TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING:
NEW

16 NOVEMBER 1967

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 379) . . . . . . . , . . , . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

Page
1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . + . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 November 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Republic addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8226) . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1379

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, . .) are normally published in quarterly
of fhe Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the’
Security Council. The new system, khich has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-NINTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday, 16 November 1967, at 4 pm.
when we must decide together what should be done-never
forgetting that what we do here must be judged by the test
of effective action.

President: Mr. Mamadou Boucabar KANTE (Mali).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

4. I have said before that so great is the need and so great,
I believe, the measure of agreement between us that I
cannot believe that we shall fail.
5. We have had the benefit last month and this of the
leadership of our President for October, the Ambassador of
Japan, and this month you, Sir, have greatly encouraged us
to press on with our work to a successful conclusion.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 379)

1. Adopt‘ion of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/8226).

6. I wish, too, to pay a special tribute to the work of the
elected members of the Council, It is in our best traditions
that when the permanent members of the Council hesitate
or hold back it is the elected members who give us the lead
and the initiative to overcome the dangers of deadlock.
Most respectfully I express my admiration for the spirit of
urgency and determination which they showed. Unanimously they pointed the way to progress when they
reported that they were agreed on the necessity for the
appointment of a United Nations special representative to
go to the Middle East without further delay, when they
told us that we should search for a solution in accordance
with the principles of pacific settlement of disputes set out
in Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter, and when
they urged that we should all co-operate in stating as
precisely as possible the principles in accordance with
which this special representative should work.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted,
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 7 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/8226)

1, The PRESIDENT (translated fvom French): In accordance with the decisions taken by the Council at its 1373rd
meeting on 9 November and at its 1375th meeting on 13
November, I propose with the consent of the CounciI to
invite the representatives of the United Arab Republic,
Israel, Jordan and Syria to take places at the Council table
and to participate without vote in the discussion.

7. Since they so reported, consultations have proceeded
amongst the permanent members of the Council with the
parties concerned and with all of us, permanent and elected
members alike, making our contribution in co-operative and
constructive effort. That is the way the Council should
work, and we who are permanent representatives of our
countries here at the United Nations have also greatly
benefited by the presence in New York of the Foreign
Ministers who have come to take part in our deliberations.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mahmoud Riad
(United Arab Republic), Mr. A. Eban {lsrael), Mr. A. M.
Rifa 5: (Jordan) and Mr. A. Daaudy (Syria) took places at
the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT (translated fvom French): The Council will now resume its examination of the item before it.
The first speaker on my list is the representative of the
United Kingdom, and I now call upon him.

8. Nevertheless, in spite of the extensive common ground
which has been cleared for advance, many of us greatly
feared not long ago that we might not be able to formulate
a. resolution which would carry the full authority of the
Council. We had before us two draft resolutions, We saw
the merits of both. But we came to the alarming conclusion
that there was a serious danger, because of the position
taken up by one side or the other, that neither of these
resolutions would carry general support, and neither would
therefore lead to the effective action on the ground without
which our labours would be in vain.

3. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Now that our
debate on the continuing crisis in the Middle East is nearing
an end, and now that the views and aims and hopes of all
concerned have been very ably and very forcibly presented
to us and now that we have undertaken prolonged and
thorough and anxious consultations, the time approaches
1

9. We consequently felt-and
we were encouraged to
realize how widely our feeling was shared-that the time
had come to make a new effort. We wanted to make clear
and defend the policy which we have advocated throughout. But much more important than that, we wanted to
work with others to devise a resolution which would take
full account of the essential interests of both sides as they
have stated them, and which would also give the United
Nations special representative the best hope of successin
carrying out his mandate,

its continuing
situation in the Middle East,
‘%xpressing

concern with fie grieve

7

‘Emphasizing the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by war and the need to work for a just and
lasting peace in which every State in the area can live h
security,
“Emphasizing further that all Member States in their
acceptance of the Charter of the United Nations h;ave
undertaken a commitment to act in accordance with
Article 2 of the Charter,

10. We went to both sides. We know and respect their
intense feelings. We well realize that the future security and
progress and happiness of their peoples depends on what we
do here. It is entirely understandable, therefore, that to
each point, indeed to each word, they should attach the
utmost importance. Nevertheless, the representatives of
both sides have been ready to consider with the greatest
patience and care the representations which we have put to
them. Perhaps we cannot hope that full agreement between
both sides can be secured. It may be too early to hope for
such a miracle. But there has been a readiness to go back
over every word and phrase, and a readiness, too, to
understand the needs and views of others.

“1. Affirms that the fulfilment of Charter principles
requires the establishment of a just and lasting peace:in
the Middle East which should include the application of
both the following principles:
“(i) Withdrawal of Israel armed forces from territories
occupied in the recent conflict;
“(ii) ‘l’errnination of all claims or states of belligerency
and respect for and acknowledgement of the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of every State in the areaan4 their ril5ht
to live in peace within secure and recog&ed
boundaries free from threats or actsof force;

11. In the long discussions with representatives’of Arab
countries, they have made it clear that they seek no more
than justice. The central issue of the recovery and restoration of their territories is naturally uppermost in their
minds, The issue of withdrawal to them is all-important
and, of course, they seek a just settlement to end the long
suffering of the refugees.

“2. Affirms further the necessity
“(a) For guaranteeing freedom of navigation through
international waterways in the area;

“/b,J For achieving a just settlement of the refu,gee
problem;

12. The Israelis, on the other hand, tell us that withdrawal
must never be to insecurity and hostility. The action to be
taken must be within the framework of’s permanent peace
and withdrawal must be to secure boundaries. There must
be an end of the use and threat and feak of violence and
hostility. I have said before that these aims do not conflict;
they are equal. They are both essential. There must be
adequate provision in an$ resoIution to meet them both,
since to attempt to pursue one without the other would be
foolish and futile.

“(c) For guaranteeing the territorial inviolability and
political independence of every State in the area, through
measures including the establishment of demilitari:r;ed
zones;
“3. Requests the Secretary-General to designate: a
Special Representative to proceed to the Middle East to
establish and maintain contacts with the Statesconcerned
in order to promote agreement and assist efforts to
achieve a peaceful and accepted settlement in accordalnce
with the provisions and principles in this resolution;

13. Sb we have been guided by all the earlier work which
has been done and by the eloquent statements which have
been made by both sides, and we have endeavoured, with
the help of my brother members of the Council, to set out
in a draft resolution what I believe will be recognized as a
sincere and fair and honest attempt both to meet t!he just
claims of both sides and also to discharge the high
responsibility of this Council.

“4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on the progress of the efforts of the
Special Representative as soon as possible.” (S/8247.1

The draft resolution speaks for itself and I need not
attempt any detailed explanation. We have all for many
months past had these issues constantly uppermost in our
minds.

14. I cannot maintain that the resolution which we have
by these means prepared will be accepted in full by either
side. Naturally they will have their doubts and differences
on wording and formulation
and presentation and
emphasis, but I trust that both sides, as well as all members
of this Council, will recognize that the resolution which I
now present to the Council is indeed balanced and just. The
resolution, which I respectfully present to the Council,
states:

1.5. All of US recognize that peace is the prize. None of us
wishes a temporary truce or a superficial accommodation.
We could never advocate a return to uneasy hostifity. As I
have said, my Government would never wish to be
associated with any so-called settlement which wasoa!Y a
continuation of a false truce, and all of us without any
hesitation at all can agree that we seek a &tIementwiihin
the principles laid down in Article 2 of the Charter. SO
much for the preamble.

“The Security Council,

2

J

16. As to the first operative paragraph, and with due
respect for fulfilment of Charter principles, we consider it
essential that there should be applied the principles of both
withdrawal and security, and we have no doubt that the
words set out throughout that paragraph are perfectly clear.

25. The Security Council is considering the situation
which has resulted from the aggression committed by Israel
on 5 June 1967 against the United Arab Republic, Jordan
and Syria. The aggressive Israel forces continue to occupy
territories of Syria, Jordan and the United Arab Republic
and territories under United Arab Republic administration.
The duty of the Security Council in accordance with the
Charter, as well as with the various decisions previously
adopted by this Organization, is very clear, that is, to secure
the withdrawal of the Israel forces from all the territories
which they have occupied after 4 June 1967. Our position
on this question is absolutely firm. We have emphasized it
throughout all the informal consultations which have taken
place and we have stated it in no vague or ambiguous terms
in the deliberations of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. Under no circumstances will the United Arab
Republic compromise on this point, nor, in our judgement,
should the Security Council. An aggression has taken place
against the Charter, and therefore the consequences of that
aggression have to be fully eliminated in accordance with
the Charter.

17. As to the second operative paragraph, there is I believe
no vestige of disagreement between us all that there must
be a guarantee of freedom of navigation through international waterways. There must be a just settlement of the
refugee problem. There must be a guarantee and adequate
means to ensure the territorial inviolability and political
independence of every State in the area.
18. As to the third operative paragraph, I have said before
that I consider that the United Nations special representative should be free to decide himself the exact means
and methods by which he pursues his endeavours in contact
with the States concerned both to promote agreement and
to assistefforts to achieve a peaceful and accepted and final
settlement.
19. I believe indeed that the proposals which this draft
resolution includes can and should command overwhelming
support in the Council. I believe that they represent the
best hope of achieving effective action in the Middle East.
The provisions here set out are drawn from the work
undertaken and the proposals put forward by.. other
members of the Council. But they are much more than a
collection of different ideas. They represent a balanced
whole and, so I am convinced, a just finding.

26. During the private consultations which have taken
place, we have willingly discussed all formulas and all
drafts. We have never refused to discuss in these endeavours
any idea which was presented to us, but we made our
position very clear on the question of the withdrawal of the
Israel forces. The withdrawal of those forces from the
territories occupied by them is a matter prescribed by every
essential rule of the Charter.

20. In commending this draft resolution to the Council, I
would say only two things further, First, again I would
stressthe need for urgent action. We have waited too long
already. I am convinced that if we wait any longer the
opportunity we now have, the last opportunity, will be lost.
Surely we have now consulted enough and argued enough
and spoken enough. I am convinced that if we do not reach
our final decision this week, the opportunity of a just
settlement may escape us forever.

27. The Security Council is aware of its duties and
responsibilities as prescribed by the Charter. On our part,
we shall never accept aggression; indeed, no one should
expect us to.
28, I have outlined the position of my country in clear
terms to the Council. That position is in full conformity
with every single norm and rule governing international
relations. We stand by our position and, equally, we ask
every member of the Security Council to stand by the rules
of the Charter, the requirements of peace, and the essentials
of justice.

21. Finally, again I would emphasize that the alternative
to agreement is too terrible to contemplate. If we go back
on the road of hate and suffering and conflict we shall look
back to this week and realize what an opportunity we lost
and what an appalling responsibility rests on us for our
failure-failure to enable all the peoples of the countries
concerned to turn away from death and destruction and
start out on a new era of peace and justice.

29. The PRESIDENT (translated J?onz French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Israel, and I now
call upon him.
30. Mr, EBAN (Israel): In the light of what we have heard
this afternoon, I wish briefly to restate the general
principles of Israel’s policy.

22. I dearly hope that we shall rise to the opportunity
now before us, and I ask that all should most urgently and
carefully consider the proposals which I respectfully
submit.

31. For nineteen years, Israel has been the victim of
constant hostility, belligerency and aggression, by Governments which have always regarded themselves as being in a
state of war with Israel. It is internationally known and
recognized that Israel’s resistance last June was not aggression, but resistance to aggression; and we reject every
attempt to portray Israel’s decision to survive as aggression.

23. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of the United Arab
Republic, and I now call upon him.
24. Mr. Mahmoud RIAD (United Arab Republic): At the
present stage of our deliberations and in the light of what
hasbeen stated by some members of the Council, I consider
it imperative that I once again clarify the position of the
United Arab Republic,

32. Our policy is that we shall maintain and respect the
cease-fire situation until it is replaced by peace treaties
ending the state of war, determining the agreed national
frontiers of States, and ensuring a stable and mutually
3

guaranteed security. We cannot return to the shattered
armistice rdgime or to the fragile demarcation lines, or to
any system of relations other than permanent, contractually binding peace.

41. We must ‘at all cost relinquish the illusion that time
can cure all ills. These twenty years of Palestine’s history,
marked by constant crises and convulsions, is adequate
proof of the folly of such a hope.

33. We agree with those who have said, in the General
Assembly and elsewhere, that agreement on secure and
recognized boundaries is absolutely essential to a just and
lasting peace; and we believe that any constructive resolution should emphasize the duty of the States themselves,
the States of the Middle East, to work out the condition; of
their own peace in direct negotiation.

42. The responsibilities of the Council are quite clearly
defined by the Charter itself. The safeguarding of peaceand
the application af the law in justice and equity are the sole
principles which must guide us in carrying out our difficult
mission. It is in the light of these considerations, to the
exclusion cf a!1 others, that we must tackle the serious and
difficult problems presented by Israel’s aggression.

34. It is in the light of this policy that we have examined
and yvill examine and analyse any draft or text that has
been or is being put before us.

43. The immediate stumbling block in the crisis is the
withdrawal of the Israel forces from the territories of the
United Arab Kepublic, Jordan and Syria which they
occupied following the aggression of 5 June 1967. Their
withdrawal is a prerequisite for any political solution to the
crisis, The first task of the Council is therefore to secure,in
application of the provisions of the Charter, the withdrawal
of the Israel forces to the positions they held before the
aggression.

3 5, The PRESIDENT (translahd from French): As the list
of speakers is now exhausted and no delegation has asked
to speak, I should like to address the Council as the
representative of MALI.
36. My Indian and Nigerian colleagues have introduced, on
behalf of our three delegations, a draft resoluticn dated
7 November 1967 [S/8227/. Both of them have described
ably and sincerely the true reasons for our actions. I
therefore do not propose to repeat the highly pertinent
arguments they have adduced. Nor do I wish to stir up
again here the strong emotions which have attended every
discussion on this crisis, whether in the Security Council or
in the General Assembly.

44, Despite the differences of opinion which have emerged
in the course of the debates on this item, both in the
General Assembly and in the Security COUIV~I, the inviolability of the national territory of States, which is one of the
fundamental principles of the Charter, has been reaffirmed
by almost the entire membership of the United Nations.
That is the feeling which has emerged more clearly than any
other during the present session of the General Assembly. It
would therefore be a grave mistake to link the withdrawal
of the Israel troops with any other element of the Middle
East crisis, if only because of the awkward precedent it
would set. The fact that neither the General Assembly nor
the Security Council has so far succeeded in giving effect to
this minimum requirement-the
withdrawal of the Israel
forces-creates a situation fraught with serious consequences for the members of the international community.

37. I should like mereIy to bring to your attention a few
points concerning the responsibilities we bear in the face of
the serious situation in the Middle East today. I should like
to keep strictly within this context in considering the
situation which is perturbing us today.
38. This crisis is unquestionably the most serious that has
confronted the United Nations in the last ten years, and we
are thus facing a formidable test. If we are to succeed in
finding a solution, we must be guided not by partiality and
passion, but solely by a spirit of justice and equity. Peace is
not a stock exchange asset. It cannot and must not be
negotiated as such.

45. It is as a result of a sober assessment of the threat to
peace inherent in the dilemma facing the United Nations in
its search for a just and equitable solution to the Middle
East crisis that the sponsors of draft resolution S/8227 have
ventured a last effort at conciliation. As you may imagine,
this was not achieved without painstaking negotiations and
concessions on all sides. You will note yourselves the
similarity between the draft resolution before you today
and the Latin American resolution which received the
support of a large number of delegations at the fifth
emergency special session [A/L.523/Rev.l].
You will
.understand our surprise at seeing it rejected in advanceby
those same delegations which a few months ago welcomed
the contents of the Latin American draft resolution as
constructive and acceptable.

39. Five months have now elapsed since war once again
swept over the Middle East, bringing ruin and desolation in
its train. Since then, the Israel armed forces have been
occupying vast areas of the territory of other States, in
violation of the Charter. This is a case without precedent in
the annals of the United Nations. Never, before this
conflict, has the Organization been placed in a position
where it was incapable of following up the cease-fire orders
with an order for the withdrawal of troops to their original
positions.

46. Our draft resolution does not pretend to be anything
miraculous, but it has at least the merit of approaching the
problem objectively and impartially and indicating a cmme
of action calculated to bring about peace in the Middle
East.

40. Above and beyond the perpetuation of this situation
in the Middle East looms the spectre of a greater danger:
that of the incapacity of the United Nations to play its role,
i.e. to ensure the restoration and maintenance of peace in
justice and equity. While we do not wish to be overpessimistic, we must nevertheless recognize that we shall
present a sorry spectacle to the world if we do not succeed
in settling this crisis.

47. There is another point of agreement which likewise
cannot be denied in view of the clear and unambiguous WaY
4

in which it has been expressed in the debates of recent
months, namely the necessity to do universal justice to the
Arab people of Palestine. The wretched treatment meted
out to this people over the last twenty years is the real
source of the malady which has been ravaging the Middle
East ever since the implementation of the plan for the
partition of Palestine. The forcible expulsion of millions of
human beings from their homes and homeland and the
wholesale privations suffered by the Palestine Arabs as
victims of a plan conceived without their participation are
acts which provoke in every human being reactions as
natural as that which prompts men to seek to return to
their homeland, their home, their lands and the sofi where
their ancestors lie.

54. As I said at the beginning of my statement, I feel that
in view of the eloquent explanations given by my colleagues
from India and Nigeria there is no need for me to comment
further on the provisions of this draft resolution. I shall
merely add that in drafting the text we were guided ,solely
by a desire for peace and justice.
5.5. These are the views which my delegation felt it should
put before the CounciI for consideration, as a contribution
to the search for a solution to this grave crisis in the Middle
East. Although it is a sensitive and complex problem, it is
not beyond our capacities or our resources to solve it. if we
are to achieve that end, however, all paities, including those
directly involved, must sacrifice their susceptibilities, their
pride and their resentment to the cause of peace.

48. In his recent analysis of the international political
situation, the Secretary-General very rightly recalled, as a
perennial necessity, the natural right of every human being,
wherever he may be, to live in his homeland and to
establish a home, and build a future there. It is precisely the
denial of this sacred right so far to the Arab people of
Palestine that has been basically responsible for the
episodes of violence upon violence which have engendered
the law of “an eye for an eye” and led to the state of
belligerency that has prevailed in the Middle East for the
last twenty years.

56. Neither Israel nor the Arabs, still less the international
community, have any interest in perpetuating the present
situation. Let us therefore pool our resources and try to put
out this dangerous fire which threatens to set the whole
world ablaze.
57. We have no right to let the international community
down. The efforts to reach agreement made by all the
members of the Security Council in recent weeks indicate
clearly the high degree of awarenessin all quarters of the
historic responsibility we bear, for there is no more
formidable task than settling the problems of ‘peace and war
between nations.

49. If the Europe of a past era could find no better way of
saving its conscience for the genocide perpetrated against
the Jewish people in the course of history than by
establishing a Jewish national home in Palestine, thus
fulfilling the dreams of people like Theodor Herzl, we
today find it intolerable that the bloodshed and suffering of
that people should be paid for by reducing millions of other
human beings to want, ruin and misery.

58. Speaking now as PRESIDENT,
I call upon the
representative of Canada on a point of order.
59. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): On a point of order, I
should like to draw attention to the fact that a new draft
resolution has been introduced this afternoon by the
United Kingdom representative [S/8247/, and that the
situation which we now face, with three draft resolutions
before us, requires very careful consideration by all
members of the Council, In the circumstances, I believe
that a reasonable period should be allowed for consultations, but, as has been said by many around this table, at
the same time there should be no undue delay in our work.
I would therefore propose, in order to allow time for
consultations and for delegations, if necessary, to seek
further instructions, that the Council should adjourn until
tomorrow, Friday, November 17, at 3.30 p.m. J:make this
motion in accordance with sub-paragraph (3) of rule 33 of
our provisional rules of procedure.

50. If, therefore, we wish to break the vicious circle of
reprisals and counter-reprisals in the Middle East, we must
start by finding a political and humane solution for the
plight of the Arab refugees, which remains at the heart of
the Middle East drama. The future of peace in the region
will depend on the redress of that wrong.
5 1. The third problem which requires an urgent solution
on Our part is, surely, the question of navigation in
international waterways. The delegation of Mali considers
that freedom of navigation through the international
waterwaysin the region should be extended to all States, in
accordance with international agreements and conventions.
52. These are the prior conditions which must be fulfilled
before there can be peace in the Middle East-llot peace
dictated by armed force, but genuine peace, to which all
States in the region must subscribe and which will
guarantee each one of them the right to live in complete
security, safe from threats and acts of war, in respect for
sovereignty, political independence and territorial integrity.

60. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The representative of Canada proposes that our next meeting on the
situation in the Middle East shouId be held tomorrow,
Friday, at 3.30 p.m. If I hear no objection, I shall take it as
agreed.
It was so decided.

53. That is the sole aim of the draft resolution whichhas
been submitted to you by India, Nigeria and Mali: peace in
the Middle East, the peace we are responsible to the
international community for maintaining.

The meeting rose at 5.10 pm

5

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications.may
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore
or.Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

LES PUBLICATIONS

Ler publications
des Nations
Unies
sent
depositaires
du monde
entier.
Informer,-vous
Nations
Unies, Section
des ventes,
New York

KAK IlOJlY~MTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Los publicaciones

M3AAHMFI

PUBLICACIONES
de las Naciones

en todar
partes
del mundo.
Consulle
Ventas,
Nueva
York a Ginebra.

1

Litho

in

U.N.

from bookstores
and distributors
tar United
Nations,
Sales
Section,

DES NATIONS

06bEAMHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES
Unidas

UNIES

en vente
dans
les libroiries
auprbs
de votre librairie
au
ou Geneve.

OPrAHH3AUMM

estan

en venta

a sv librero

o dirijase

Price: $U.S. 0.75 (or equivalent

throughout
New York

et les agences
adresses-vous
b:

HAUMA

UNIDAS
en librerias

in other

y casas

a: Naciones

currencies)

Unidos,

distribuidoros
Seccion

de

35825-January

1971-2,100
