S/PV.8940*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8940th meeting

Tuesday, 21 December 2021, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Ndung’u
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Gonsalves
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

*Reissued for technical reasons 11 January 2022.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-41126 (E)
*2141126*

S/PV.8940

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: I am devoting my regular
briefing on the situation in the Middle East to the
twentieth report on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). The written report of the SecretaryGeneral that members of the Security Council have
already received covers the period from 29 September
and 9 December.
Before turning to developments that have taken
place since the submission of the written report, I would
like to express my continued concern about recent
developments in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, in particular the deteriorating security
situation. Clashes, attacks, military operations,
including in Area A, and high levels of settler-related
violence have continued, alongside calls by Palestinian
militant factions for increased confrontations
with Israel.
Continued unilateral steps, including Israeli
settlement advancement, evictions and demolitions,
and the severe fiscal and economic crisis in the
occupied Palestinian territory are further exacerbating
the situation and undermining the institutional stability
of the Palestinian Authority. If left unchecked, I am
concerned that not only may the situation in the West
Bank further deteriorate, but the dynamics could also
impact the security situation in Gaza and undermine
the cessation of hostilities in place since 21 May. It is
crucial that all parties take immediate steps to lower
tensions and restore calm.
Violent incidents have, unfortunately, continued
throughout the occupied territories. Overall, since
2/18

21/12/2021

29 September, 12 Palestinians, including one woman
and four children, have been killed by Israeli security
forces during demonstrations, clashes, search-and-arrest
operations, attacks and alleged attacks against Israelis
and other incidents across the occupied Palestinian
territory; and 306 Palestinians, including three women
and 53 children, have been injured, including 16 by
live ammunition. Thirty-nine Palestinians, including
four children, have been injured by Israeli settlers or
other civilians, who have also perpetrated 121 attacks,
resulting in damage to Palestinian property.
In all, two Israeli civilians have been killed and
39 Israelis — 30 civilians, including two women and
two children, and nine members of the Israeli security
forces — injured by Palestinians in clashes and shooting,
stabbing and ramming attacks, as well as incidents
involving the throwing of stones and Molotov cocktails
and other incidents. Palestinians have perpetrated 105
attacks resulting in damage to Israeli property.
On 10 December, a Palestinian man was shot and
killed by Israel security forces during clashes near the
town of Beita in the West Bank, near Nablus. The man
was the ninth Palestinian fatality in the same area this
year since protests began in May in the vicinity of Beita
against the neighbouring Evyatar settlement outpost,
which was partly evacuated in July. On 12 December,
clashes erupted in Aida camp, Bethlehem, between
Hamas supporters and Palestinian security forces during
a celebration for a released prisoner. Two Palestinian
officers were injured by an explosive device.
On 13 December, Israeli security forces conducted
a search-and-arrest operation in Nablus, which
was followed by an exchange of fire with armed
Palestinians. One Palestinian man was killed and two
others were injured in unclear circumstances. Later that
day, a general strike took place in Nablus to protest the
incident. Clashes between Palestinian security forces
and other armed Palestinians were reported during the
man’s funeral.
On 16 December, a 25-year-old Israeli was shot
and killed by armed Palestinians near the evacuated
settlement of Homesh, near Nablus. Two other Israelis
were injured in the attack. On 17 December, settlers
entered the village of Qaryut, south of Nablus, severely
beat a Palestinian man and damaged property. On
19 December, Israeli security forces arrested six
Palestinians in the village of Silat Al-Harithiya, near
Jenin, on suspicion of involvement in the shooting.
21-41126

21/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

On 19 December, hundreds of settlers attempted to
enter the Homesh outpost and set up illegal structures,
breaking through Israeli security forces barricades and
using violence against Israeli soldiers, including hitting
one soldier with a vehicle. On 20 December, Israeli
Minister of Defence Benny Gantz condemned violent
acts by Israelis against Palestinians and Israeli security
forces, saying that such attacks would not be accepted
or tolerated.
Some affirmative steps have been taken since the
submission of the written report. On 11 December, the
Palestinian Central Elections Commission conducted
the first round of local council elections in several
hundred small communities in the West Bank, with
more than 66 per cent of eligible voters participating.
More than 25 per cent of the candidates were women,
with nine heading electoral lists. Their representation
in the local councils will amount to some 22 per cent,
close to the minimum legal requirement for at least two
seats per council.
On 12 December, the Central Elections
Commission announced the start of preparations for a
second round of municipal elections in the larger West
Bank communities and all local councils in Gaza, set
for 26 March. On 14 December, United States and
Palestinian officials met virtually to renew the United
States-Palestinian economic dialogue — the first such
meeting in five years.
I will now turn to several observations concerning,
the implementation of the provision of resolution 2334
(2016) during the reporting period. Israeli settlement
expansion in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, remains deeply concerning, particularly
the consideration of advancements of plans in highly
controversial areas crucial to the continuity of a
future Palestinian State, including in E-1, Atarot and
Givat Hamatos.
Israeli settlements constitute a flagrant violation
of the relevant United Nations resolutions and
international law, and I call on the Government of Israel
to cease the advancement of all settlement activities
immediately. I remain concerned about the potential
eviction of a number of families from homes that they
have lived in for decades in the Sheikh Jarrah and
Silwan neighbourhoods of occupied East Jerusalem. I
call on Israeli authorities to end the displacement and
eviction of Palestinians and approve plans that would

S/PV. 8940

enable those communities to build legally and address
their development needs.
In this context, I welcome the advancement of plans
for several thousand housing units for Palestinians in the
occupied East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Al-Isawiya
and Area C. I urge Israel to continue regularly
advancing such plans and to issue building permits for
all previously approved plans for Palestinians in area C
and East Jerusalem.
The continuing violence, incitement to violence and
attacks against civilians, including acts of terrorism
and sexual-related violence exacerbate mistrust and
undermine a peaceful resolution to the conflict. There
can be no justification for such acts, which must be
condemned by all. I reiterate that the violence must stop
and all perpetrators must be held accountable.
The deterioration of the security and socioeconomic
situations across the occupied Palestinian territory is
deeply worrying and the situation must be reversed. It
is essential that the parties avoid unilateral steps that
change the realities on the ground, reducing flashpoints
and violence across the occupied Palestinian territory.
Concerted efforts by all parties — more than we have
seen to date — are required to maintain calm, strengthen
Palestinian institutions and restore hope. Furthermore,
steps by all parties are urgently needed to shore up the
economic and institutional stability of the Palestinian
Authority, including through the implementation of
needed reforms.
I note that the situation in Gaza also remains
fragile. While constructive measures initiated during
the reporting period are encouraging, further steps are
required to solidify the cessation of hostilities and meet
the needs of the population in the Strip. For any durable
stability, movement and access in and out of the Strip
must be improved with a view to the full lifting of the
closures in line with resolution 1860 (2009).
I also note the high turnout in the 11 December
municipal elections, echoing the level of public
engagement leading to the campaign period for
planned elections earlier this year. I look forward to the
second round of local council elections on 26 March
and encourage all parties to respond positively to calls
by the Central Elections Commission to allow local
elections across the occupied Palestinian territory,
including in Gaza.

21-411263/18

S/PV.8940

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
rising level of violence we have seen in recent weeks
should be a clear warning to us all. If left unaddressed,
the festering conflict drivers described in my briefing
today and in the latest written report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) will drag us into yet another destructive and
bloody round of violence. We must act now to prevent
that from happening.
Strengthening the Palestinian Authority is critical
to maintaining stability on the ground. Financial
support is essential, but not enough. I urge positive
steps from all parties and necessary reforms that
increase the Palestinian Authority’s ability to deliver
for the Palestinian people. At the same time, negative
actions that undermine its authority need to stop.
This has been a year of significant shifts in the
political context affecting the conflict, resulting in
one of the most challenging set of circumstances to
face the Palestinian Authority since its establishment.
Nevertheless, I look ahead to next year with the
determination that we will find opportunities to
reverse the negative trajectories and work towards
constructive engagement by the parties, with the
support of the international community, to restore the
political horizon.
The United Nations remains committed to
supporting Palestinians and Israelis in resolving
the conflict and ending the occupation through the
achievement of a two-State solution in line with the
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, international law and bilateral agreements.
We will continue our intensive engagement with the
parties, the Middle East Quartet and regional and
international partners to advance that goal.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Wennesland for his briefing.

21/12/2021

acts of violence and also to respond to attacks in a
proportionate and reasonable manner that seeks to
avoid the unnecessary loss of life. Such episodes risk
precipitating an even greater escalation of violence.
We call on Israelis and Palestinians to refrain
from any actions that would add to the already tense
situation we have just heard about and that would
undercut efforts to advance a negotiated two-State
solution. Those actions include demolitions, settlement
expansion, the eviction of families from homes in which
they have lived for generations, incitement to violence
and providing compensation for individuals in prison
for acts of terrorism.
We also call on the authorities to hold those
responsible for violence fully accountable for their
actions. All perpetrators should face equal justice
under the law.
Israeli and Palestinian civil society members
have an important role to play in promoting peace.
Ambassador Thomas-Greenfield met with civil society
leaders in Ramallah and was, frankly, inspired by their
work to advance democracy, human rights and economic
opportunity for the Palestinian people. We also support
the roles of Israeli and Palestinian non-governmental
organizations alike in monitoring human rights abuses,
wherever they occur.
Let me also take note of Crown Prince Sheikh
Mohamed Bin Zayed Al Nahyan’s welcome of Israeli
Prime Minister Bennett to the United Arab Emirates
last week. It demonstrated that good faith engagement
can build confidence and create a path of cooperation
towards achieving security, prosperity and dignity for
every Israeli and every Palestinian. We look forward to
working with the United Arab Emirates when it joins
the Council next month, in addition to new members
Albania, Brazil, Gabon and Ghana.

Mr. Mills (United States of America): As always,
I would like to thank Special Coordinator Wennesland
for his very useful and informative briefing.

The United States remains committed to widening
the circle of peace between Israel and its neighbours and
expanding normalization agreements. We encourage all
those who look for peace in the Middle East to commit
to constructive acts that helped the Palestinians and
Israelis to coexist and prosper.

The United States is also deeply concerned about
rising tensions in the West Bank and in and around
Jerusalem, especially violence perpetrated against
ordinary civilians attempting to go about their lives
as best they can. We urge the authorities to condemn

While the United States has contributed more than
$318 million in the fiscal year 2021 to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) to help Palestinians in need, we
are deeply concerned that the Agency is once again

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.

4/18

21-41126

21/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

facing an immediate financial shortfall. We note the
broad support of Member States for the work of the
Agency, most recently expressed during the Human
Rights Council briefing to the Council and during the
General Assembly’s humanitarian debate.
We thank those Member States contributing to
UNRWA, including Qatar and Kuwait, for their recent
generosity in that regard. We renew our call for all
Member States to provide financial contributions to
UNRWA as we work towards a financially sustainable
Agency that effectively delivers on its mandate and
operates in line with humanitarian principles.
Finally, if I may, as this is the last scheduled meeting
of the year, I would like to congratulate, on behalf of
the United States delegation, the Nigerien presidency.
It was a very successful presidency during a very
challenging month. I would also like to bid, on behalf
of the United States delegation, a fond farewell to our
outgoing colleagues: Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam. They and
their teams have been strong and effective colleagues
on the Council over the past two years and the United
States delegation looks forward to continuing our close
work with each of them after they leave the Council.
I will conclude by quoting from the final line
of one of the great American plays of the twentieth
century. When you speak of this experience — and you
will — please “remember to be kind”.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Tor Wennesland for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in the Middle East.
It will not be possible to achieve an overall improvement
in the situation in the Middle East region without
resolving the Palestinian question. As demonstrated by
the voting in the General Assembly this past November
and December on the annual thematic resolutions,
the vast majority of the international community is
united in its commitment to a just solution to the
Palestinian question.
With no prospect of an imminent relaunch of the
peace process, that focal point of repeated tensions will
continue to generate sporadic violence. The escalation
in May in the Gaza Strip, the West Bank, East Jerusalem
and predominantly Arab areas of Israel are clear
examples of that. We view with concern the recurring
outbursts of confrontation in the Old City of Jerusalem,
which have resulted in injuries and casualties. We call

S/PV. 8940

on the parties to show restraint and refrain from taking
drastic steps.
The situation is complicated by unilateral
actions — the appropriation and destruction of
Palestinian property, the construction of settlements,
arbitrary arrests, violation of the status of holy sites and
incitement to violence. The most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) provides some very disheartening statistics
in that regard. We are particularly concerned about the
Israeli leadership’s plans, announced in mid-October, to
resume, after a brief pause, building illegal settlements
in the West Bank, as well as to double the number of the
settlers in the Jordan Valley by 2026.
We call on the parties to resume the peace process
on a universally recognized international legal basis
that includes the two-State solution. That requires
renouncing provocations and unilateral steps that create
irreversible facts on the ground.
Overcoming the intra-Palestinian division within
the Palestine Liberation Organization remains an
important condition for emerging from the crisis. For
our part, we maintain our intention to hold the next
joint meeting in Moscow as soon as leading Palestinian
political forces and movements are ready to agree on
common approaches and formalize them in the relevant
document. We are counting on the assistance of other
interested parties, particularly our friends in Egypt.
We continue to work with the Palestinians and
the Israelis and with the international and regional
actors concerned, including within the Middle East
Quartet. A month after Prime Minister Bennett’s visit
to Russia, President Putin met with President Abbas
in Sochi on 23 November. In principle, we support
the initiative of the Palestinian President to hold an
international conference on the Palestinian question.
We intend to continue working actively with our
Quartet partners, whose most recent teleconference
took place on 10 December. Our initiatives to improve
the effectiveness of that mediation mechanism are well
known and remain on the table.
We believe that it is important to provide
comprehensive humanitarian assistance to those in
need in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, as well as
to Palestinian refugees in neighbouring Arab countries.
Following the escalation in violence in May, maintaining
the ceasefire and providing humanitarian assistance to

21-411265/18

S/PV.8940

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

affected Palestinians, especially in the Gaza Strip, are
of the utmost importance.
In that regard, we support the efforts of the
relevant international organizations, including the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). At an international
conference held in Brussels on 16 November in support
of the Agency, Russia announced its intention to
continue its funding, which involves annual voluntary
contributions to the Agency’s budget over the next five
years. We believe that it is crucial that UNRWA continue
its comprehensive work to provide humanitarian
assistance to the millions of Palestinian refugees in the
Middle East without hindrance.
In conclusion, given that this is the last official
meeting of the Security Council this year, we would
like to thank you, Mr. President, and all the delegation
of the Niger for your high-level presidency of the
Council in December. We would also like to take this
opportunity to thank the delegations of the Niger,
Viet Nam, Tunisia, Estonia and Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines for their close engagement in the Security
Council during their two-year tenures, including on the
issue under consideration today.
Mr. Ndung’u (Kenya): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his overview and observations
during this reporting period. We welcome his
17 December call in response to the recent escalating
violence in the Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. As outlined in the report, those tragic
incidents are claiming both Israeli and Palestinian lives.
Kenya continues to strongly condemn that and other
terror attacks and shootings, which Hamas and other
militant groups continue to laud and claim, including
the November shooting in Jerusalem’s Old City and the
fatal shooting in the West Bank last week. We reiterate
that no cause can justify the deliberate targeting of
civilians. Such acts of terror must cease.
Kenya urges all political, religious and community
leaders from both sides to speak up. Beyond speaking
up, we urge all leaders, young and old, to demonstrate
the daily dividends of constructive grass-roots efforts
in practically and consistently mitigating against cycles
of conflict.
As Kenya has stated before, the practicality and full
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) will need to
address the issues of settlements, territorial contiguity
and the viability of the two-State solution, whereby two
6/18

21/12/2021

States — Israel and Palestine — live side by side in
peace and within secure and recognized borders based
on the 1967 lines.
While the quarterly reports remain essential in
keeping the Security Council informed in terms of
numbers and trends, breaking the cycle of conflict will
take much more. There is a need to have updates on the
actual efforts and operationalization mechanisms, or
lack thereof, to address all violations of the provisions
of resolution 2334 (2016), including efforts to combat
terrorism and all acts of violence against civilians. The
parties have a particular responsibility in that regard,
and there is a need for accountability.
It has been five years since the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016). There is very little to show in
terms of implementation. For decades, we have been
talking about a comprehensive, just and lasting peace,
and rightfully so. However, the actual elements of
preventive diplomacy, peacemaking and peacebuilding
seem to always be a catch-up or reactionary endeavour.
Kenya welcomes the focus in the current report on
the important trends in 2021 that need the Security
Council’s urgent attention, including settler expansion,
demolitions and the issuance of housing tenders. That
said, in view of paragraph 11 of resolution 2334 (2016),
in which the Security Council affirms its determination
to examine practical ways and means to ensure the full
implementation of its relevant resolutions, we urge for
a deeper analysis that also focuses on the correlation
and contextualization of those incidents and their shortand long-term implications for the implementation of
the Middle East peace process normative framework,
which includes resolution 2334 (2016).
Such a call for the report to be analytical is not aimed
at criticism or animating discussions. It is an effort to
salvage resolution 2334 (2016). It is an approach that
we believe will provide a workable framework that will
safeguard the achievements to date and reinforce the
underlying principles of resolution 2334 (2016), namely,
achieving the stabilization of the situation, reversing
negative trends on the ground and creating conditions
for successful, direct final-status negotiations.
Additionally, as the needed focus is being directed
on Gaza, we must not lose sight of the security and
economic challenges in the West Bank. We take note of
the successful completion, on 11 December, of the first
phase of municipal elections in the West Bank.
21-41126

21/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Kenya also welcomes the United States-Palestinian
economic dialogue the first such senior-level meeting in
five years. We look forward to implementable outcomes.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Coordinator for his briefing, which reminds
us that only a two-State solution, with two States living
in peace and security within recognized borders along
the 1967 lines, with Jerusalem as their capital, will
make it possible to meet the legitimate aspirations of
the Israeli and Palestinian peoples and to guarantee the
security of all.
This solution has been defined by international
law, the agreed parameters and Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). Only the
implementation of that framework will allow for a just
and lasting peace in the region. It is on this realistic
basis that France and its European partners continue to
support the two-State solution.
The facts are clear. The adoption of resolution 2334
(2016) five years ago did not prevent the continued
settlement. Over the recent period, the positive trend
of recent months has been jeopardized by unilateral
actions. The first of these was the increase in Israeli
announcements concerning settlements after months
of standstill. The decision of the Israeli authorities to
temporarily suspend the creation of a new settlement
in Atarot offers a reprieve, but that project must
be permanently abandoned. I recall that if it were
implemented, it would constitute, as with Givat
Hamatos, the creation of a new settlement in East
Jerusalem for the first time in 25 years. France is also
concerned about plans to expand Area E-1.
Settlement runs counter to international law and
only makes the prospect of a peaceful resolution of
the conflict more distant. France will not recognize
any change to the 1967 lines other than those agreed
upon by the parties. All States must distinguish in
their exchanges between the territory of Israel and the
territories occupied in 1967.
Secondly, this year again, the number of
demolitions and evictions has reached record levels.
Settler violence against Palestinians is increasing.
The current escalation in the Palestinian territories is
worrisome. We deplore any loss of life and welcome
the determination of the Israeli authorities to combat
settler extremism. We recall that Israel must ensure the
protection of all civilians, including Palestinians, under
international law. It must also ensure the proportionate

S/PV. 8940

use of force by its security forces and that those
responsible for crimes are brought to justice.
Thirdly, the designation of six Palestinian
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) as terrorist
organizations constitutes a further narrowing of the
space for civil society in Palestine. These designations,
which concern one NGO that received the Human
Rights Prize of the French Republic in 2018, are very
worrisome.
Finally, we call on the Palestinian Authority to
ensure respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in the territories under its control, as well as
to strengthen Palestinian democratic governance. We
are concerned by the backsliding of recent months.
The holding of municipal elections in December
recalls the importance of general elections in renewing
the democratic legitimacy of institutions. Strong
democratic institutions, based on respect for the rule of
law, are indeed essential for a viable Palestinian State.
In that light, the international community must
act to reverse the current trend. This means, first of
all, strengthening the ceasefire in Gaza and enhancing
the humanitarian response and reconstruction efforts.
France commends the essential work of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and calls for a surge of
donors to enable it to pay its December salaries. The
measures taken by Israel to foster the development of
the Palestinian territories must be furthered.
Lastly, it is essential to restore a political perspective
for the resumption of negotiations between the parties.
This is why France is determined to work with its
partners for concrete and reciprocal measures aimed
at building trust between the parties. We will continue
our efforts within the framework of the Amman group,
as well as with the Security Council and the Quartet, so
that they play an active role.
Before I conclude, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your presidency of the Security
Council during December, although the month is not
over yet. I would also like to warmly thank the five
non-permanent members of the Council that will be
leaving us on 31 December for the outstanding work
they have done over the past two years.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of France for his kind words.

21-411267/18

S/PV.8940

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Ms. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I too would like to thank Special Coordinator Tor
Wennesland for his comprehensive briefing.
A resolution of the matter before us this morning
is long overdue. The suffering of Palestinians and the
injustice meted out for decades are etched into the hearts
and minds of many people. Recently, we saw football
fans display their solidarity with the just Palestinian
cause at the Arab Cup, held in Qatar. Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines continues to stand in solidarity with the
State of Palestine in support of international law and is
mindful that the world is watching and losing faith in
the Security Council and our rules-based international
order for failing to uphold the very rules that we adopt.
We have repeatedly reaffirmed the vision of a
two-State solution based on pre-1967 borders, with
Palestinians and Israelis living peacefully side by side.
This is, indeed, a vision backed by international law,
resolution 2334 (2016) and numerous other resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly.
We emphasize again the need for Israel to end its
aggression, occupation and annexation. The lack
of progress towards the two-State solution is, quite
frankly, egregious.
We need to address the following issues with
urgency: the escalation of hostilities in the West
Bank and Gaza; forced displacement through home
demolitions; undue restrictions on the rights to freedom
of expression, peaceful assembly and association
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory;
extrajudicial killings of Palestinians; settler violence;
the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic on
Palestinians; and the situation of Palestinian refugees.
This month marks five years since the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016). Since then, as we have heard
and as we all know, the situation on the ground has
only deteriorated, owing to Israel’s non-compliance
with its obligations. Yet again, we reiterate that the
establishment of settlements in the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, has
no legal validity and constitutes a flagrant violation
of international law. Furthermore, the continued
demolition and seizure of Palestinian structures are also
deeply concerning, and we condemn these acts. These
practices must stop. It is time for the Security Council
to take practical steps towards ending the occupation
and realizing a negotiated two-State solution.
8/18

21/12/2021

We remain very concerned about the very fragile
situation in Gaza. Now more than ever, humanitarian
and economic support is needed to support the most
vulnerable communities. As we are aware, the 14-year
siege on Gaza continues to devastate its economy,
restrict the movement of people and limit the provision
of basic services, including electricity, affecting
medical services and hospital operations.
We therefore reiterate our call for the Israeli
authorities to lift the blockade imposed on the Gaza
Strip so as to allow for the reconstruction of Gaza in
its entirety.
The plight of Palestinian refugees in the Middle
East is also dire. The financial situation of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) is worsening,
with December salaries for staff — most of whom are
refugees themselves — hanging in the balance and
with refugees facing a stark reduction in services. We
commend donors who are committed to supporting
UNRWA and call for timely and predictable funding to
allow the Agency to conduct its vital work.
Further, as previously discussed, we remain deeply
concerned about the Israeli designation of six civil
society organizations as terrorist groups. Before making
my closing remarks, I would also like to take note of the
recent virtual meeting between the United States and
the Palestinian Authority in order to discuss economic
matters. That engagement must, of course, be grounded
in international law and support the two-State solution.
We welcome all engagements to that end.
As this is the final statement my delegation will
make as an elected member of the Security Council and,
indeed, for the month of December, I wish to commend
you, Ambassador Abarry, for the manner in which you
and your team have led the Council this month, with the
assistance of the Security Council Affairs Division. For
our part, it has been an honour and a privilege for my
team and I to work with everyone on the Council over
the past two years on a professional and personal level.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for
her kind words of farewell.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his comprehensive briefing.
I share the deep concern of the Special Coordinator
and the Security Council members over the continued
21-41126

21/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

violence in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
This year, the number of Palestinians killed by the use
of force in the West Bank alone is three times that of
2020 and 2019, and the rate of injuries has been even
higher. Settler-related attacks remain a major concern,
as reflected in the Secretary-General’s report.
We call on all parties, especially the relevant
Israeli authorities, to spare no effort to reverse that
trend. Israelis and Palestinians deserve equal measures
of protection. Israeli security forces must exercise the
utmost restraint and refrain from the excessive use
of force. Given the volatility of the current situation,
it is urgent for all those in power to reject violence.
Attacks, clashes and incitement to violence will only
exacerbate mistrust and push all sides deeper into the
cycle of conflict.
When resolution 2334 (2016) was adopted, it
constituted a major achievement of the Council, and
there was strong hope that it would be a breakthrough
in the question of Palestine. However, now five years
after its adoption, no progress has been made.
On the contrary, the situation has even worsened.
The prospect of a just, sustainable and comprehensive
settlement of the conflict now seems less promising
than it was in 2016. The negative trends on the ground
have continued, with more settlement expansions,
demolitions, evictions and violence. Day by day, those
trends have undermined the hope for a two-State
solution, despite the fact that such a solution has the
overwhelming support of the international community,
including all 15 of the current members of the Council.
We have stressed on many occasions that Israeli
settlements in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, have no legal validity, constitute a flagrant
violation of international law and United Nations
resolutions and systematically erode the possibility
of establishing a viable and contiguous Palestinian
State. It is not the lack of a legal framework but the
lack of implementation that is hindering the settlement
of the conflict. We believe that the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) remains the only way forward,
and there is no viable alternative.
The security of Israel must be respected, but it is in
Israel’s security interests to implement resolution 2334
(2016), along with the other relevant United Nations
resolutions. Settlement activities and the use of force
against hopeless and disadvantaged Palestinians, in
disregard of international law and United Nations

S/PV. 8940

resolutions, will never bring about lasting peace. It will
only ignite more violence.
While we welcome the recent exchanges and
cooperation between Israeli and Palestinian officials,
we believe that significant progress will require further
concrete steps from both the Israeli Government and
the Palestinian Authority. The Quartet is expected to
have a strong role in advancing the peace process. We
also support all initiatives put forward by members of
the international community in that direction. At the
same time, we highly commend all humanitarian efforts
from non-governmental organizations, United Nations
agencies, especially the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and international actors to help Palestinians in need.
We are saddened by the lack of progress in the
Palestinian question. Viet Nam will no longer be on the
Council next year, but our hope and commitment remain
strong. We will continue our unwavering support for
the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian people and
their inalienable rights and the establishment of the
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
peacefully coexisting alongside the State of Israel, with
secure and internationally recognized borders based
on the pre-1967 lines and the negotiated settlement
and in accordance with international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
Finally, since this is the last open meeting of the
Security Council for 2021, we would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the Nigerien delegation,
particularly Ambassador Abarry and his team, for
their successful presidency of the Council for the
month of December. We would also like to take this
opportunity to express our sincere thanks to all
members of the Security Council in 2020 and 2021 and
all States Members of the United Nations for the close
cooperation and valuable support they have provided us
during the past two years. We look forward to working
with one and all on issues of common interest in the
years to come.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Viet Nam for his kind words.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I would like to thank the Special Coordinator for his
briefing on the Secretary-General’s detailed twentieth
report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).

21-411269/18

S/PV.8940

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

21/12/2021

The report highlights worrying trends across the
region, including an increasing level of violence and
incitement to violence across a number of fronts. We
call on all parties to condemn incitement wherever and
whenever it occurs. Just last week, we were horrified to
see the attacks on three Israeli citizens near Nablus, in
which a young man lost his life. Our hearts go out to the
family of Yehuda Dimentman. We fully support Israel’s
right to ensure its security and to bring the perpetrators
to justice.

through a meeting of the Joint Economic Committee
early next year.

The report also highlights the acute risks to stability
facing the region and the need to ease tensions. Those
include the immediate financial crises facing both the
Palestinian Authority and the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
the rising tension in East Jerusalem and Sheikh Jarrah
following a number of violent attacks and an increase
in settler violence against Palestinians. We call on all
parties to urge calm and prevent this cycle of violence.

Before I conclude, Mr. President, may I join
others in thanking you and the Niger as you assumed
the presidency during this busy month, and to our
colleagues and their teams from Estonia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam for their time
on the Council. Dag Hammarskjöld reminded us that
we are not permitted to choose the frame of our destiny,
but what we put in it is ours. My departing colleagues’
time on the Council has been remarkable.

The United Kingdom continues to urge the
Government of Israel to permanently end its settlement
expansion and settlement activity in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem.
The plans to advance construction in E-1 and the
demolitions and evictions affecting the Palestinian
populations in East Jerusalem and Area C directly
threaten the viability of a future Palestinian State. The
threat of eviction facing residents in Sheikh Jarrah also
risks further violence and instability.
We welcome the decision by the Jerusalem District
Planning Committee to postpone the decision to
construct housing units in Atarot beyond the 1967 lines.
We urge the Israeli authorities not to move forward with
these plans.
We must not forget the toll this prolonged conflict
has taken on the people of Gaza. As our Minister for
the Middle East set out on 17 December, the United
Kingdom is proud to have provided $2.6 million to
UNICEF to launch its child-sensitive cash-assistance
programme in Gaza to help vulnerable households,
especially children, gain access to basic services.
We do welcome the positive progress made this year
to improve relations between the parties and encourage
dialogue at the senior ministerial level. We encourage
further progress in this regard. We hope economic
cooperation will continue to develop, building on the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee in November and, we hope,
10/18

As we look towards a new calendar year, we urge a
continuation of increased dialogue between the parties
and a reversal of the negative trends we have heard about
today. It is only through dialogue that we can improve
stability across the region and build the foundations for
peace. The United Kingdom remains firmly committed
to a two-State solution based on 1967 lines and with
Jerusalem as a shared capital.

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the United Kingdom for her kind
words.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank Tor Wennesland
for his comprehensive briefing and for the report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
As the Security Council convenes to discuss the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory for the
final time this year, five years since the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016), it is fitting that we take stock.
Despite grave concerns raised in the Council about
Israel’s settlement activity in every meeting this year,
Israel has continued to plan and expand its settlements,
with an estimated 800,000 people now housed in
illegal settlements.
I repeat Ireland’s call on Israel to halt all
settlement activity, including in the sensitive areas of
E-1, Atarot and Givat Hamatos. The facts are crystal
clear: settlements are illegal under international law
and severely undermine the viability of a two-State
solution. Ireland assures the Security Council of its
commitment to the principle of differentiation and the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
The year 2021 has also seen a record-high number
of Palestinians affected by demolitions, evictions and
confiscations. Once again, Palestinian families in
Silwan, Sheikh Jarrah and Al-Walaja are confronted
with a looming legal deadline. In East Jerusalem alone,
21-41126

21/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

121 children have been affected by demolitions and
confiscations this year. As highlighted by the SecretaryGeneral, demolitions and forced evictions raise serious
concerns about the risk of forcible transfer.
The significant uptick in violence across the
occupied Palestinian territory this year — as well as
its increasing intensity — is extremely concerning.
Incidents of settler violence are deeply disturbing, and
those responsible for attacks must be held accountable.
In 2021, the Israeli security forces in the West Bank
killed 72 Palestinians, including 17 children, using
live ammunition. The disproportionate use of live fire
by the Israeli security forces is unacceptable. We are
deeply disturbed by the surge in violence in the West
Bank, including attacks in Jerusalem and the killing of
civilians. We condemn terrorism in all its forms. We
are concerned by the threat to the safety and security of
Palestinian and Israeli populations and by incitement to
violence by terrorist groups.
Earlier this year, we witnessed the most significant
escalation in hostilities since 2014, leading to the death
of more than 200 people, including over 60 children.
Seven months on, the ceasefire remains fragile. The
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has confirmed
that more than half of the children in the Gaza Strip
require mental-health support. Every child is born with
the right to safety, the right to protection and the right
to development. For Palestinian children, these rights
are violated on a daily basis.
Our statement here last month (see S/PV.8913)
made our position of grave concern clear on Israel’s
recent designation of six Palestinian civil society
organizations. Ireland’s commitment to supporting
civil society and those defending human rights
remains unwavering.
We welcome the first phase of Palestinian
municipal elections in the West Bank and look forward
to the second phase. Ireland remains of the view that
national Palestinian elections are essential to renewing
the legitimacy of national institutions. The financial
situation of the Palestinian Authority is of concern,
and we encourage support and enhanced economic
cooperation between the Palestinian Authority
and Israel.
We strongly support UNRWA’s vital work for
Palestine refugees and call on others to do the same
and to ensure that UNRWA has the financial means

S/PV. 8940

to fully discharge its role, which is also critical to
regional stability.
Let me emphasize again the need to reinvigorate
efforts, including through the Quartet, with and
between the parties and with key regional players, to
help make progress towards a two-State solution to the
conflict. Only this will end the occupation and achieve
our shared vision of two States, Israel and Palestine,
living in peace and security on the basis of the pre-1967
lines, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States.
The Security Council also bears a particular
responsibility, given its role in the maintenance of
international peace and security under the United
Nations Charter and the fact that this issue has been on
the United Nations agenda since 1948. Ireland is ready
to play its part, and this issue will remain a priority for
the rest of our membership in the Council.
As this is the last official meeting of the year, I
wanted to take this opportunity to say a most sincere
congratulations to you, Mr. President, and to your team,
for the stellar way in which you have led us through
your final month on the Security Council. I also wanted
to say a fond farewell to the other departing colleagues
from Estonia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia
and Viet Nam. If I may respond to the beautiful prose of
the representatives of the United States and the United
Kingdom, I would like to end with a quotation — of
course, from an Irish poet, W. B. Yeats — who said,
“Think where man’s glory most begins and
ends, and say my glory was I had such friends.”
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Ireland for her kind words and for
sharing her Irish wisdom.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I too thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
Estonia shares the concerns about escalated tensions
in the West Bank, which have led to an increasingly
volatile situation. We strongly condemn the terrorist
attacks and violence against civilians, including the
deadly shooting near Nablus last Thursday. We are also
concerned about the increased settler-related violence.
We call on all parties to refrain from violence incitement
and acts of provocation.
Secondly, we remain worried about the continued
Israeli settlement expansion, demolitions and evictions,
as such acts are contrary to international law. While

21-4112611/18

S/PV.8940

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

we note the recent decision of the Israeli authorities to
postpone the approval of a plan for some 9,000 settlement
units in Atarot, we urge Israel to permanently halt all
settlement plans in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem.
The report of the Secretary-General mentions
another worrying trend — the increase in restrictions
by Israel and the Palestinian Authority on the rights
to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and
association, including arbitrary detentions. We call
on the Palestinian authorities to ensure freedom of
expression of human rights defenders and protesters
and ensure the protection of the witnesses in the trial for
Nizar Banat’s killing. We also take seriously the listing
of six Palestinian non-governmental organizations as
terrorist organizations by the Israeli authorities. Civil
society enjoying fundamental freedoms is essential to
democracy and to promoting peace and efforts between
Israelis and Palestinians.
On a positive note, we recognize the increased
contacts between the Israeli and Palestinian authorities.
Hopefully, these will be followed by more practical
steps, including those aimed at improving the economic
and institutional stability of the Palestinian Authority.
Thirdly, we welcome the holding of the first phase
of Palestinian municipal elections on 11 December.
Hopefully, that will soon be followed by a second phase
in the rest of the municipalities, as well as national
elections. We hope to see the resumption of the efforts
towards intra-Palestinian reconciliation, which also
remains vital to reaching a sustainable solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Turning to Gaza, we positively note the recent steps
taken by Israel to ease the restrictions on the movement
of goods to Gaza and call for additional improvements
to allowing movement in and out of Gaza, while taking
into account Israel’s security concerns.
I would like once more to call on the parties to
refrain from unilateral steps undermining the two-State
solution and instead to take practical steps towards
improving cooperation. I would also like to commend
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his continued
efforts, together with key international partners, to
create favourable conditions for the resumption of
meaningful negotiations.
Before I finish, Sir, I would first like to congratulate
and thank you and the Niger for an excellent presidency
12/18

21/12/2021

during the month of December. As this is, hopefully,
my last official meeting as a member of the Security
Council, I would like to also take this opportunity to
thank Ms. Hasmik Egian, her team and the Secretariat
for the excellent help and cooperation that we have had
during the past two years, and all my colleagues on the
Council — both elected and permanent members — for
really making us feel like part of the family. I use that
word sincerely. Although we have sometimes not seen
eye to eye, I really appreciate the personal relations that
we have had here, and it has been an honour and great
experience to serve in the Council. When we leave the
Council, I promise that we will be guided by the same
principles and that we will continue to work towards
making this a better and safer world.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Estonia for his statement and
kind words.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). I take this opportunity to reiterate Tunisia’s
appreciation for the efforts of the Secretary-General
and the Special Coordinator to promote peace in the
Middle East.
The Security Council’s resolutions continue not
to be implemented and the parties concerned not to
be compelled to uphold them, in contravention of the
Charter of the United Nations. That is the main reason
why the situation in the Middle East remains hostage to
tensions and instability, thereby prolonging more than
seven decades of occupation accompanied by killings,
displacement and repression of Palestinians and the
violation of their most basic rights, without arriving at
a solution for the question of Palestine and the ArabIsraeli conflict in general.
The Secretary-General’s report notes the scope
of the violations committed by the occupation
authorities against this resolution 2334 (2016). They
insist on pursuing their aggressive practices against
Palestinian citizens in the occupied territories without
any sense of accountability, demonstrating yet again
how the occupation forces ignore the resolutions of
international legitimacy.
It has been five years since resolution 2334 (2016)
was adopted, along with dozens of previous resolutions
and international and regional initiatives. Since
21-41126

21/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

then, there has been no progress in terms of ceasing
settlement activities, the seizure of land and the
demolition of homes; halting measures to change the
demographic nature and legal and historic status of the
occupied Palestinian territories since 1967, including
East Jerusalem; stopping violence against civilians;
or resuming negotiations pursuant to resolutions
of international legitimacy and the agreed terms
of reference.
In view of the flagrant violations of the rights of
the Palestinian people by the occupying Power, Tunisia
calls once again on the international community and the
Security Council to fully shoulder their responsibilities
and ensure that the occupying Power upholds its
obligations under international law, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We reiterate the need to protect Palestinian civilians
from the violence perpetrated by the settlers and the
occupation forces, which use excessive force, including
against women and children. Defenceless Palestinian
civilians are repeatedly attacked. Restrictions are
being imposed upon their freedom of expression and
organization. Palestinian civil society organizations
are targeted, including six that have been classified as
terrorist organizations.
How long will this situation of violence and
escalation last as a result of the occupation practices,
such as those carried out in May? We must confront
the root causes of the situation, namely, the occupation.
There can be no security and stability in the
region without a just and comprehensive peace that
restores the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people
and enables them to enjoy their liberty and dignity
in an independent sovereign State within the 1967
borders with East Jerusalem as its capital. The terms
of reference of such a solution are well-known. There
are numerous United Nations resolutions to that effect.
International efforts must now be made to ensure that
those resolutions are upheld and implemented in order
to launch serious, credible and time-bound negotiations
to arrive at a just and comprehensive settlement.
In that regard, we reiterate Tunisia’s call for the
convening of a full-fledged international conference
with the participation of all relevant parties to engage
in a genuine peace process based on international
law, United Nations resolutions, the relevant terms of
reference and the Arab Peace Initiative. We hope that
the Middle East Quartet will maintain its support of

S/PV. 8940

peace and redouble its efforts to break the current
impasse in the peace process.
The socioeconomic and humanitarian situations in
the occupied Palestinian territories are deteriorating.
We therefore call on international donors to increase
their economic and humanitarian support to Palestine.
We also call on the international community to compel
the occupation authorities to lift the restrictions
imposed upon freedom of movement and to end the
embargo in Gaza.
We stress the vital role of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), which provides assistance to around
5.5 million Palestinian refugees and supports stability
in the region. There is an urgent need to promote and
increase the support addressed to UNRWA.
In conclusion, we reiterate Tunisia’s steadfast and
principled support for the rights of Palestinian people,
which are not subject to statute of limitation. We are
always ready to pursue our efforts for achieving lasting
and comprehensive peace.
Since this is Tunisia’s final scheduled meeting
as a member of the Security Council, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your able leadership
of the Council this month. I thank all colleagues and
delegations of Member States for their cooperation and
positive interaction over the past two years, despite all the
difficulties and challenges faced by the Council. I also
thank the Council’s secretariat, headed by Ms. Hasmik
Egian, and all her colleagues for their assistance and
cooperation, and wish the new Member States that will
join the Council on 1 January 2022 all the success. We
reiterate our readiness to continue cooperation with all
Member States pertaining to all issues in the service of
peace and security and in support of multilateralism.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Tunisia for his kind words.
Ms. Juul (Norway): At the outset, I wish to thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing and
for the twentieth report on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016).
Once again, today’s reporting shows that the deeply
disturbing trend of settlement activity, demolitions,
evictions and violence continues unabated. We urge
the Israeli Government to halt and reverse that trend.
Israeli settlements are illegal under international law.
The expansion of settlements in and around Jerusalem

21-4112613/18

S/PV.8940

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and deep into Area C contribute to undermining the
prospects of a future contiguous Palestinian State.
Israel’s decision not to approve — in the immediate
future — the building of settlement units in Atarot is
a step in the right direction, but the media has also
recently reported worrying plans for settlements in Beit
Safafa, Sheikh Jarrah, Dahiat Al-Barid/Beit Hanina
and Sur Baher.
Today’s reporting describes daily violence
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory, including
clashes between Palestinians and Israeli security
forces, high levels of settler-related violence, attacks
by Palestinians against Israelis and the use of lethal
force by Israeli security forces against Palestinians. We
condemn all acts of violence. They must be stopped.
We are especially concerned about children, who
are experiencing violence and threats — including on
their way to school — by settlers and reportedly also
by Israeli security forces. Those responsible for violent
acts must be held to account. Israel has responsibility to
protect all civilians from violence, including children,
as well as to uphold their right to education.
Norway also remains concerned about the
Palestinian Authority’s financial situation. A
sustainable Palestinian economy is critical, both for
long-term State-building and the more immediate need
for stability. We welcome the stepped up engagement
between senior Israeli and Palestinian officials in
that regard.
We are also encouraged by reports of progress in
implementing the recommendations from the meetings
of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of the International Assistance to Palestinians and the
Middle East Quartet held in Oslo in November. That
includes the entry of goods and materials into Gaza
being increased; the total numbers of permits issued
for Gaza traders being expanded to 10,000; the parties
agreeing on all technicalities shifting to a digital value
added tax collection system; and the opening of a new
water line that allows for an additional 5 million cubic
meters of water into central Gaza, improving the water
quality there.
Norway also welcomes the agreement between
the European Union and the Palestinian and Israeli
authorities to launch shipments of containers through
the King Hussein/Allenby Bridge border crossing
with Jordan. We welcome the decisions of continued
14/18

21/12/2021

assistance by Qatar into the year 2022 and $100 million
of additional financial support provided by Algeria to
the Palestinian Authority.
We commend the Palestinian Authority for holding
the first round of local elections on 11 December. It is
now imperative that the second round of elections is
held as planned in March 2022. Palestinians deserve
democracy and the rule of law with security, equal
rights and opportunities for all. The absence of regular
national elections weakens the legitimacy of the
Palestinian Authority and there is an urgent need to
strengthen it.
Finally, let me reiterate Norway’s continued support
for and belief in the two-State solution on the basis of the
1967 lines, the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016), international law and
the international agreed parameters.
Before concluding, let me also congratulate the
Niger on a successful presidency this month and thank
all outgoing colleagues for their excellent work and
cooperation this year.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Norway for her kind words.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his briefing on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016).
Resolution 2334 (2016) was adopted by the Council
to reaffirm the international community’s firm
commitment towards preventing the erosion of the twoState solution. It calls upon parties to prevent all acts of
violence against civilians; stresses that all settlement
activities must cease; and underscores the need to exert
collective efforts to launch credible negotiations on all
final status issues.
The recent developments on ground, as revealed in
the latest report of the Secretary-General, indicate that
resolution 2334 (2016) is yet to be fully implemented in
its letter and spirit. Violent attacks against Palestinian
and Israeli civilians have continued during the reporting
period, as have acts of destruction, provocation and
incitement. We condemn all such acts.
Prospects of the possible eviction of Palestinian
families in Sheikh Jarrah remain high. Tension
continues to prevail at the holy sites of Jerusalem.
Settlement activity has resumed after a brief hiatus.
We call upon the parties to immediately make concrete
21-41126

21/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

efforts to reverse those negative trends. Unilateral
actions that unduly alter the status quo on the ground
pose serious challenges and undercut the viability of
the two-State solution. They must be avoided in the
interest of peace and stability.
Instead, parties must engage in constructive steps
that create conducive conditions for the resumption
of peace talks. We acknowledge that some steps have
recently been initiated in that regard. The Israeli
Government and the Palestinian Authority have
opened a channel of communication. Steps have been
taken to stabilize the fiscal situation of the Palestinian
Authority and improve the socioeconomic conditions of
Palestinians, including through the progressive easing
of restrictions in the Gaza Strip for commodities and
construction materials and increasing work permits for
Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza.
The successful conclusion of the prisoner exchange
talks would help the process further. We encourage
everyone to build on such measures and create more
avenues of cooperation, which can help overcome the
trust deficit.
India’s support for a peaceful resolution of the
Israel-Palestine conflict is consistent and well known.
We believe that durable and long-lasting peace can be
achieved between the people of Israel and Palestine
only through a two-State solution, which entails the
establishment of a sovereign, viable and independent
State of Palestine within recognized and mutually
agreed borders, living side by side with Israel in peace
and security.
Both the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people for statehood and Israel’s legitimate security
concerns can be fulfilled through an open and direct
dialogue between Israel and Palestine based on the
internationally agreed framework. We reiterate that
there is no alternative to direct peace negotiations
between the parties.
Thirty years ago, the international community
helped to open a channel for direct talks between Israel
and Palestine through the Madrid Peace Conference. A
similar effort is now required to overcome the present
impasse. India stands ready to support all efforts aimed
at the resumption of direct negotiations and facilitating
the peace process to achieve a two-State solution.
Before I conclude, allow me to convey our deep
appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to the Niger

S/PV. 8940

for your presidency, as well as our appreciation to all
outgoing members. We wish them every success.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of India for his kind words.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
Two days from now, it will be the fifth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016). Regrettably,
the resolution remains unimplemented to this day. The
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory
not only have not ceased but have continued to expand.
This year, in Area C of the West Bank, tenders have
been announced for more than 3,300 settlement units,
which is almost double the figure of 2020. A total of
835 Palestinian structures were demolished, displacing
1,044 Palestinians, which is the highest number since
2016. China is deeply concerned about that. Settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory violate
international law, undermine the contiguity of the
occupied Palestinian territory, squeeze the living
space for Palestinians and continuously jeopardize the
prospects for the two-State solution. We once again
urge Israel to abide by resolution 2334 (2016), cease all
settlement activities and return to the track of the twoState solution.
The security situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory is worrisome. Since early this year, military
and police operations in the West Bank have caused
massive Palestinian casualties. Violence by the Israeli
settlers has intensified, and attacks frequently occur.
The tensions near Nablus last week once again sounded
the alarm. We urge all parties to remain calm, exercise
restraint, refrain from measures that could lead to
further escalations, avoid harming civilians and work
together to de-escalate the situation.
Israel should earnestly fulfil its obligations under
international humanitarian law, ensure the safety of the
people of the occupied territory and their property and
thoroughly investigate attacks by settlers and incidents
of violence against civilians in order to bring the
perpetrators to justice. At the same time, Israel’s right
to exist and its legitimate security concerns should also
be respected.
The per capita gross domestic product in the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip has been shrinking for years.
The Palestinian Authority faces a financial crisis. After
the conflict in May, Gaza is in dire need of recovery and

21-4112615/18

S/PV.8940

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

21/12/2021

reconstruction. The people in the occupied Palestinian
territory are suffering hardship. The international
community should take urgent action, provide assistance
to Palestine through multiple channels and support the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in its relief and
assistance work. Israel should further facilitate access
for humanitarian aid and reconstruction materials and
lift the blockade and siege on Gaza as soon as possible.

Mr. De La Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his briefing.

China has always cared about the Palestinian
people. We have already provided Palestine and
UNRWA with multiple batches of assistance, including
among other things, cash transfers, anti-pandemic
supplies and coronavirus disease vaccines. We will
donate another 1.5 million doses of vaccine to Palestine.
We will provide 500,000 doses to the people in Gaza, in
partnership with Egypt, and 200,000 doses to UNRWA.

Today, nearly 800,000 Israeli settlers live in
settlements, representing a 53 per cent increase in the
past five years. Housing units continue to be built,
thereby impeding the geographical contiguity of the
Palestinian territory. In addition, the rate of demolitions
in 2021 was the highest since 2009.

The issue of Palestine has always been at the
heart of the Middle East question. The international
community should maintain the right path of the twoState solution and make greater efforts to advance the
Middle East peace process on the basis of the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for
peace and other international consensus. We must not
allow 2022 to become yet another year misspent. We
hope that Palestine and Israel will take the opportunity
afforded by the recent high-level contacts, continue to
build momentum, gradually re-establish mutual trust
and resume equal dialogue at an early date.
We call for broader international efforts for peace
and support the United Nations, the Arab League, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and countries
with significant influence in playing a more positive
role. The Security Council should also shoulder its
responsibilities, have a greater sense of urgency and
work actively towards the just and lasting settlement of
the Palestinian question.
Last but not least, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Niger, and in particular you,
Ambassador Abarry, for your excellent work during
your presidency this month. I also appreciate the
work and contribution of Estonia, the Niger, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam as
Council members.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of China for his kind words.
16/18

This week marks five years since the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016), which sought, among other
things, to halt the expansion of settlements. After
reviewing and receiving the Secretary-General’s regular
reports on the implementation of that resolution, it is
clear that much remains to be done.

Such settlements violate international law, pose an
obstacle to the two-State solution and hinder prospects
for a sustainable peace. Mexico once again urges Israel
to halt the construction of new housing units, as well as
the confiscation and demolition of, and eviction from,
Palestinian properties. We support full respect for the
legal obligations contained in resolution 2334 (2016).
The briefing by the Special Coordinator highlights
the continuing volatility on the ground. It also points
out the increase in violence in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. Both the frequent clashes between the Israeli
security forces and Palestinian civilians and those
between settlers and Palestinians are unacceptable.
In the past two years, 540 settler attacks have been
recorded. In the past week alone, violent incidents
again occurred on the outskirts of Nablus. We also
condemn acts that violate the status of holy sites in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem.
We also note that, in 2021, at least 341 Palestinian
minors have been detained by Israeli law enforcement
forces, and that many of them have suffered
mistreatment and have no access to legal counsel. We
condemn that and recall that the detention of minors
must be an exceptional measure and that it must comply
with international standards of juvenile justice.
We also express our dismay at the reduction of
democratic space for civil society, both by Israel and
the Palestinian Authority. We stress the importance
of respecting fundamental freedoms and of creating
spaces that are conducive to the full exercise of the
freedom of expression and association.
21-41126

21/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We welcome the continuation of the legal process to
clarify the facts surrounding the death of activist Nizar
Banat, in the hope that it will enable the identification
and prosecution of those responsible. We also
commend the organization of the local elections held
on 11 December in 154 localities in the West Bank, but
we again urge the Palestinian Authority to hold general
elections as soon as possible.
We welcome the cooperation between Israeli and
Palestinian authorities in civil and security matters,
as well as the trade exchange between Jordan and
the Palestinian Authority. We also welcome the
confidence-building measures taken in Gaza, such as
the issuance of permits for Palestinian workers, the
supply of drinking water and the easing of restrictions.
However, the economy continues to deteriorate sharply,
making it imperative to lift the blockade on the Strip.
As a country committed to the peaceful settlement
of disputes, we reiterate that, through the Security
Council’s work, Mexico favours a comprehensive and
definitive solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
that is based on the premise of two States, addresses
Israel’s legitimate security concerns and allows for the
consolidation of a politically and economically viable
Palestinian State within secure and internationally
recognized borders, as well as the special status of
Jerusalem, in accordance with international law and
relevant United Nations resolutions. We therefore call
for a decisive push for the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) in order to achieve the goals set five
years ago.
In conclusion, as this is the last briefing of the
month, I join my colleagues in warmly thanking the
presidency of the Niger for its successful leadership of
the Council’s work this month. On behalf of my country
and my delegation, I recognize and express gratitude
for the valuable contributions of Estonia, the Niger,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet
Nam over the past two years in the Security Council.
On a personal note, it has been a pleasure to work with
them.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Mexico for his kind words addressed
to me.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the Niger.

S/PV. 8940

I thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his detailed briefing
on the situation in the Middle East. My delegation
followed with great interest the briefing by the Special
Coordinator and takes note of the Secretary-General’s
comments on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016).
During its two-year term on the Council, the Niger
has continued to deplore the lack of effective measures
for the implementation of that important resolution.
The disturbing elements highlighted by the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report reinforce our disappointment
with this state of affairs. These developments include the
continued unbridled expansion of Israeli settlements on
Palestinian land, in particular through the accelerated
issuance of building permits in the occupied West Bank
and in areas of East Jerusalem, thereby jeopardizing
the territorial continuity of a future Palestinian State
with these areas.
It is high time that the international community
and the Security Council abandon their wait-and-see
attitude of reiterating positions of principle and other
professions of faith while the prospect of an independent
Palestinian State and the two-State solution recede from
view. We must finally act decisively to save the IsraeliPalestinian peace process, the sine qua non for which,
as we all know, is the end of Israel’s occupation of
Palestinian lands. Indeed, it is the continuation of that
abject policy of expropriating Palestinian lands — which
has repeatedly resulted in evictions, destruction and
forced displacement of Palestinian civilians — that
leads to the kinds of escalations that this year have
sparked particularly deadly confrontations between
those two peoples.
At this point, I would like to mention two other
equally disturbing elements, also highlighted in the
Secretary-General’s report, and which characterize
the policy pursued by Israel, the occupying Power,
in the Palestinian territories. These are the continued
demolition of Palestinian structures and the resurgence
of settler violence against Palestinian civilians. As of
December, no fewer than 835 Palestinian structures had
been demolished by the Israeli authorities, very often on
the basis of military regulations whose illegality under
international law is well known to all. This year alone,
these demolitions have resulted in the displacement
of approximately 1,044 people, the highest number of
displaced persons since 2016.

21-4112617/18

S/PV.8940

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In addition to the despair and desolation of entire
families thrown out on the street, there is the persecution
and attacks on the Palestinians by Israeli settlers,
whose activities benefit from the protection of the
Israeli law enforcement forces. This settler violence has
reached worrisome proportions since 2017, with several
Palestinians killed by live ammunition and several
others injured in violent incidents involving settlers.
All of these illegal and ruthless practices by the
occupying Power in the occupied Palestinian territories
have, over time, become the principal obstacle to the
restoration of trust and peaceful coexistence between
the two peoples — a genuine obstacle to progress
towards the only valid solution, that is, the two-State
solution.
Furthermore, the Niger hopes that with the prospect
of a return to the negotiating table between Israelis
and Palestinians, the various Palestinian factions will
benefit from reconciliation to speak with one voice.
That can be done only through the organization of
credible general elections, which will help pave the way
for peace. We call on the international community to
support the Palestinians in this promising effort, with
a view to a rapid return to the negotiating table for a
two-State solution.
The socioeconomic and humanitarian situation
throughout the occupied Palestinian territories is
another source of concern, as rightly addressed by the
Secretary-General’s report. Indeed, the tension in Gaza,
which is a veritable open-air prison, reflects the deep
despair of a population that is subject to the worst forms
of harassment, deprivation and humiliation, owing to
the prolonged blockade imposed by Israel. The Gaza
Strip today, with one of the highest densities in the
world and facing extreme poverty, unemployment, food
insecurity and a multitude of humanitarian challenges

18/18

21/12/2021

brought about by the most recent war, meets all the
criteria of an unliveable area.
The situation in the West Bank is also worrisome, in
particular the economic recession resulting from years
of stagnation, declining investments, the Palestinian
Authority’s budget deficit and Israel’s continued
withholding of Palestinian Government revenues.
That is why, given its crucial importance in assisting
the Palestinian people held hostage by Israel, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East deserves to be supported
and to have its work funded. We therefore call on the
international community to be even more generous
and to disburse the funds pledged in order to enable
the Agency to continue providing essential services,
especially now, in the time of the pandemic.
In conclusion, my delegation recalls that the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) continues
to be a true test of the Council’s authority and its
capacity to enforce its own resolutions on Israel. It is
time to act for the creation of a sovereign, independent
and viable Palestinian State because maintaining the
status quo will only perpetuate hatred, violence and
the unacceptable triumph of the law of the jungle. It
would constitute the most appalling illustration of the
failure of the international system to protect the weak
from the tyranny of the powerful, as well as a flagrant
violation of the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting so that the
Council can continue its discussion on the subject in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

21-41126
