S/PV.7400

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7400th meeting

Friday, 6 March 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Haniff
Mr. McLay
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

15-06188 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1506188*

S/PV.7400

Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/136)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs; Mr. John Ging, Director of the Coordination
and Response Division in the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs; and
Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: In the six weeks since I last briefed
the Council, on 26 January (see S/PV.7368), there have
been a number of significant developments related to
the conflict in eastern Ukraine. The most pivotal was
the signing, in Minsk on 12 February by the Trilateral
Contact Group and rebel representatives, of a package
of measures for implementing the Minsk agreements.
The agreement, the result of tireless diplomacy on
the part of Chancellor Merkel, President Hollande,
President Poroshenko and President Putin, provides a
road map for lasting peace in eastern Ukraine.
Recognizing that fact, on 17 February the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2202 (2015), thereby
providing the peace process in eastern Ukraine with a
binding international framework for further engaging
all sides to find an urgent and lasting solution to the
conflict. However, as we converged in this Chamber on
that same day (see S/PV.7384), the fight for Debaltseve
reached its climax, with hundreds, if not thousands,
of innocent civilians caught in the crossfire. As
Ambassador Tagliavini, one of the signatories to the
12 February Minsk agreement, remarked to the Council

2/27

06/03/2015

on 27 February (see S/PV.7395), the rebels’ unabated
attacks for control over that strategic area were in clear
violation of the agreement they had signed only five
days before.
Since 18 February, the situation appears to have
calmed. However, as we are all well aware, the ceasefire
remains fragile, not yet having taken hold firmly across
the region. Sporadic violations are reported frequently,
including in the south near Mariupol and, once again,
near Donetsk airport.
The Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
has monitored some withdrawals of heavy military
equipment from the line of contact but, due to a lack of
access and freedom of movement for its monitors, the
Mission remains unable to verify the true extent of that
process. It is also yet to receive baseline information
regarding the sides’ inventory, routes for withdrawal
and where the weapons will be stored. As per the
commitments undertaken by the parties in Minsk, full
and unfettered access must be given to the OSCE and
the withdrawal of heavy weaponry must commence
urgently, transparently and comprehensively.
We are aware that there will be no significant
traction on the political track unless the prerequisite
ceasefire and withdrawal of weapons are fully
implemented. The history of this conflict has taught us
that the window of opportunity to make those processes
irreversible is limited.
Eastern Ukraine still appears to be in limbo as we
await the full implementation of the Minsk package
of measures. The road ahead will be difficult, but it
is critical that all concerned strictly adhere to, and
commence the good-faith implementation of, that
agreement. We welcome the continued efforts of the
leaders of Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany, as
well as the crucial role played by the OSCE.
Let me also take this opportunity to touch briefly
on President Poroshenko’s 17 February statement
noting that Ukraine will be requesting a possible
deployment of a United Nations-mandated peace
mission to Ukraine. Subsequent to that, Ukrainian
Foreign Minister Klimkin held discussions with the
Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
and me on this issue. We informed the Foreign Minister
that it was a decision for the members of the Security
Council and that the Secretariat would be guided by the

15-06188

06/03/2015

Ukraine

Council’s decision. To date, no formal request has been
received from Ukraine.
With reference to the OSCE briefings to the Council
on 27 February and the call for the United Nations to
do more, the Secretariat continues its close cooperation
with the OSCE on what more could be done to support
the OSCE’s difficult and complex mandates.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ging.
Mr. Ging: On behalf of Ms. Valerie Amos, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, I would like to deliver
the following statement on the humanitarian situation
in Ukraine.
One year ago Ukraine had no displaced people; now,
as a result of the conflict, there are almost 1.1 million
people registered as internally displaced, more than
100,000 of them displaced in the last month. More than
670,000 people have fled to neighbouring countries.
Displacement continues, as pauses in the fighting in
some locations has allowed people who are trapped to
flee. More than 2 million people are living in conflictaffected areas, the majority of them with limited access
to basic services. Only 180,000 people now remain in
the city of Horlivka, as compared to 276,000 before the
conflict. Only 8,000 people remain in Dokuchaievsk,
as compared to 30,000 before the conflict. And in
Debaltseve, where the re-conflict population stood at
over 25,000, fewer than 7,000 people remain — 5,000
of them are estimated to be living underground in
basements and improvised bunkers.
Five million people across the country are now in need
of humanitarian assistance — 1 million in Governmentcontrolled areas and 3 million in non-Governmentcontrolled areas. Approximately 1.4 million people have
no access to health care. Those remaining in conflictaffected areas, in particular in densely populated urban
areas, face ongoing security threats due to military
activities. Lives have been lost, basic life-saving
services have been disrupted, access to banking and
cash services is limited, food and non-food items are
increasingly scarce and expensive and there is an
upsurge in lawlessness across the country.
We welcome the package of measures for the
implementation of the minsk agreements, but continue
to urge all parties to the conflict to adhere to the

S/PV.7400

15 February ceasefire and to protect civilians. The
ceasefire remains fragile but, where observed, has
allowed a limited increase in humanitarian access.
Most recently, on 19 February, 62 tons of humanitarian
aid was delivered to Donetsk city by United Nations
convoy. Supplies included essential hygiene items,
warm clothes, blankets, condensed milk powder,
drinking water and medicines.
Despite limited humanitarian access to affected
areas due to insecurity and administrative obstacles,
by the end of 2014 humanitarian actors had provided
health kits to 2.6 million people, vaccinations for
30,000 people, clean water and sanitation facilities for
more than 100,000 displaced people and food supplies
for 100,000 people. Despite those efforts, needs still far
outweigh the combined capacity of the humanitarian
community and the Government of Ukraine to respond.
It is imperative that humanitarian actors be able to
reach those in need with life-saving assistance. We call
on all parties to the conflict to facilitate the safe and
unimpeded passage of aid and aid workers and to lift
any administrative obstacles to such passage.
The Humanitarian Coordinator, Mr. Neal Walker,
is coordinating the humanitarian response of United
Nations agencies and national and international
non-governmental organizations to ensure that
assistance reaches those who need it most in an
effective, efficient and timely manner. Coordination
structures, including sector-specific clusters, have been
put in place in Ukraine. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs is present in the six key areas
across the country.
Additional funding to address the immediate
humanitarian needs of those affected by this conflict
is urgently needed. Ukraine’s humanitarian response
plan, launched on 24 February, calls for $316 million to
reach 3.2 million people in the most dire humanitarian
need. To date, only 13 per cent of that appeal — a mere
$42.2 million — has been either received or pledged. We
thank those Member States that have contributed, with
the largest financial contributions so far coming from
the United Kingdom, the United States, the European
Commission, Germany and Denmark. Several Member
States, most notably the Russian Federation, have
provided significant material assistance.
It is essential that the millions of civilians caught up
in this conflict, many of whom have been traumatized
by violence and severe hardship, be able to return to

15-061883/27

S/PV.7400

Ukraine

their homes and be given access to basic, life-saving
services is restored. We call on all parties to the conflict
to respect the ceasefire and put an end to the violence.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Ging
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Šimonović.
Mr. Šimonović: The ninth report of the United
Nations Human Rights Mission in Ukraine, whose
mandate has just been renewed for a further three
months, was released on 2 March. It covers the period
from 1 December 2014 to 15 February 2015. Today I
will highlight some of the report’s key findings and
provide an update on developments since the cut-off
date.
Although since the 12 February Minsk agreement
the ceasefire in Ukraine has held up in general, with a
few isolated incidents of small arms and mortar shelling
reported, the human rights situation, especially in
eastern Ukraine, has remained alarming. Particularly
in January and the first half of February, the stark
escalation of hostilities led to increased violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, with a sharp spike in casualties and
devastating consequences for the local population.
From mid-April 2014 until 15 February 2015, at least
5,665 people were documented as killed; by 5 March,
the figure increased to at least 5,820. Given that
full reports on casualties, especially near Donetsk
airport and in the Debaltseve area, are still pending,
we estimate that the total number of people killed in
eastern Ukraine has now passed the 6,000 mark.
Allow me to highlight a number of disturbing
trends in the human rights situation in Ukraine.
First, during the reporting period there was an
increased use of sophisticated and heavy weaponry,
including multiple launch rocket systems. Those types
of weapons were used during the 24 January attack
on Mariupol, which killed 31 people, including two
children. In the east up until the ceasefire of 15 February,
and in the Debaltseve area beyond the ceasefire,
there was continued indiscriminate shelling of highly
populated civilian areas, both in areas controlled by the
Government and those controlled by the armed groups,
with an escalating toll on civilians. The deliberate
targeting of civilians may constitute a war crime and
could amount to a crime against humanity if widespread
or systematic. Attacks caused heavy damage to civilian

4/27

06/03/2015

property and vital infrastructure. By 4 March, the
number of residential buildings destroyed during the
conflict period on the territory of the Donetsk region
exceeded 9,500. Approximately 150,000 local residents
of the Donetsk region alone still remain without water,
gas and electricity. Hospitals, schools and kindergartens
have been shelled in both Government-controlled and
armed-groups controlled areas, limiting access to
health care and education. The situation is aggravated
by the alleged continued inflow of heavy weaponry and
foreign fighters from the Russian Federation.
Secondly, many civilians have remained trapped
in the conflict zone, with ongoing and severe
restrictions on the freedom of movement. According
to the Government, the situation of approximately
4,000 people remaining in 21 facilities of institutional
care in the areas under the control of armed groups is
particularly precarious. The lack of vital medicines and
food is also of major concern. The armed groups have
on several occasions stated that they will not allow
the evacuation of people from social care institutions,
such as older persons or the bedridden. Nothing has
been done to evacuate prisoners either. It is essential
that these most vulnerable groups be evacuated as a
matter of priority, and as part of an obligation under
international humanitarian law.
Thirdly, there is a clear indication that the divide
in Ukrainian society continues to deepen. With every
new attack on the civilian population, with every new
case of arbitrary detention and torture, with every
new deprivation of basic services to those remaining
in the territory under the control of the armed groups,
with every new displacement, the divide deepens. A
terrorist attack in Kharkiv, which killed four people by
an explosive device on 22 February, and 14 attacks in
Odesa since December, targeting pro-Maidan offices
and supporters, are further contributing to the negative
trend. At the same time, there is growing dissatisfaction
among the Ukrainian population over the fighting in the
east, and there have been a series of anti-mobilization
protests around the country.
Fourthly, the humanitarian situation is increasingly
affecting the social and economic rights of the population
as a whole. The enormous influx of registered internally
displaced persons (IDPs), as already reported by Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, is placing
an ever-heavier burden on the Government and on the
Ukrainian people. Just this week, the Parliament passed
a bill reducing already low pensions in order to satisfy

15-06188

06/03/2015

Ukraine

conditions for the much-needed International Monetary
Fund loan and to allow social payments to IDPs. It
is clear that the price of the conflict rises for every
individual Ukrainian, as the cost of living continues to
soar, the threat of potential gas and heating shortages
becomes more likely and the value of the hryvnia
declines, along with the standard of living. Ultimately,
the much-needed and long-promised reforms are
severely jeopardized as they are moved further and
further down the Government’s list of priorities.
Against that backdrop, it remains absolutely crucial
that the Government show resolve and commitment
to fight corruption and to render impartial justice
and accountability for all human rights violations,
regardless of the perpetrators or the victims. Impartial
accountability can help deter future human rights
violations, preserve the confidence of the people in
their Government and contribute to the healing of
psychological wounds. In that context, the judgement
rendered by the regional administrative court on
19 February, which found that the State emergency
service was responsible for inaction during 2 May
disorders in Odesa, is a welcome step in the right
direction. Nonetheless, progress in the investigations
into human rights violations related to the Maidan
events remains slow. After one year, only four persons
have been arrested, two of whom are being tried
currently. However, as yet no one has been convicted
for the violence that led to the deaths of 117 people.
Impartial justice and accountability must also apply
to those who have committed violations in the context of
the hostilities. While the initiation of some 49 criminal
proceedings against servicemen of the Ukrainian armed
forces and National Guard for human rights violations
was a welcome development, it appears that most cases
were not pursued due to disputes over the official status
of those presumably involved. In the same vein, it is
also very alarming that the key defence witness in the
case against former mayor of Slovyansk Nelya Shtepa
was abducted and found murdered on 30 January, which
effectively intimidates other witnesses from coming
forward.
At the same time, the armed groups continue to
violate the most basic human rights of the population
trapped in the areas under their control. The Human
Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine continues
to document cases of torture, ill-treatment and
disappearances. On 22 January, a dozen Ukrainian
servicemen captured at Donetsk airport were forced

S/PV.7400

to march through the streets of Donetsk. Several were
reportedly physically assaulted by members of the
armed groups and by onlookers. It is recalled that such
degrading and humiliating treatment of prisoners may
constitute a war crime.
The situation in the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea is also deteriorating, with systematic human
rights violations affecting mostly Crimean Tatars and
those who opposed the March referendum. The Deputy
Chairman of the Crimean Tatar Mejlis, Mr. Ahtem
Ciygoz, was placed in pre-trial detention for his
participation in a pro-Ukrainian protest a year ago. That
is in addition to the continued ban against the historical
leaders of the Crimean Tatar Mejlis, Mr. Mustafa
Jemilev and current Chair Refat Chubarov, to return to
Crimea. According to Mr. Chubarov, there are serious
allegations of attempts to break the autonomy of the
Crimean Tatar Mejlis and replace its leadership with
pro-Russian candidates. The pressure on Crimean Tatar
media also continues.
It is absolutely necessary that all sides fully respect
the 12 February Minsk agreement. It is the only way out
of a crisis, which is not only national but also regional
and, increasingly, global. I especially welcome the
all-for-all formula for the release of detainees. I have
advocated for the formula with representatives of the
armed groups, the Government and the facilitators.
However, so far it has not been properly applied.
Piecemeal prisoner exchanges, which have taken place
so far, stimulate arbitrary arrests in order to have more
prisoners to exchange. The full implementation of
an all-for-all release formula would be an important
confidence-building measure and a real test of the
commitment of parties to end the conflict. I therefore call
on both parties to implement it fully and immediately.
At the same time, the Ukrainian pilot Nadiya
Savchenko remains in solitary confinement in a
pre-trial detention centre in the Russian Federation.
It is highly important to ensure that Ms. Savchenko
is released from custody immediately. She should
either be released under the all-for-all formula or on
humanitarian grounds, because of her health conditions.
In conclusion, the human rights situation in
Ukraine remains grave. There are fears that hostilities
may resume, and concerns about a military campaign
on Mariupol. That could entail many more casualties,
significantly escalate the conflict and lead to its
further internationalization. After more than 6,000

15-061885/27

S/PV.7400

Ukraine

06/03/2015

killed, 1 million displaced, hundreds of thousands of
refugees, and continuing violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, the conflict has
still not reached the point of no return. However, the
window of opportunity seems to be rapidly closing. We
simply cannot afford to let that happen.

restrictions. Russia-backed armed groups continue to
deny access, including to Shyrokyne and Kruzhylivka;
they also continue to harass and threaten the personnel
of the Special Monitoring Mission. That is clearly
unacceptable and a violation of the Minsk agreements
and their implementation measures.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Šimonović for his briefing.

The OSCE Mission has not been provided with the
requested detailed information, including the inventory
of weapons, withdrawal routes and concentrations
points, as per the Minsk agreements. Valid questions
therefore remain regarding whether the illegal militants
are withdrawing their weaponry or merely regrouping
under the guise of doing so.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I thank you, Sir,
for having convened today’s meeting. I would also
like to thank the three briefers for their valuable and
sobering contributions. It is hard to disagree with the
statements made by Under-Secretary-General Feltman
and Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović that the
window of opportunity is very small and may be closing
very fast.
Following the diplomatic efforts in the Normandy
format aimed at finding a solution to the Ukrainian
conflict, a package of measures for the implementation
of the Minsk agreements of 5 and 19 September 2014
was agreed upon on 12 February. The Security Council
put its weight behind th0se agreements by adopting
resolution 2202 (2014), on 17 February.
Since then, some positive developments have taken
place, including the initial exchange of prisoners and a
significant reduction in the death toll. However, further
steps are urgently needed. All illegally detained persons
must be released, including the Ukrainian pilot Nadiya
Savchenko, who spent more than 80 days on a hunger
strike and whose health is close to a point of no return.
Serious concerns remain regarding the verification
of the withdrawal of heavy weaponry and continuing
instances of ceasefire violations, including near
Mariupol and Donetsk airport.

The situation is further aggravated by the fact that
OSCE border-monitoring activities remain restricted to
40 metres out of some 400 kilometres. As we know,
Russia has repeatedly blocked efforts to expand border
monitoring.
It is paramount that Russia stop destabilizing the
situation in eastern Ukraine and stop supporting illegal
armed groups operating there. Its soldiers must be
withdrawn from the territory of Ukraine. It must put an
end to the movement of mercenaries across its borders
into Ukrainian territory and stop support to the illegal
militants. Russia should also use its influence with the
illegal armed groups to ensure that the ceasefire is fully
and unconditionally respected and that the withdrawal
of the heavy weapons can be duly monitored.
The OSCE Monitoring Mission should be provided
full and unhindered access to all areas. It must be
able to exercise its mandate independently, without
obstruction or interference. We look forward to the
early extension of the Mission’s mandate for a 12-month
period. Adequate financing and resourcing must be
ensured for the Mission to carry out its mandate.

We note the assessment by the Special Monitoring
Mission that attacks on Government-controlled towns
east of Mariupol may indicate an attempt to test the
eastern defences of the city. We stress that any attempts
by the Russia-backed militants to seek to gain control of
additional territory will be a clear breach of the Minsk
agreements and will seriously undermine all efforts to
promote a sustainable political solution.

Civilians have borne the brunt of this conflict,
which started a year ago with the illegal annexation of
Crimea in blatant breach of the Charter of the United
Nations. The false pretext of defending the rights
of Russian speakers was used to invade Crimea and
promote separatism in eastern Ukraine. While fighting
imagined human rights violations, Russia and the illegal
militants it supports have caused a real humanitarian
crisis and real and dramatic human rights violations in
the regions affected by the illegal actions.

Monitors of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) continue to face severe

Normal life in those regions has been disrupted,
leading to displacement, destruction and deaths. The

6/27

15-06188

06/03/2015

Ukraine

numbers were given by John Ging of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). At
least 1 million have resettled within the country, placing
a heavy burden on the authorities as well as on local
communities. Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović
has spoken about that. The humanitarian crisis is most
acute, aggravated by the cold winter. Russia and the
illegal armed groups it supports bear full responsibility
for the devastation that has befallen Ukraine.
We welcome the efforts of OCHA, United Nations
agencies and other international organizations aimed
at alleviating the suffering of the people in eastern
Ukraine. It is imperative that all humanitarian
actors should be provided unfettered access to all
affected areas for a prompt and unimpeded delivery
of humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian assistance
should be provided in line with international law and in
full respect of Ukraine’s sovereignty. Russia’s so-called
humanitarian convoys remain a cause of concern, as
they are operating in violation of the accepted norms
of humanitarian assistance and in breach of Ukraine’s
borders and sovereignty.
Reports of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights have repeatedly
documented the catastrophic breakdown of the rule of
law and ongoing massive human-rights violations in
the militant-held areas, including abductions, arbitrary
detentions, beatings, torture and summary executions.
There are also numerous instances of serious violations
of international humanitarian law, to which Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović just referred. The
capture and parading of Ukrainian prisoners of war
by the militants constitute a possible war crime. The
capture of Donetsk airport revealed bodies of executed
Ukrainian servicemen with their hands tied behind
their backs, as documented in the latest reports.
Attacks against journalists and media outlets
continue. At least 60 cases of attacks against the media
offices were recorded, and 78 journalists have been held
by armed groups since March last year, according to the
report. The whereabouts of some remain unknown.
The latest human rights monitoring mission report
speaks eloquently of the disturbing human rights
situation in occupied Crimea. The Tatar community,
those who opposed the sham referendum a year ago,
religious communities and minorities are facing
threats, harassment, intimidation, abductions and
forced disappearances.

S/PV.7400

Since the annexation by the Russian Federation,
the public space in Crimea has been shrinking. The
fundamental freedoms of expression and assembly
have been severely curtailed. All those holding
Ukrainian passports are facing restrictions in
exercising their political and civil rights, limited access
to social services, tight quotas for residence permits
and loss of jobs and homes. Out of 600 schools that
offered instruction fully in Ukrainian, not a single
one remains. Only 20 schools on the peninsula have
separate Ukrainian classes — violating the rights of the
Ukrainian community in Crimea.
Religious communities have also been affected.
Priests, imams and representatives of other religious
communities are being threatened with prosecution,
detained and harassed, with their prayer houses and
monuments desecrated. People are forced to adopt
Russian citizenship or lose their property, rights and
income.
Crimean Tatars are in an especially serious
condition, as they have no other home but Crimea.
Their leaders are evicted from the Mejlis, threatened,
prosecuted and deported. Major figures, such as
Mustafa Jemilev and Refat Chubarov, have been barred
from re-entering Crimea. The Deputy Chairman Ahtem
Ciygoz is being detained along with a number of other
activists. A number of activists are still missing after
being abducted as early as May last year. The son the
Crimean Tatar leader Jemilev remains in detention in
the Russian Federation under trumped up charges.
Media freedom is under siege in Crimea. The
broadcasting of the Ukrainian television channels and
Ukrainian Internet have been discontinued. Journalists
have been threatened, assaulted and attacked.
Investigations have been invoked against the Crimean
Tatar newspapers.
In spite of Russia’s allegations to the contrary and
in spite of the extremely difficult circumstances, the
Ukrainian authorities are continuing the necessary
reform processes. We welcome the Ukrainian President’s
decree on setting up a constitutional commission,
establishing a national council for reform, creating an
anti-corruption agency and drafting a national humanrights strategy, which speaks to the Government’s
commitment to human rights for all. Those efforts must
be wholeheartedly encouraged and supported. The
Ukrainian people deserve to have reforms put in place
expeditiously and effectively. The Maidan events were

15-061887/27

S/PV.7400

Ukraine

not about extremism, as some continue to allege. It was
about the passionate desire of the Ukrainian people
for reform and for a clear break with a past marked by
abuses, corruption, cronyism and graft.
It is also imperative to address the issue of impunity
for serious crimes and human-rights violations,
including in Crimea and the militant-held areas, which
have seen pervasive lawlessness and a total breakdown
of accountability. All perpetrators of the most serious
crimes, including the downing of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17, must be held to account. We call on the
Ukrainian authorities to do their utmost in that regard.
We also urge Ukraine to complete its accession to the
Rome Statute. I would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate that no amnesty should be granted for
international crimes, including gross violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.
My delegation would like to express its appreciation
for the engagement in Ukraine of the United Nations
and its agencies, and of the OSCE. We look forward
to continued reporting, including the spot reports of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, on human rights in Ukraine,
including Crimea. The United Nations, the OSCE and
their missions should be given full and unhindered
access to all areas in Ukraine, including Crimea. The
international community, United Nations agencies and
humanitarian actors must step up their efforts to help
Ukraine cope with the enormous challenges posed by
this year-long foreign-sponsored conflict.
The key to the stabilization of the situation in
eastern Ukraine lies in the full implementation of
the September 2014 Minsk agreements, as reaffirmed
on 12 February. The people of Ukraine have heard
enough talk from the international community. The
time has come to walk the walk. Russia has caused and
sponsored this war, and it remains in Russia’s hands to
put an end to it by fully and unconditionally abiding
by the Minsk agreements, and using its influence on
the illegal militants to do the same. Ukraine’s political
independence, unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity are non-negotiable, and must be respected by
all members of the international community without
exception.
Ms. Power (United States of America): We
continue to believe that compliance with the September
Minsk agreements and the February implementation
package provides a road map to peace in Ukraine. For

8/27

06/03/2015

the first time since the Minsk implementation package
was signed, on 12 February, we have seen a reduction
in violence. Of course, no one forgets that Russia and
the separatists they have trained, armed, directed and
fought alongside started violating their commitments
under the package from the first minutes and hours
after the deal was signed, by laying siege to Debaltseve,
a city dozens of kilometres beyond the contact line,
with their deadly and indiscriminate pummelling.
Violations started on day one, and violations of the
ceasefire continue in a number of places, particularly
outside Mariupol, where Russian-backed separatists
have engaged in intense fighting, attacking the village
of Shyrokyne in recent days.
Unfortunately, although the violence has decreased,
there has been only partial compliance with the Minsk
implementation package. As the members of the
Council know, the package calls for “an immediate and
comprehensive ceasefire”, not a gradual and partial
reduction of fire. It does not say that Russian-backed
separatists can continue to shell, engage in sniper
fire or use barrel and rocket artillery; yet they have
carried attacks using all such methods in recent days.
Since 20 February, Russian separatist attacks such as
those have killed 15 Ukrainian military personnel and
wounded nearly 100 more.
A second condition in the Minsk implementation
package is full, unfettered access to the entire conflict
zone for monitors from the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). While there have
been occasional instances when the OSCE’s Special
Monitoring Mission has been stopped at Ukrainian
checkpoints, the restrictions placed on the Mission by
Russia and the separatists are documented as widespread.
Just as Russia and Russian-backed separatists prevented
the Mission from going to Debaltseve while those
forces carried out their vicious attack, recent Mission
reports chronicle repeated, persistent obstruction from
Russian-backed separatists — obstruction that includes
even threatening to kill OSCE monitors. To date, the
separatists have granted the monitors sporadic access,
limited to certain roads when and where it suits them.
As we have asked before, the question bears asking
again: who obstructs an objective observer other than
someone who has something to hide from an unbiased
eye?
The Minsk implementation package also calls for
a full pull-back of all heavy weapons. That, too, has
not happened. Shortly after the package was signed, the

15-06188

06/03/2015

Ukraine

OSCE’s chief monitor sent a letter to all the signatories
requesting that they provide information on what heavy
weapons were present in eastern Ukraine, where they
were, which routes would be used to withdraw them
and where they would be located after being withdrawn.
Russia has not replied, as though if it pretends it has no
heavy weapons in Ukraine, we will forget all the tanks,
GRAD missiles and other heavy weapons we have
watched Russia send across the border. All signatories
to the Minsk agreements and the implementation
package — Ukraine, on the one side, and Russia and
the so-called Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk
People’s Republic, on the other — are responsible for
pulling back heavy weapons. The OSCE must have
unfettered, unconditional access in order to verify the
withdrawal. Two days ago, Russia sent its seventeenth
so-called humanitarian convoy into Ukraine, once
again denying international observers and Ukrainian
border guards the right to conduct a full and complete
inspection of its contents. Russian convoys, which
should be coming out of Ukraine, are instead going in.
If those convoys are carrying humanitarian assistance,
why not allow a full inspection?
The ceasefire weapons pull-back and OSCE
verification, neither of which is complete, are among just
the immediate steps to be taken in the implementation
package. In addition to that, all of the Minsk agreements
to date have called for the release of all hostages by all
sides. Nadiya Savchenko and other Ukrainians being
held in Russia are hostages, just as surely as are those
being kept in basements in Donetsk and Luhansk.
Again, we call on Russia to release Nadiya Savchenko,
who has been on hunger strike for more than 80 days, as
well as her Ukrainian counterparts. That is something
Russia can do today.
As we have seen before, the separatists have an
established track record of using a lull in the fighting
to regroup, re-arm and re-supply. Russia supports that
process by providing an unlimited supply of guns
and weaponry. The United States, and the rest of the
world, hopes that will not be the case this time. We are
carefully watching what happens in Shyrokyne, a town
just east of the strategic port city of Mariupol, which
many fear will be the next target of the separatists and
Russian military.
The devastating consequences of this conflict have
been brought into sharp relief by the most recent report
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. More than 1.7 million people have

S/PV.7400

been displaced and more than 5,800 killed — a casualty
count that does not include the hundreds of bodies
found after Russian-backed separatists finished their
deadly siege of Debaltseve. A report from the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs at the end
of last month stated that 500 bodies had been found in
houses and basements at the end of the siege — 500
bodies. Homes and basements where people took shelter
from the endless barrage of Russian-made mortars and
rockets as they rained down on the city’s residents, who
could not escape. Weeks into the siege, at the end of
January, the self-declared leader of the Russian-backed
separatists announced that anybody who left would
be in the interlocking field of fire of their artillery.
From that day, he said, the road would be under fire.
Those inside were therefore left with a choice between
risking their lives by staying or risking their lives by
leaving. Civilians were killed doing both, and, I repeat,
500 bodies were found in homes and basements where
people had taken shelter.
The casualties and the displaced are one of the
devastating consequences of this conflict. Another, and
one we rarely speak about in the Council any more, is the
ongoing illegal occupation and attempted annexation of
Crimea by a permanent member of the Council. Crimea
is important not only because it constitutes a continued
violation of the territorial integrity of a sovereign
nation — a violation orchestrated in Moscow and
dressed up in a sham referendum — but also because
it offers a preview of the kind of rule we can expect
in the other parts of Ukraine seized by those who see
themselves as part of Novorossiya.
Let me give just one example of what it is like
to live in that world, from a long list of repressive
practices documented in the aforementioned February
human-rights report of the United Nations, part of the
relentless persecution of the Crimean Muslim Tatar
minority. According to the report, on 29 January
2015, the de facto authorities arrested Ahtem Ciygoz,
the Deputy Chairman of the Tatar Mejlis, the Tatars’
representative council. He was charged, under the
Russian criminal code, with having participated in a
“mass disturbance” for protesting against what was
then the imminent Russian occupation, which ended in
a clash with pro-Russian demonstrators. On 7 February,
another Crimean Tatar was detained on the same
charges. Both men are charged with violating Russian
law, even though Russian law had not even taken effect
at the time that they participated in the protest.

15-061889/27

S/PV.7400

Ukraine

Yesterday the OSCE Representative on Freedom
of the Media released a statement saying that media
freedom in Crimea was at an all time low. Among other
violations, she reported that,
“Journalists from at least 13 independent media
outlets, free lance journalists and bloggers have been
threatened, assaulted, physically attacked, banned from
entry, interrogated and kidnapped; their equipment
confiscated or damaged.”
The Russian Federation occupies territory,
unilaterally attempts to annex it and then retroactively
and arbitrarily applies its laws to those who dared to
question its take-over as it was occurring. It does not
get much more Orwellian than that. As anyone who has
read the human rights report knows, that is just one
in a long list of repressive tactics, including torture,
enforced disappearances and targeted political killings
that have defined Russia’s occupation.
It is to avoid an Orwellian world like that, where
we talk of peace while undermining it, that we must
ensure that the Minsk agreements are implemented.
The Council members around this table must confront
the situation on the ground as it exists, rather than as
we wish it were. Peace will not come from more words,
and there have been so many words in this Chamber.
It will come from the long-awaited and faithful
implementation of the many agreements that have been
entered into, and renewed respect for the territorial
integrity of a State Member of the United Nations.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The last three speakers employed 50 shades
of black. We would like to call on everyone to be
more objective, which is in the interest of settling the
conflict. However, we understand that in this case such
appeals are useless.
We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman and to the Director of
the Coordination and Response Division of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John
Ging, for their briefings.
With regard to Mr. Ivan Šimonović, we believe that
his briefing to the Security Council is inappropriate
for several reasons. First, the Council has not taken
a decision to establish the human rights mission
in Ukraine and had not asked for a reporting line.
Secondly, Mr. Šimonović already had an opportunity,
just a few days ago, to address the Human Rights

10/27

06/03/2015

Council in Geneva and to convey his views to Member
States. This is a classic example of a duplication of
effort in the United Nations. Previous appearances by
Mr. Šimonović the Security Council have led only to
an excessive politicization of the issue. Objectivity was
sacrificed to propaganda. It has reached the point where
the Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine has
begun to express its views on military aspects that have
nothing to do with human rights issues. That is why
today we will not comment on Mr. Šimonović’s report
or on his briefing. We have already done so in Human
Rights Council.
On 17 February, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2202 (2015), which approves a
package of measures aimed at implementing the
Minsk agreements, which established a framework
for peaceful settlement and a way to address the
conflict in the Council. The package of measures of
12 February raised the bar for the settlement of the
conflict to a more advanced stage, and it became a
kind of new affirmation of the process. The document
provides a comprehensive approach — from military
issues to confidence-building measures — and includes
constitutional reform, which should be carried out in
consultation with Donetsk and Luhansk.
There are also a number of other important elements,
including amnesty for participants, the restoration of
socioeconomic relations and humanitarian aspects.
Now, thanks to resolution 2202 (2015), everything has
been reinforced by the international authority of the
Security Council, which in addition to the leaders of
the Normandy quartet, has become a guarantor of the
package of measures. The document is clear, both with
regard to the sequence of the steps to be taken and the
participants that must take those steps. In that regard,
it is important to act in good faith and implement the
steps without any attempt to rewrite them.
The Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) plays a
crucial role in implementing the package of measures.
It is tasked with observing the process, in accordance
with the parameters prescribed in the document,
in an impartial and coordinated way. If the special
monitoring mission needs strengthening with more
observers, equipment or financing, we are ready to
consider that in a more constructive manner and in
more detail in the framework of the Permanent Council
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe in Vienna.

15-06188

06/03/2015

Ukraine

Being both realists and optimists, we are satisfied
with the positive development of the situation on
the ground. The ceasefire is generally holding. The
withdrawal of heavy weapons has begun. One of the
parties to the conflict, the Donetsk People’s Republic
and the Luhansk People’s Republic, has already
completed that process. We hope that Kyiv will fall in
line and finally withdraw its heavy equipment to the
line of contact. We hope that this will help to foster
a climate of trust, and that isolated violations of the
ceasefire will cease. We also note the progress made in
the exchange of prisoners.
At the same time, progress has stalled on a number
of points. On 24 February in Paris, Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Normandy quartet called on
the Trilateral Contact Group to immediately establish
a working group to address the remaining aspects.
Unfortunately, Ukrainian authorities refuse to do
that and are dragging their feet. That is alarming and
counterproductive. On 3 March, after having delayed for
several months, President Poroshenko signed a decree
establishing a constitutional commission, which will
draft changes to the Constitution. However, the process
is far from transparent. According to the package of
measures, constitutional reform must be carried out
in coordination with representatives of Donetsk and
Luhansk. Otherwise, the deep-rooted causes of the
Ukrainian crisis will not be dealt with.
A separate issue is the catastrophic socioeconomic
and humanitarian situation in Donbas. The measures
taken by Kyiv to suffocate the south-east have become
a veritable blockade. Social benefits and pensions
paid to Donbas residents have been cut off. Exiting
and entering the area requires overcoming almost
insurmountable bureaucratic obstacles. Convoys with
humanitarian assistance and food are not reaching
civilians, as confirmed by international organizations.
Dozens of hospitals and schools have been destroyed.
Kyiv recently ended the delivery of gas to Donbas.
Russia is undertaking extensive efforts to meet
the urgent needs of the population of Donbas. It has
already 17 sent convoys with humanitarian assistance.
By the way, the most recent convoy, as well as some
previous ones, was fully inspected by Ukrainian
customs officials at the Donetsk checkpoint. I would
ask Ambassador Power to take an interest in what her
Embassies in Kyiv and Moscow are doing and in why
they are not providing her with such basic information,

S/PV.7400

instead giving her with disinformation on this topic and
many other issues related to Ukraine.
Thanks to the humanitarian convoys approximately
30,000 people are being provided with food rations,
250 hospitals are receiving medical equipment and
approximately 150 social service facilities have been
reopened. Drinking water is being provided to 80 per
cent of the population in the affected areas. We believe
it is unfounded and cynically politicized to criticize us
for sending those convoys. That criticism will in no
way undermine our determination to help the people
of Donbas.
The statistics about the 1 million internally
displaced persons in the territory of Ukraine is well
known. However, almost as many people — 950,000
people since April 2014 — have left Ukraine and stayed
in Russia. Of them more than 650,000 have requested
to be granted special status. We make no distinction
as to whether those people come from the east or the
west of Ukraine or as to what their political views
are. We are making comprehensive efforts to welcome
them and provide them housing and jobs. There are
some 527 temporary accommodation sites throughout
76 regions of the Russian Federation where more than
27,000 people, including nearly 9,000 children, are
currently residing. Those people are being provided
with humanitarian, medical and psychological support.
In the medium term, the socioeconomic problems
of Donbas cannot be resolved without implementing
the provisions of the package of measures pertaining
to the full re-establishment of relations with the rest of
Ukraine, including the resumption of transfers of social
benefits and pension payments and the functioning of
the banking system. That work must begin without
delay in the framework of the Contact Group.
We have heard dozens of times in this Chamber
that the Ukrainian crisis can be resolved only through
political means. Today the main work is being carried
out in the Normandy and Minsk formats, which are
making an important contribution to achieving results
that give us hope for a solution. However, against the
backdrop of positive steps, we are very worried about
the continuing sabre-rattling by Kyiv — statements by
President Poroshenko about the expansion of the army,
the delivery of a new batch of tanks to the National
Guard and the armed forces, trips by Kyiv officials
around the world looking for weapons, and the drafting
in the United States Congress of a law to provide

15-0618811/27

S/PV.7400

Ukraine

$1 billion for the equipping and training of Ukrainian
forces.
According to data we have, in Lviv oblast these
days some 300 military personnel from the United
States have arrived to train Ukrainian soldiers in
the use of foreign equipment. Everyone knows that
wherever American military appear bad things can be
expected to happen. I just want to recall, for instance,
that when the Saakashvili regime attacked South
Ossetia, there were 127 United States military advisers
working in Georgia. The result was conflict, bloodshed
and destruction. Only irresponsible politicians refuse
to understand what this kind of a scenario could lead
to in Ukraine.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Šimonović and Director Ging for their timely
briefings today.
We share the briefers’ grave concern at the
situation in eastern Ukraine. This week the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights reported that more than 6,000 people have been
killed since April 2014. In that time, over 15,000 people
have been wounded, and more than 1.5 million have
fled their homes. It should trouble us all that these grim
milestones have been met in less than one year and in
spite of successive ceasefires.
Behind those statistics lies a worrying and escalating
humanitarian crisis that has further undermined the
human rights of all those living in eastern Ukraine. I
can understand why the representative of Russia does
not want to discuss the human rights situation in the
country because the latest report by the United Nations
Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine details
a growing level of violations and abuse, including
reports of arbitrary arrests, summary executions,
torture and enforced disappearances. The report details
indiscriminate shelling of populated areas, including
deliberate attacks by Russian-backed separatists
on civilians being evacuated through Ukrainiancontrolled routes, and it highlights the human cost of
the fighting — overburdened centres for internally
displaced persons, collapsing social services and a
growing scarcity of food, water and heating.
The violence is having a disproportionate effect
on the most vulnerable, with women, children and
the elderly increasingly caught up in the fighting.
Thousands remain trapped in volatile locations like

12/27

06/03/2015

Debaltseve. Hospitals, schools and kindergartens have
been deliberately shelled, and disturbing reports of
sexual violence are on the rise.
We call on both sides to respect international law,
to ensure the safety and security of all in the region
and to take active steps to ensure accountability for
any violations and abuses of human rights. Sadly,
investigations have been hindered by the separatists’
refusal to grant access to the territory they control.
We urge Russia to use its influence to overcome that
situation.
More must also be done, as agreed in Minsk on
12 February, to ensure the exchange of all hostages and
unlawfully detained persons who remain in captivity.
That includes Ukrainian pilot Nadiya Savchenko,
being held in solitary confinement, who has been on
an extended hunger strike. Recent reports indicate that
she has had to suspend her hunger strike after 83 days
without food amid serious concerns for her health. As
part of the agreement, Russia committed to releasing
all prisoners, and yet Ms. Savchenko and many others
remain in captivity. That is a clear violation of the
Minsk agreements. I would like to ask the Russian
representative here today to explain to the Security
Council why Ms. Savchenko is still being held. I would
also like to remind the Russian Federation authorities
that while Ms. Savchenko remains in their custody they
are fully responsible for her health and well-being.
One year on from the illegal annexation of Crimea,
we must be clear in our condemnation today of what the
United Nations describes as “systematic human rights
violations affecting mostly Crimean Tatars and those
who opposed the March ‘referendum’”. The report
details arrests, arbitrary detention and deportation of
Crimean Tatar activists, denying them their freedom
of religion and belief, their right to free expression
and their right to peaceful assembly. The continued
denial of access to Crimea to the Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities is of
particular concern.
We must send a united message today on the issue of
access. The Minsk agreement calls for the safe delivery
of humanitarian aid to those in need. It calls for the
OSCE to observe the withdrawal of heavy weapons, the
border and the ceasefire. None of that can be achieved
unless the Russian-backed separatists grant free and

15-06188

06/03/2015

Ukraine

unfettered access to the territory they control. We
welcome Ukrainian President Poroshenko’s statement
this week that the OSCE will be granted access by the
separatists to 10 locations in the east. I look forward
to Russia’s confirmation that it will be support this
commitment and that it will use all its influence to
improve access for humanitarian deliveries.
Russian so-called humanitarian convoys remain
of grave concern. Some are clearly being used as
cover for the delivery of military supplies. Russian
military hardware remains in eastern Ukraine despite
the agreement at Minsk to withdraw foreign military
formations. The United Nations Human Rights
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine details credible reports
of
“a continuing influx of heavy and sophisticated
weaponry to armed groups in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions, as well as foreign fighters,
including from the Russian Federation.”
The OSCE reported on Wednesday that an 83-vehicle
convoy crossed the border from Russia at Donetsk.
The Ukrainian Government has made clear that it
has not authorized such convoys. They are therefore a
clear violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity and of international law.
Should Russia wish to support the humanitarian
effort, I urge it to donate money to the United Nations
aid programme. Unless Russia changes its approach,
we will have no choice but to maintain sanctions
and continue our condemnation of Russia’s flagrant
disregard for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine and the human rights of its people.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman, Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović and Mr. Ging, Director
of the Coordination and Response Division of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
for their briefings.
In recent days, the overall situation in eastern
Ukraine has been stable, and the ceasefire has largely
been maintained. Not long ago, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2202 (2015), reflecting
the firm support of the international community for
the diplomatic efforts of the leaders of the Russian
Federation, France, Germany and Ukraine and for a
political settlement of the question of Ukraine. The top
priority now is for the parties concerned to continue to

S/PV.7400

implement in a comprehensive manner the 12 February
Minsk agreement reached by the leaders of the Russian
Federation, France, Germany and Ukraine and advance
the process of political settlement.
China is against any gross violation of human rights
in Ukraine and any act that causes the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation of the country. We also
believe that a political solution is the only way to
resolve the question of Ukraine.
The question of Ukraine involves multiple complex
and interwoven historical and contemporary issues;
a comprehensive long-term solution requires a full
accommodation of the legitimate rights, interests
and claims of the various regions and ethnic groups
in Ukraine, addressing the legitimate concerns of
the parties concerned and achieving a balance in the
parties’ interests. The international community should
continue to increase diplomatic efforts to push for a
political settlement of the crisis in Ukraine.
In terms of the Council’s discussion on the question
of Ukraine, China takes an open approach. We believe
that the discussion should play a constructive role in
easing tensions in the country. Moreover, the threat or
use of unilateral sanctions all too often in international
relations is not conducive to finding a fundamental
solution.
Respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all countries has been China’s consistent position.
China’s position on the question of Ukraine has been
objective and impartial.
We welcome and support the Minsk agreements
reached by the leaders of the Russian Federation,
France, Germany and Ukraine. We call on the parties
concerned to continue to make efforts to ease the
situation in eastern Ukraine, with a view to achieving
peace, tranquility, stability and development in Ukraine.
China is willing to continue to play a constructive
role towards a political settlement of the question of
Ukraine.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Mr. Ivan Šimonović,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights and
Mr. John Ging, Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for their
comprehensive briefings.

15-0618813/27

S/PV.7400

Ukraine

The crisis in Ukraine has created an extremely
difficult humanitarian situation for Ukrainians.
Thousands have been forced from their homes and into
exile in other areas. Furthermore, more than 1 million
people in Ukraine are in dire need of humanitarian
assistance. We are therefore compelled to achieve a
positive, peaceful settlement that takes into account the
interests of all parties puts an end to military actions.
Those actions, in addition to other security challenges,
continue to hamper the work of humanitarian
organizations and stability in Ukraine.
Jordan is increasingly concerned about the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Ukraine,
including the effects of the random shelling of civilian
areas. In the current situation, the first priority must
be the protection of civilians, mitigating their suffering
through urgent measures to assist displaced persons
and Ukrainian refugees and supporting basic services,
particularly in the health sector, which has suffered
enormously as a result of the crisis in Ukraine.
Furthermore, pressure must be brought to bear on
the parties to the conflict, particularly the separatists,
to compel them to respect the rules of international
humanitarian law and human rights law and to cease
all violations thereof. The current divisions among
Ukrainians as a result of such violations and breaches
may lead to a point of no return in the matter of Ukraine.
That serves the interest of no party whatsoever and
would have long-term negative effects on security and
stability in the region.
Jordan appreciates the limited improvement in the
security situation in eastern Ukraine and the ceasefire
being respected in some regions. We stress the need
for an end to all confrontation in eastern Ukraine.
In that regard, we emphasize the need for all parties
must uphold their responsibilities under the Minsk
agreements and translate those agreements into facts
on the ground.
My country underscores the importance of the
ongoing meetings under the Normandy format in
order to implement the agreements, including a full
ceasefire, the withdrawal of heavy weaponry and the
completion of prisoner exchanges, through cooperation
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the working groups to be set up by the
Trilateral Contact Group. We consider it necessary to
to make additional efforts at this crucial stage aimed at
resolving the crisis in Ukraine, especially in the light

14/27

06/03/2015

of the building blocks available to make progress on a
political solution.
Jordan supports the efforts of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and other international humanitarian
organizations, including the International Committee of
the Red Cross. We call on all parties to lift all obstacles
in order to ensure access by those organizations to the
areas requiring assistance.
Furthermore, we urge support for the strategic
response plan for 2015 set forth by OCHA to ensure
humanitarian assistance to the people in need. We stress
that such organizations will be unable to carry out their
humanitarian work without proper political support
from all of the parties to the conflict, in addition to
the necessary international financial support for such
assistance. We call on the Government of Ukraine to
continue implementing the human rights strategy it
has developed and to continue drafting the legislation
necessary to protect all of its citizens.
In conclusion, Jordan believes that the current
positive environment must be used to advantage,
following last month’s Minsk meeting. We must ensure
the space for a comprehensive political solution in
Ukraine that serve to preserve its sovereignty and
territorial integrity and bring together all parts of
Ukrainian society.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for keeping us updated on the
political situation in Ukraine. We also thank Mr. John
Ging and Mr. Ivan Šimonović for their briefings on the
humanitarian situation in the country.
I would like to begin by deploring the death of four
demonstrators as the result of a remotely detonated
device, on 22 February in Kharkiv. We hope that
terrorism will not spread. Ukraine is a country that has
already suffered greatly; it needs to rebuild a peaceful
society in which its citizens will not have to fear for their
lives or well-being. In that connection, we were pleased
to hear that, since the signing of the Minsk agreements,
there has been a decrease in tensions in Ukraine and
progress has been achieved — for example, on prisoner
exchanges between the parties.
Nevertheless, it is difficult to begin to speak of a
political solution when we know that, since the ceasefire
entered into force on 15 February, 60 Ukrainian

15-06188

06/03/2015

Ukraine

soldiers and an unknown number of separatists and
civilians have died. Indeed, confrontations persist in
some regions of the country. We once again urge the
parties to fully implement the ceasefire.
According to the package of measures adopted on
12 February, the deadline for the withdrawal of heavy
weaponry will expire tomorrow, 7 March. That process
was developed with limited access by the Special
Monitoring Mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Chile believes
that the process must be transparent and that the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine must be given
an inventory of the weapons in the country and full
access to information on the withdrawal so that it can
play its full role in monitoring the ceasefire and the
arms stockpiles.
Despite those difficulties, it will be able to manage
this phase without major setbacks, in accordance with
the programme established in the package of measures,
which should not interfere with the establishment of
working groups and the finding of a political solution
to the conflict. We are also concerned that access was
not given to a United Nations rescue team following
a methane explosion in a Donetsk mine. We stress
the fact that access to humanitarian and emergency
support must be unrestricted throughout the territory of
Ukraine, and the authorities must ensure the protection
of the entire Ukrainian population.
It is necessary to put a clear end to the confrontation
so that the international community and the Government
of Ukraine can concentrate their efforts and resources
on dealing with the humanitarian and economic crisis.
Ukraine will need all the help it can get in addressing the
humanitarian crisis, which has left more than 1 million
people displaced. The Government must find lasting
solutions for the provision of housing, employment
and social services and the integration of those people
who, because of the conflict, will not be able to return
to their places of origin. In that vein, we are pleased
that the international community is supporting the
Government’s reform programme, and we hope that
it will continue to support the implementation of the
necessary changes.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank Mr. Feltman, Mr. Šimonović and
Mr. Ging for their briefings and express my gratitude
to the delegation of Lithuania for having called for this
meeting. I would like to particularly thank Lithuania

S/PV.7400

because Spain is very supportive of the Security
Council’s role in closely monitoring the implementation
of the Minsk agreement on the basis of resolution 2202
(2015). All of us here agree that the conflict in Ukraine
can be resolved only by political means. The Minsk
accord, facilitated by Germany and France, to which the
parties agreed and which was endorsed by the Security
Council, can serve as a tool for us to achieve a solution.
We need to support it in a decisive, and unanimous way.
A new high-level meeting of the participants in the
Normandy format is convening today in Berlin, with
Ambassadors Tagliavini and Apakan in attendance
on behalf of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in order to continue
providing assistance aimed at advancing the process.
The Security Council should also support that process.
Spain welcomes the progress achieved in the first
few weeks after the entry into force of the ceasefire
agreement, including the first steps in the withdrawal
of heavy weapons and the exchange of prisoners.
However, progress remains weak and inadequate,
as clearly described by Under-Secretary-General
Feltman. I believe, as he does, that we really need to
take advantage of this window of opportunity. We urge
respect for the ceasefire, without exception and pursuant
to the agreed conditions, and the implementation of the
other provisions of the Minsk agreement in a uniform
and condition-free manner. We also appeal to Russia
to use all its influence to demand that the rebel groups
immediately and strictly implement the agreements and
thereby comply with its obligations as a signatory of the
Minsk agreement. We also call on Ukraine to continue
moving forward in fulfilling the obligations undertaken
in Minsk, including the non-military aspects of the
agreement.
We are concerned about the difficulties that
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
continues to face in fulfilling the tasks entrusted to
it under the agreement. We therefore urge the parties
to work together with the Mission and to provide it
forthwith with the full information it requires. In recent
days, the Council has repeatedly expressed its support
for the important role that the OSCE plays. I think that
we must stress the importance of the agreement. Spain
has proposed extending the mandate of the Special
Monitoring Mission and providing it with the necessary
human and material resources.

15-0618815/27

S/PV.7400

Ukraine

We have heard with great concern the
description of the humanitarian situation reported by
Mr. Ging. Assistance to the population in need should
be a top priority for everyone. We need to reject the
politicization and exploitation of the situation. The
effective distribution of humanitarian assistance
should be a common goal that should be implemented
in a coordinated way and not unilaterally. I appeal
specifically to Russia to ensure the effective distribution
of aid and the due observance of international law and
the necessary restoration of trust between the parties
and to coordinate its humanitarian assistance with the
Ukrainian authorities and the competent international
authorities. Spain suggests that we consider the
possibility of setting up a specific mechanism that
would make it possible, perhaps with the support of
independent humanitarian actors, to facilitate and
accelerate the delivery of aid to those in need with full
respect for humanitarian principles.
We have also listened intently and with great concern
to Mr. Šimonović’s briefing. We again see the dramatic
impact of the conflict in terms of its undermining
human rights and international humanitarian law. That
has been particularly severe since January in the areas
under the control of rebel groups. On that point, I would
like to express, as have other delegations, a special
thought for Nadiya Savchenko, whose hunger strike is
of great concern to us. We request that she be released
immediately.
Also of particular concern is the description of
the situation in the autonomous republic of Crimea.
Its population, according to the report, is subject to
systematic violations of its rights, especially those
people who belong to the Tatar community. Spain would
like to recall the content of General Assembly resolution
68/262. The report submitted by Mr. Šimonović recalls
that the implementation of the laws of the Russian
Federation in respect of the population of Crimea not
only contravenes that resolution but also has certain
implications that negatively impact human rights.
Any lasting and sustainable solution must be based on
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jeffrey Feltman, Director John Ging of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and Assistant Secretary-General Ivan Šimonović for
their briefings illustrating the political and diplomatic
developments aimed at putting an end to the conflict

16/27

06/03/2015

in Ukraine, as well as the situation on the ground, the
ceasefire agreed to in Minsk, the dire humanitarian
situation endured by the Ukrainians and the alarming
human rights situation facing the country.
As a matter of principle, Angola supports the
peaceful resolution of conflicts through dialogue
and negotiations, strict adherence to the principles
of international law, and respect for the sovereignty,
independence, non-interference and territorial integrity
of all States. Angola reiterates its full support for the
implementation of the package of measures agreed to
in Minsk on 12 February. We believe that a permanent
ceasefire will allow for the overall implementation of
the Minsk agreement and ultimately, the establishment
of peace in Ukraine.
We are deeply concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Ukraine, where over all,
since the beginning of the conflict in mid-April 2014,
almost 6,000 people have been killed and almost 15,000
wounded. We regret that over 1 million people are
reported to be internally displaced. This is a situation
that must stop and the Ukrainian people must be
allowed to live with one another in peace and security.
We call once again on the parties to the conflict to
respect the ceasefire and to implement speedily and in
good faith the package of measures under the Minsk
agreements. Having been endorsed by the Security
Council in its resolution 2202 (2015), the agreement
carries special weight resulting from the Council’s
authority in matters pertaining to international peace
and security. In addition, the agreements’ endorsement
by the Council’s unanimous adoption of that resolution
confers additional responsibilities on the Council and
on the parties to the conflict to enforce the ceasefire
and the Minsk agreements.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on presiding over the work
of the Security Council during the month of March.
You may count on the full cooperation of my delegation
in the pursuit of the objectives inherent to the Council’s
work. We also thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, Mr. Ivan
Šimonović, and the Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Ging, for their
briefings.

15-06188

06/03/2015

Ukraine

The
Bolivarian
Republic
of
Venezuela
optimistically notes that the prospects for a political
solution in Ukraine have continued to grow, especially
following the adoption of resolution 2202 (2015) by
the Security Council in support of the decision agreed
by the representatives of Ukraine, Russia, France and
Germany on 12 February in Minsk. We underscore
the need for the agreements to receive the support of
the international community. We firmly hope that the
parties will respect the ceasefire so that the agreements
can be fully implemented.
We would like to express our concern regarding the
more than 6,000 deaths, 14,740 wounded and 1 million
internally displaced persons that have been reported,
as well as the fragile situation in which civilians find
themselves in the regions of Donetsk and Lugansk.
We therefore reiterate the need for the parties strictly
to observe what was agreed in Minsk on 12 February
regarding the protection of civilians and to support a
process addressing the humanitarian situation. We
reiterate our rejection of violence, ethnic and political
persecution, and any form of terrorist act, by whosoever
committed and for whatsoever motivation. We call on
the parties to refrain from actions that threaten the
aspirations for peace and stability of the populations
affected by the conflict.
Venezuela supports the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes and welcomes the work being
carried out by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to support the effective
implementation of the Minsk agreements, including the
withdrawal of heavy weaponry by the parties concerned,
which has already begun, as stated Mr. Ertuğrul
Apakan, head of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine on 27 February.
Without a doubt, the human rights situation
throughout the region is cause for concern. And while
that is the focus of our discussion at this meeting,
I cannot fail to stress the importance of seeking a
political and diplomatic solution to the conflict. The
Security Council must therefore support the effective
implementation of resolution 2202 (2015) and the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements of 12 February
in an impartial and transparent manner and without
ulterior motives.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank Mr. Feltman,
Mr. Ging and Mr. Šimonović for their excellent
briefings, which only serve to emphasize that, if the

S/PV.7400

Security Council is to perform its role of scrutinizing
the situation in Ukraine, it must continue to receive
regular and reliable information, such as that which we
have just heard. We also compliment Lithuania for its
initiative in requesting those briefings.
What we now know about the human rights situation
in Ukraine is truly distressing, in particular the reports
of severe violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law, including the indiscriminate shelling
of civilians, which New Zealand has previously
condemned, and does so again today. Vulnerable
populations are subject to grave abuses; they strive just
to maintain a precarious existence, all the while seeking
safety. We think, in particular, of the plight of the
disabled, who are often overlooked in these situations.
Moreover, today there are 1 million displaced persons
in Ukraine; 12 months ago, there were none. There are
5 million in need of humanitarian relief; 12 months ago,
there were none.
A sharp increase in casualties coincided with the
dramatic escalation of hostilities of recent months,
the only mitigating factor being that the worst reports
generally predate the ceasefire recently agreed in
Minsk. While there are indications that the situation
has started to improve since that ceasefire, we as
the Security Council must do everything possible
to maintain that momentum. We must in particular
address the gaps in information referred to by UnderSecretary-General Feltman, and we must, to use his
words, make the process irreversible. We can only hope
that the events of late 2014 and the early part of this
year represent the lowest point of the humanitarian and
human rights situation in Ukraine.
In the February open debate on the topic (see
S/PV.7389), my Minister of Foreign Affairs raised New
Zealand’s concerns about the veto. We were not alone
in that, with some Member States also mentioning
paragraph 3 of Article 27 of the Charter of the United
Nations. Without repeating those comments, New
Zealand emphasizes that, where parties to a conflict
know that the Security Council is unable to act, there is
much less incentive for compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law. We see the sad
reality of that every day in Ukraine.
New Zealand urges those involved in this conflict
to deliver on their Minsk commitments, not least with
a genuine and comprehensive ceasefire. Until that has
been achieved, the humanitarian crisis and the violations

15-0618817/27

S/PV.7400

Ukraine

that have been described to us today will persist, more
people will suffer, more blood will be shed, and more
lives will be lost. Under international human rights law,
all parties have an obligation to ensure that civilians
are protected. Where civilians seek to escape conflict
areas so as to get to safety, they must be allowed to
do so, not be trapped as Assistant Secretary-General
Šimonović described to us, and certainly not threatened
by separatist artillery. Humanitarian aid must reach the
affected populations. All involved must do everything
within their power to ensure its delivery without let
or hindrance. International norms on the protection of
humanitarian actors must also be respected.
As we have just heard that the situation for
ordinary people in Ukraine remains very dangerous
indeed. The observation of the ceasefire remains
imperfect. Significant civilian populations remain at
very high risk. Much is needed to ensure their safety
and to protect them from human-rights violations.
New Zealand reiterates the Security Council’s recent
unanimous call for the full implementation of the
Minsk package, including a comprehensive ceasefire
and the withdrawal of heavy weapons. All of this must
be monitored and verified by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. We also call once
again on Russia, as a party to the Minsk agreements
on the ceasefire and with indisputable influence in
this matter, to ensure that the separatists honour that
which has been agreed. Those are the essential steps
on the path to a long-term political solution and to the
restoration of peace in Ukraine, and, as such, they must
be delivered.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Lithuania for taking the initiative to hold this debate on
the humanitarian situation in Ukraine. I would also like
to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs; Mr. John Ging, Director of the
Coordination and Response Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs; and Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Human Rights, for their briefings.
Chad is very concerned about the grave security
and humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine, despite
the recent calm that has prevailed following the signing
of the 12 February agreements.
The fighting and blind bombings between the
Government and the separatist groups have primarily
affected the civilian population. The report on human

18/27

06/03/2015

rights in Ukraine covering the period from 1 December
2013 to 15 February 2014 states that 1,012 people were
killed and 3,793 injured in the fighting in eastern
Ukraine. In total, from April 2014 to February 2015, the
conflict has caused 6,000 deaths, including 375 women
and 63 children, and over 14,000 injured, including 650
women and 150 children. The conflict has also resulted
in over a million internally displaced persons and
refugees, including thousands of vulnerable people, in
particular elderly and handicapped persons found in the
combat zones without access to humanitarian aid. In
addition, there has been a massive destruction of public
and private infrastructure, including schools, health
centres and homes.
It is a heavy toll, and the humanitarian situation
highlights the responsibility of political actors and
leaders to find lasting solutions for the affected
populations. Such solutions must include the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, including the
ceasefire, the prohibition on the use of heavy weaponry
and other relevant provisions of the agreements.
Priority should be given to free and unhindered access
to conflict areas in order to allow for the quick and
non-discriminatory delivery of necessary humanitarian
aid to internally displaced persons; the strengthening of
evacuation measures; lasting solutions to the issues of
shelter, jobs and integration for refugees; and the release
of all persons detained illegally or arbitrarily; and the
identification of effective measures to counter violence
against women, guarantee the freedom and security
of the media and put in place educational measures to
allow students to pursue their studies.
Finally, the implementation of such measures must
be carried out with respect for international norms
and the recommendations contained in the report of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and in line with General Assembly
resolution 68/262 on the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I thank you for convening
this meeting, Mr. President. We wish to thank Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Mr. John Ging and Mr. Ivan Šimonović for
their respective briefings.
At the outset, Malaysia would like to express its
sincere condolences to the families of the victims of
the coal mine accident in Zasyadko in eastern Ukraine.
The incident, which resulted in dozens of casualties, has
further exacerbated the already grim situation in the

15-06188

06/03/2015

Ukraine

Donetsk region. We call on the parties to the conflict to
give full cooperation to the relevant authorities for the
rescue and recovery effort.
As is normally the case, the civilian population
bears the biggest brunt and pays the highest price in any
conflict. The Ukraine crisis is no exception. In a matter
of one year, Ukraine went from being a country without
a single displaced person to one having over 1 million of
its people displaced from eastern Ukraine and Crimea.
Of the 1 million, 1 in 3 internally displaced people in
Ukraine is a child. Currently, an estimated 5 million
people in eastern Ukraine are in need of humanitarian
assistance. Over 6,000 people have been killed in the
conflict, including the 298 passengers on flight MH-17,
a tragic incident that was a direct consequence of the
Ukraine conflict.
Malaysia condemns indiscriminate attacks against
civilians in the strongest terms. We are alarmed to learn
that attacks that seem to intentionally target civilians
in residential areas have further intensified in recent
months, including in Volnovakha, Mariupol and the city
of Donetsk. As reported by the human rights mission
in Ukraine, the fighting and indiscriminate shelling
have severely damaged civilian property and vital
infrastructure, leaving civilians without electricity, gas,
heating, water or food. We also condemn the attacks
against hospitals, schools and kindergartens, carried
out in stark disregard for international humanitarian
law and civilians’ lives. We repeat our call for an
independent investigation into those incidents, so
as to bring those responsible for gross violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law to
justice.
Malaysia is deeply concerned by the allegations
of violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law in Ukraine. Reports of the
arbitrary detentions of civilians, torture and enforced
disappearances committed against both sides of the
conflict must be investigated to prevent impunity. We
regret the lack of progress in ensuring accountability
for the grave human rights violations, such as those that
occurred during the Maidan protest in Kyiv and Odessa
last year.
We deplore the attacks against journalists in
Ukraine, particularly in eastern Ukraine and Crimea.
Over the past year, at least 78 journalists have been held
by armed groups, and at least 60 attacks were carried
out against media offices. We call on the parties to

S/PV.7400

respect the right to the freedoms of opinion, expression
and peaceful assembly. We also view with concern the
targeting of religious minorities in the areas controlled
by armed groups, as reported by the human rights
mission in Ukraine.
Since the ceasefire went into effect on 15 February
2015, fighting has generally decreased in the Donbas
region. We also welcome the progress made in the
withdrawal of heavy weapons on both sides. At this
point, however, the ceasefire remains fragile, and the
progress made thus far is far from irreversible. We urge
the parties to the conflict not to miss the opportunity
for peace once again and to ensure full compliance with
the provisions of the Minsk agreements. We also call on
both sides to cooperate fully with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine so as to enable the mission to carry
out its mandate, including to monitor and verify the
ceasefire and the heavy weapons withdrawals.
Malaysia commends the tireless efforts and
commitment on the part of various organizations,
including the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, to provide humanitarian
assistance to those affected by the Ukraine crisis. With
the ceasefire in effect, we hope attention can now be
focused on intensifying humanitarian assistance in an
environment that would ensure the safety and security
of humanitarian personnel. We urge all parties to allow
safe and unrestricted humanitarian access and to remove
bureaucratic impediments that could create barriers to
deliveries of immediate and effective humanitarian aid.
We reiterate our position that humanitarian assistance
must be carried out in accordance with international
law and international humanitarian law and respect for
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
In conclusion, we wish to reflect on the priority task
facing the Chairperson of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, which is to rebuild trust and
confidence in Europe, in particular in view of the worst
crisis the region has faced since the end of the Cold
War. We believe that the Minsk agreements provide
an excellent opportunity for the parties in conflict to
take a step back from the spiralling violence in Ukraine
and recommit themselves to a peaceful resolution of
the conflict. Full adherence to the Minsk agreements
by both sides would constitute a first step towards the
rebuilding of trust and confidence, hopefully leading to
a sustainable political solution to the conflict.

15-0618819/27

S/PV.7400

Ukraine

Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): I to would like to thank
Mr. Feltman, Mr. Šimonović and Mr. Ging for their
briefings this morning.
Nigeria notes that the ceasefire in eastern Ukraine
is holding, although the situation remains tenuous and
precarious. The Minsk agreements provide the basis for
a long-term resolution of the crisis in Ukraine. They
should therefore be respected and not be undermined
by acts that run counter to its provisions. The human
rights of all peoples must be respected. Humanitarian
assistance must reach all those in need without
discrimination.
Nigeria urges all sides in Ukraine to refrain from
acts that may threaten the ceasefire and erode the gains
made in de-escalating the conflict. The ceasefire is a
critical confidence-building measure, an important
first step towards the implementation of the political,
economic and governance aspects of the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements. In our view, the agreements represent a
comprehensive framework for a political solution that
will hopefully return Ukraine to a state of normalcy
and peace and ensure the respect for its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.
I would like to thank Mr. Feltman, Mr. Šimonović
and Mr. Ging for their briefings. Their presentations
have helped to provide valuable insight into the overall
situation in Ukraine.
The Security Council, through its resolution
2202 (2015), has brought all its weight to bear on the
efforts to end the crisis that is the subject of the Minsk
agreements, which the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is in charge of
implementing. After having heard the representative of
the OSCE last week (see S/PV.7391), it seems useful
for the Council to have information for evaluating the
overall situation. All aspects are relevant for efforts to
support the crisis resolution process initiated in Minsk,
which is the priority for all of us. In that regard, it is
important to remember that the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minsk agreements
devotes an entire paragraph to humanitarian issues:
The signatories have committed to ensuring

20/27

06/03/2015

“safe access, delivery, storage, and distribution of
humanitarian assistance to those in need, on the
basis of an international mechanism” (resolution
2202 (2015), annex I, para. 7).
The human rights situation in Ukraine has
continued to deteriorate in recent months. Here in
the Council in mid-November (see S/PV.7311), we
denounced the arrival from abroad of reinforcements
in terms of weapons and fighters in support of the
separatists, which fuelled a new wave of violence that
peaked in early February 2015. Mr. Šimonović’s report
is illuminating on that issue. Nearly 6,000 people have
died since the beginning of the crisis in April 2014,
including the 298 passengers on the Malaysian Airlines
flight.
Civilians have been the main victims of this
escalation. I note in particular, and with horror, the
ongoing bombing of the evacuation corridors used by
people fleeing the combat zones, which has endangered
the evacuation operations organized by the Ukrainian
Government. Thousands of civilians, such as those in
the city of Debaltseve, have found themselves trapped
in combat zones.
This conflagration has also given rise to an increase
in the number of human rights violations, including
acts of torture, summary executions and abductions.
International standards have been violated by all
parties to the conflict. The east of the country, which
is controlled mainly by the separatists, has been turned
into a zone of lawlessness. Accordingly, the report
emphasizes the importance seeing the perpetrators of
those crimes, including most serious crimes, found and
brought to justice.
In that context, the humanitarian situation requires
the attention of all. The response must be coordinated.
The precarious conditions in which people live in
eastern Ukraine do not justify Russia’s open violations
of the sovereignty of the country by bringing in socalled humanitarian convoys without notice, which are
only partially monitored by the Ukrainian authorities.
Finally, we remain particularly concerned about the
situation of the population of Crimea under the de facto
yoke of Russian law. Mr. Šimonović’s report describes
a situation of arbitrariness and legal uncertainty, where
civilians, especially the Tatars, experience regular
violations of their human rights and are criminally
charged under the Russian justice system for events

15-06188

06/03/2015

Ukraine

that took place prior to the illegal annexation of the
territory.
With the signing on 12 February of the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, a new dynamic has emerged. The ceasefire
that entered into force on 15 February is now generally
respected, although it remains fragile. It has helped to
reduce the overall level of violence. De-escalation has
been observed on the ground, and the beginning of the
withdrawal of heavy weapons extends this dynamic. It
is the OSCE’s responsibility to verify the withdrawal,
as provided for in paragraph 3 of the Minsk package of
measures. Other measures relating to human rights and
the humanitarian situation must now be encouraged. In
that respect, two points would establish confidence.
First, with regard to all the hostages and illegally
detained persons, the Minsk agreements provide for
their release and exchange on the basis of the principle
of “all against all”. In that regard, we call on Russia to
stop holding people wrongfully detained in its territory,
particularly Nadiya Savchenko. Her release would
strengthen the first encouraging exchanges of prisoners
that have been taking place since 12 February, including
138 Ukrainian soldiers and 52 separatist fighters on
21 February.
Secondly, progress must be made quickly in the
coordination of humanitarian assistance, as provided
for in paragraph 7 of the Minsk package of measures.
All parties to the conflict must guarantee access for
international humanitarian assistance to all areas.
We welcome the announcement by the Ukrainian
Government of the creation of a platform for discussions
between Ukrainian officials and representatives of the
humanitarian community.
In addition, we support the proposals of
Ms. Heidi Tagliavini, Special Representative of the
OSCE Chairperson-in-Office in Ukraine, to create
a working group that would work to resolve all
humanitarian, economic and rehabilitation issues.
That group would cover the many outstanding issues:
the voluntary return of internally displaced persons
and refugees, the reconstruction of housing, food and
medical aid, the provision to civilians of food, clothing,
schools, and so on. The efforts of all sides will be
needed in that regard.
To give substance to the Minsk agreements,
all parties must respect all of the points. Full and
unconditional access and the security of the OSCE

S/PV.7400

observers, as well as the transmission of information,
especially to confirm the withdrawal of heavy weapons,
must imperatively be guaranteed by all parties. We
expect Russia to encourage the separatist elements to
fully implement the commitments they made in Minsk.
In addition, all parties must courageously address
all of the political points of the road map drawn up in
Minsk to advance towards a comprehensive and peaceful
settlement of the crisis. Progress will be possible when
all parties are willing to move forward. The Council may
be assured of the resolute and continued commitment of
France with its partners in the Normandy format and
in the framework of the Council to continue on the
difficult and demanding path of peace.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this meeting
to discuss the current situation in Ukraine. It is our
hope that under your presidency the Ukraine issue will
progress further towards a resolution. I thank Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Mr. Ivan Šimonović and Mr. John Ging for
their important and timely briefings. Unfortunately, the
facts mentioned today show that the Minsk agreements
of 12 February this year, and of 5 and 19 September of
last year, have not been implemented in full.
The armed and pro-Russian groups are continuing
their attacks on positions and control centres of
the Ukrainian armed forces, as well as on civilian
residences. Since the ceasefire of 15 February, the
militants have carried out over 750 attacks. As a result,
the Ukrainian armed forces have lost 64 soldiers and
341 have been wounded. On the last day alone, terrorists
attacked positions of the Ukrainian military 58 times.
Since the launching of the anti-terrorist operation last
year, 1,541 Ukrainian soldiers have been killed and
6,226 wounded.
The Russian side and pro-Russian separatists
launched an offensive on the city of Debaltseve, which
has already become a symbol of Russia’s flagrant
violation of international humanitarian and human
rights law. As Ambassador Apakan, head of the Special
Monitoring Mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), informed the
Council last Friday,

15-0618821/27

S/PV.7400

Ukraine

“This was an attempt to create new facts on the
ground, and so to change the basis on which the
latest package of measures had been agreed. These
attacks were against the letter and the spirit of the
Minsk agreements.” (S/PV.7395, p.3)
After Debaltseve, Mariupol is the most likely target
of an attack. Furthermore, with the start of the ceasefire,
the self-proclaimed leaders of the so-called Donetsk
People’s Republic and the Luhansk People’s Republic
demonstrated their reluctance to create conditions that
would allow the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to
effectively monitor and verify the ceasefire regime and
the withdrawal of heavy weapons.
For our part, we remain fully committed to the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, including
those reached in September 2014. We believe that they
remain the road map for seeking a peaceful settlement of
the conflict. The Ukrainian armed forces have strictly
followed the order issued by the President of Ukraine to
implement the ceasefire as of 15 February. Ukraine has
continued to withdraw its heavy weapons from the line
of contact. At the present time, 150-millimetre artillery
weapons have already been removed from the line of
contact. Grad missile operations were halted yesterday
and the Uragan systems are withdrawing today.
That step was carried out under OSCE monitoring
and verification. But the withdrawal of heavy
weapons from the Donbas by the Ukrainian Army
and the Russian-backed fighters should be carried
out simultaneously. Moreover, it must be precisely
coordinated and monitored by the OSCE. Ukraine
is committed to continuing to provide all necessary
assistance to the OSCE in Ukraine in that regard.
We once again call on the Russian Federation and the
Russian-backed mercenaries to immediately fulfil their
obligations under the Minsk agreements and Security
Council resolution 2202 (2015). We demand that the
Russian Federation influence its agents in eastern
Ukraine to guarantee all of the conditions necessary
for the OSCE to fulfil its duties in the field.
We find it difficult to trust the words of the Russian
side; they have made so many statements. We have
lost confidence even in their actions, because there
has been no real action; only the pretence of such. We
await the outcome of the implementation of the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements of September 2014 and of February 2015.

22/27

06/03/2015

(spoke in English)
The latest report of the Human Rights Mission in
Ukraine presented today by Mr. Šimonović dismisses
any internal human rights pretext for the ongoing
external aggression in Ukraine. On the contrary, it
clearly indicates a continuing flow of heavy weaponry
and foreign fighters from the Russian Federation into
the areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions controlled
by illegal armed groups. It is crystal clear that an
immediate end to the Russian aggression in the Donbas
and the occupation of the Crimea is an indispensable
precondition for ensuring respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the Crimea and the Donbas
regions in eastern Ukraine. At the same time, Ukraine
is doing its best to take forward a human-rights agenda,
including through developing a National Human Rights
Strategy, which envisages elaborating a National Action
Plan for Human Rights.
By any standard, Russia’s detention and illtreatment of Ms. Nadiya Savchenko constitute a grave
violation of human rights. We remind the Russian
side that at the Normandy format summit in Minsk
on 12 February it was agreed that all hostages and
illegally detained persons must be released within
19 days. The agreed measure fully covers the case of
Nadiya Savchenko. We call on Russia to honour its
commitments by immediately releasing Savchenko and
all other Ukrainian hostages.
My delegation is grateful to numerous States and
organizations for their clear and strong statements in
support of the immediate freeing of Savchenko. We
reiterate our protest against the continued attempts
by Russian authorities to fabricate new trumped-up
charges against other Ukrainian political prisoners in
Russia, among whom are Oleg Sentsov and Oleksandr
Kolchenko.
A year ago Russia launched its full-fledged
aggression against Ukraine. There is no need to
remind members of the Council how the occupation
and annexation of Crimea was conducted. What is
the human rights situation in that occupied territory
at the moment? The implementation of Russian laws,
which contravenes General Assembly resolution
68/262, has had serious human rights implications. We
have witnessed the arrests and detentions of Crimean
Tatar activists on totalitarian charges relating to the
demonstrations and activities of their civil society
organizations, and media outlets are being disrupted

15-06188

06/03/2015

Ukraine

on the false grounds of preventing so-called extremist
activities. The arrests, prosecutions and deportations
of Crimean Tatar leaders, including People’s Deputy
of Ukraine Mustafa Dzhemilev, the Chairman of the
Crimean Tatar Mejlis, Refat Chubarov, and his Deputy,
Ahtem Ciygoz, are politically motivated. Over 10,000
have been forced to leave Crimea for mainland Ukraine.
It has been the most serious blow to the Crimean Tatars
since the Stalinist deportation.
Those and other outrageous acts must be
immediately dealt with by the Council. Under no
circumstances can the United Nations accept that
Russia has turned Crimea into an isolated military
camp and its residents into recluses. We encourage the
United Nations to be more persistent in ensuring the
implementation of international human-rights treaties
and the recommendations of the Human Rights Mission
in Ukraine by Russia and the administration installed
in Crimea by the occupying Power. They must also
allow access by missions of international organizations
to the peninsula seeking to monitor the observance of
human rights.
More than 6,000 deaths, many thousands of injured
people and over one million internally displaced
persons — that is the human toll that Ukraine is paying
for Russia’s intervention. The Ukrainian Government is
doing its best to cope with the unfolding humanitarian
crisis. We appreciate the United Nations humanitarian
efforts, namely, the launch last week, jointly with the
Government, of the 2015 humanitarian response plan.
The Government of Ukraine devotes great attention
to the people who now live in areas temporarily
uncontrolled by the Ukrainian authorities. The
Ukrainian Government has done everything possible,
from supplying gas and electricity to providing
humanitarian assistance. Russian-backed militants
impede, through shelling and other threats, the efforts
of Ukrainian personnel to repair gas pipelines and
electricity lines. As for the Ukrainian Government’s
humanitarian assistance, most of it has not, to date,
reached non-Government controlled territories, owing
to the refusal of the Russian-backed terrorists to provide
safe and unhindered access for humanitarian deliveries
and personnel. On 4 February, there was an unfortunate
explosion at one of the biggest mines in Donetsk. Our
special rescue team was just 45 kilometres away from
the mine, and the Ukrainian Government immediately
offered to send it there to help extract the miners
from below ground. The separatists senselessly and
mercilessly refused to let the team in.

S/PV.7400

For its part, the Russian side continues to send socalled humanitarian convoys without the involvement
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
fully excluding the Ukrainian side. What the Russian
delegation stated today on the issue of the humanitarian
convoys is nothing but an attempt to misinform the
international community and the Security Council. I
should like to remind the Council that it is not only a
serious violation of international and national law; it is
a crime.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, a year ago, Russia became like a blind
painter who has decided to recolour the international
landscape according to his own taste. That is why a
series of black marks have appeared, blackening the
reputation of the Charter of the United Nations. That
black paint was applied by Russia’s hand alone. What
remains for us to do is to try to remove those black
marks on the Council and everywhere else. I would like
to thank all members of the Security Council for their
support to Ukraine.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has requested the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I want to say a few words. First, I wish to make
a brief comment on Crimea, even though I said earlier
that we were not going to discuss Crimea in the Security
Council, I will give just one figure — 93 per cent. In
a recent opinion poll conducted by a German institute,
93 per cent of the inhabitants of Crimea spoke in favour
of reunification with Russia and again confirmed their
support for that historic act. We do not need to prove
anything to anyone. In regard to the concern that our
Ukrainian colleague has expressed for the inhabitants of
Crimea, I recall that the Kyiv authorities did everything
they could to complicate the lives of the inhabitants of
Crimea when they blocked water supplies, electricity
and access. The latest news is that they could not find
anything better to do than to plant landmines. They put
450 boxes of explosives under a bridge used by local
inhabitants to move from Crimea to mainland Ukraine.
That is the kind of humanitarianism that the Ukrainian
authorities present in its best version. So we will not
even discuss this further.
As for my Ukrainian colleague’s description of the
situation regarding the implementation of the package
of measures related to resolution 2202 (2015), his

15-0618823/27

S/PV.7400

Ukraine

version is very one-sided. I just want to ask everyone
in the Chamber to read the report of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s Special
Monitoring Mission, which is, generally speaking,
objective. It is important to withdraw weapons so
that the firing will cease. The representatives of the
Donetsk People’s Republic and the Luhansk People’s
Republic began withdrawing weapons first, and
were the first to finish the process. The Ukrainian
authorities did everything they could to delay it, but
finally, as the Ukrainian representative said, President
Poroshenko gave an order not to fire and that order is
allegedly being carried out. However, we recall that in
August President Poroshenko solemnly promised not to
bombard cities, following which cities were bombarded
for several consecutive months. But I repeat, I want
to be an optimist, so let us hope that the positive
developments that we are seeing implemented in the
package of measures will be further continued.
I also want to comment on another matter that
does not fall within the purview of the Security
Council, because it has been raised several times. I
am talking about Nadiya Savchenko. I never cease to
be surprised at how ill-informed some colleagues in
the Security Council are. The representative of the
United Kingdom, Ambassador Lyall Grant, asked me
a question: Why was Nadiya Savchenko arrested? Has
he not read newspapers? She is accused of involvement
in the killing of two Russian journalists. That is a
very serious accusation. We keep on talking about the
fact that we need to protect journalists and that there
should be no impunity. She has been accused of that
crime. Her detention is in no way illegal, because it was
confirmed by our court under our legislation. By the
way, the European Court of Human Rights refused to
implement rule 39 of the regulations of the Court in
this case, which confirms the legality of the detention
of this individual.
It has been very strange to hear demands from
the representative of the United States to release
Savchenko. The American system of jurisprudence and
the penitentiary system have never been known for its
humanism. In Guantánamo, the United States has held
people for over 10 years without even making formal
accusations. The prisoners try to commit suicide and
go on hunger strikes. They are force-fed, and that is
considered normal. I will not even mention that the
United States has gotten into the habit of abducting
Russian individuals throughout the world, accusing them
of things invented, sometimes through provocations
24/27

06/03/2015

by their intelligence services at the end of nowhere,
detaining them in subhuman conditions, holding show
trials on the territory of the United States, giving them
enormously long sentences, subjecting them to constant
psychological torture and holding them under trying
circumstances. I can assure colleagues that if Nadiya
Savchenko were being held in such conditions in the
United States, her fate would be predetermined. She
would never see the light of day ever.
With regard to our investigation and prosecution, our
position is that the investigation and trial will determine
whether or not she is guilty. It is not clear on what basis
Mr. Šimonović uses his position in the United Nations
to make an appeal for the release of Ms. Savchenko.
We think that Mr. Šimonović is violating Articles 100
and 101 of the Charter of the United Nations, which
requires high-level professionalism, good faith and
impartiality of United Nations staff in fulfilling their
functions. If Mr. Šimonović wants to change his place
of work, he will be able to fulfil his potential in the
journalistic sphere, but in the Council let us stick to
what representatives of the United Nations are supposed
to do.
In conclusion, I have to note, regretfully, that our
discussion has been gloomier than it should have been
in the light of the initial steps taken in implementing
resolution 2202 (2015) and the package of measures
agreed to on 12 February. Nevertheless, I express the
hope that members of the Security Council will, in good
faith, seek to contribute to the further advancement of
the process of political resolution in Ukraine.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the United States has requested the floor to make a
further statement.
Ms. Power (United States of America): The
challenge posed by these back-and-forth statements is
that Russia no longer has any credibility whatsoever.
None. Russian representatives months ago, at one of
the first of the 32 meetings so far on this topic, said
that Russia had no soldiers, no heavy weapons and no
presence in Crimea. Later, they not only acknowledged
having a Russian presence in Crimea but announced the
annexation of Crimea — an annexation made possible
with the use of military force, the use of Russian military
forces. The pretence ends; then the facts retrospectively
change.
Russia said not long ago that it would observe
the ceasefire agreed upon in the package of measures

15-06188

06/03/2015

Ukraine

to implement the September Minsk agreements.
Oops — that was until Debaltseve became a target
for Russia and the separatists. Now Russia says that
Debaltseve is part of the territory controlled by the
separatists, even though it was not during the time that
the package of measures was agreed upon.
Today, Russia has made the claim that the
separatists have complied with the Minsk agreement
in withdrawing their heavy weapons. Yet, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
cannot get access to the heavy weapons, so we are told
to rely upon Russian claims about what the fate of those
heavy weapons is — heavy weapons that Russia has
provided to the separatists. These heavy weapons do
not just fall from the sky. These are massive weapons
systems, used to shoot down planes and bombard
civilian centres, such that 500 people are killed, left in
their basements to die and be discovered by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
The information that the United States has provided
over time to the Security Council has, unfortunately,
proven accurate. And indeed the facts on the ground
regarding what Russia has absorbed into its current
territorial claims are the facts that we have described,
day in and day out, at every one of these meetings. In
contrast, the claims that Russia makes in the Council
give way to new claims at subsequent meetings, but the
facts on the ground contradict the prior claims, and the
same will be true with regard to the claims that have
been made today.
The facts on the ground — which are really all
that matter and all that anyone in this Chamber cares
about — show Russian aggression, Russia having
lopped off part of someone else’s country and trying to
keep it. The only way that we have a chance of getting
to peace in Minsk is if Russia leaves Ukraine and takes
its heavy weapons with it.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Perhaps
I could just respond to my Russian colleague as he cited
my question specifically. It was unfortunate that he left
the Chamber before I actually spoke and perhaps it was
mistranslated on the television that he was watching.
The question I asked was not why Ms. Nadiya Savchenko
had been arrested. I asked why she was still being held,

S/PV.7400

given that Russia had agreed that there would be a full
exchange of prisoners as part of the Minsk agreements.
In terms of the facts on which he thought that I was
not well-versed, perhaps I can share with colleagues
some of the facts of Nadiya Savchenko’s arrest. She
was actually captured on 17 June 2014 by the Donbas
People’s Militia inside eastern Ukraine. She was
then taken to Russia, where she was charged with
involvement in a mortar attack in Ukraine, which killed
two Russian State television journalists — an attack
which occurred after she had been detained. Then,
in addition, in January 2015, Russian investigators
said that they had opened a new criminal case against
Ms. Savchenko for illegally crossing the border into
Russia, which is pretty rich given that she was detained
inside eastern Ukraine and then taking forcibly into
Russia in the first place.
Those are the facts of this case. The question I
asked my Russian colleague, and I repeat it, is why is
she still being held when there was an agreement in
the Minsk agreements of 12 February that all prisoners
would be released?
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, with regard to Ms. Savchenko,
an investigation is under way. Accusations have been
made and there is a legal procedure under way. In
Ukraine, there are many people being detained and held
prisoner who are not subject to any legal procedure.
The provision of the Minsk agreements with regard to
prisoner exchange applies to them. In this case, there
is a legal procedure that cannot simply be disregarded.
With regard to the response of Ms. Power, of course
she exaggerated greatly with regard to the discussions
we have had here in the Security Council since the
beginning of the crisis. Let me explain two things that
we have discussed, since she brought them up.
When the Minsk agreements were signed on
12 February, it was clear — and we said this very
clearly and unequivocally — that before a ceasefire
could take effect in the area of Debaltseve, it would be
necessary to resolve the issue regarding the withdrawal
of Ukrainian soldiers who had been surrounded in that
region. The insurgents proposed that they withdraw,
and then a ceasefire would have immediately taken
effect. Unfortunately, they were given conflicting

15-0618825/27

S/PV.7400

Ukraine

orders to break their encirclement. Of course, under
such conditions it was very difficult to expect that an
immediate ceasefire would take effect. Therefore, for
anyone who familiar with the details of this discussion,
the situation regarding Debaltseve could not have been
a surprise.
As to the last point Ambassador Power raised
regarding the location of weapons, this is closely linked
to the work of the Special Monitoring Mission, as
discussed in the Permanent Council of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. But the Mission
must do what is defined by the package of measures;
it must monitor the areas from which weapons are
withdrawn. It says nothing about a requirement as to
where they were subsequently moved, how they were
moved or where they have been stored. As a measure
of good faith, the representative of the Donetsk
and Luhansk People’s Republics did provide such
information to the Mission, but I do not know if similar
information was provided by the Kyiv authorities.
But our goal is to focus on the tasks to be carried
out according to the package of measures, rather
than try to add yet further conditions. The task is to
determine whether heavy weapons remain in the region
from which they are supposed to have been withdrawn.
If they do not, then the obligation has been fulfilled.
Where they have been taken to or are stockpiled is a
secondary matter. There are no grounds to ask such
questions of the Special Monitoring Mission. But, again
on the basis of good faith, some additional information
has been provided by the insurgents.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of Ukraine has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I give the floor to the representative of
Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I would like to make
a general observation. Listening to the Russian
delegation since last year and here again today, I must
repeat what I have been saying since last March. Russia
is an arsonist who is trying to play the role of the fire
safety inspector. As long as it seek to play such a role,
no constructive dialogue will be possible.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The representative of Ukraine would be well

26/27

06/03/2015

advised to choose his words more wisely. Ukraine is a
neighbour of Russia, and we are trying to find a solution
to the crisis. Therefore Ms. Power should be asked who
is the arsonist there — she is laughing now — and
what she, together with Mr. Parubiy, set fire to on the
Maidan. She could shed some light on that question if
she knows the details about the arsonists.
I have one last point, which is connected to the
comments made earlier by Ms. Power. People keep
talking about Russia as though there were no one
in eastern Ukraine trying to fight for their rights.
Even if the figures mentioned pertaining to Russian
interference were all correct, the fact is that tens of
thousands of people have taken up arms to defend their
rights in eastern Ukraine. Russia could not force anyone
to do that. It would be impossible. Unfortunately, many
simply do not wish to see the real situation in eastern
Ukraine. That is why the crisis has dragged on.
My Ukrainian colleague said something about
artists. In Washington, D.C., they painted for them a
very simple picture of who should be toppled and how.
There was no need to use paint; a simple pencil sketch
was enough. Using that rough pencil sketch, they tried
to resolve the political problems of Ukraine. And now
we are seeing the results. Now military advisers are
being called for. At present Saakashvili is an adviser
to the President, and there are 300 advisers. We saw
a similar scenario in Georgia in 2008. If that path is
chosen, while using colourful words about the role of
Russia, this will end very sadly for Ukraine — even
more sadly then the events we have seen over the past
year.
We would like to avoid that because there are
finally signs that the situation can be resolved. There
is a package of measures, both military and political,
that should be strictly implemented. We should not say,
as some have today, that we must first deal with all the
military aspects, then deal with the political ones. No,
we need to deal with those aspects in parallel, because
the range of issues that need to be resolved before the
end of the year in accordance with the package is very
broad. So we should not lose track of the essence of the
issue. We should focus on all the different measures in
the package.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the United States of America has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.

15-06188

06/03/2015

Ukraine

Ms. Power (United States of America): I realize
we are taxing the patience of the rest of the Council,
so I will be very brief. The Russian representative has
several times used the expression “good faith” — as in,

S/PV.7400

we do this or that “in good faith”. That is absurd in this
context.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

15-0618827/27
