S/PV.7591

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7591st meeting

Monday, 21 December 2015, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power/Ms. Sison. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Mahamat Zene
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Hmoud
Mr. Baublys
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Laro
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2015/942)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-44424 (E)
*1544424*

S/PV.7591

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

Ghani himself put it 12 days ago at the ministerial
meeting in Islamabad, Afghanistan would be fighting
for its survival in 2015.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2015/942)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Canada,
Finland, Germany, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Pakistan, Sweden and
Turkey to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Chargé d’Affaires of the delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/942, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: I would like to describe briefly the
situation in which Afghanistan finds itself at the end of
the first year of its transformation decade, and to frame
the challenges it faces in 2016.
The international civilian and military withdrawal
at the end of 2014 coincided with a political transition
and confronted Afghanistan with a triple set of
challenges — economic, security and political. The
National Unity Government, itself a product of
political crisis, inherited a weakening economy, an
empty treasury and a war that it needed to fight with
decreasing levels of international military assistance.
None of those circumstances were of its own making.
Indeed, a difficult year was expected. As President
2/37

21/12/2015

On the economic front, the fiscal gap between the
revenue raised and spent by the Government would
remain of concern. Poverty is no less prevalent, and the
economic contraction has led to high unemployment
and its attendant frustration, particularly among youth.
Corruption has yet to be overcome.
On the security front, there was overall
deterioration as the Afghan National Security Forces
(ANSF) grappled with an intensified conflict, but with
much reduced international military support. Civilians,
as ever, continue to bear the brunt of the conflict, as
casualties rise at an ever increasing rate and more
people have been displaced from their homes by the
conflict.
On the political front, the National Unity
Government has at times struggled to project the
necessary national unity and has seen the level of its
public support diminish markedly. An increasingly
vocal political opposition has emerged, drawing on the
anxiety generated by the perceived security deterioration
and economic contraction. As a consequence of this
situation, many Afghans are anxious about the future.
Some evidently feel that they have no choice other than
to leave the country in search of economic and security
opportunities elsewhere.
While we must acknowledge those realities, we
also must take note of the many significant steps being
taken to keep Afghanistan on the path to stability and
greater self-reliance. While the challenges are of such
a scale and complexity that any Government would be
tested in its efforts to meet them head-on, there has
been progress nonetheless.
On the political front, the National Unity
Government has held together and is advancing its
agenda, including that of implementing the terms of
the September 2014 political agreement, as well as
attempting to professionalize the civil service. An
example of progress would be the submission today
of the second and final set of recommendations of the
Special Electoral Reform Commission. I look forward
to the finalization of that process, which will allow for
an electoral calendar to be set and will mark another
step towards restoring public confidence in the electoral
institutions and the democratic process.

15-44424

21/12/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

The United Nations maintains its view that there is
no viable alternative to the National Unity Government,
a point that, encouragingly, much of the Afghan political
opposition also appears to recognize, as evidenced at
the gathering of political critics that took place in Kabul
just three days ago. We encourage a continued dialogue
and outreach — within Government and outside — to
ensure a greater unity of purpose, notably from the
political elite, which is necessary for public confidence,
governance reforms and military morale.
On the economic front, the Government is pressing
forward with its reform agenda, as articulated in
the Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework and its thoughtful implementation plan.
Economic growth, although low, is actually projected
to increase in the next years. When it took office in
2014, the Government faced a significant year-end
financial fiscal gap. In 2015, domestic revenues have
increased and the Government is confident that it
has averted a second fiscal crisis, albeit that this was
managed primarily by failing to expend budgeted funds
for development.
I commend the Government for continuing to
put into place the building blocks for long-term
economic improvement, including through an
increased commitment to promoting regional economic
integration. On that note, we welcome the recommitment
by the members of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process to
shared objectives at the recent ministerial-level meeting
in Islamabad. I would also like to draw attention to
the ground-breaking ceremony, held just last week
in Ashgabat, for the launch of the Turkmenistan–
Afghanistan–Pakistan–India natural gas pipeline,
which will supply energy-hungry Afghanistan, Pakistan
and India with natural gas from Turkmenistan. That is
a noteworthy development, showing as it does just what
can be achieved when Afghanistan and its neighbours
work in partnership.
On the security front, the ANSF have shown
resilience in the face of an intensified insurgency.
Certainly, the temporary loss of key district centres
and the provincial centre of Kunduz city were worrying
developments and revealed major ANSF shortcomings.
However, almost all of the district centres have been
retaken, as has Kunduz city. The ANSF may be
stretched to capacity but, for the most part, they are
holding their ground. That does not ignore the need for
improvements to ANSF functioning, with a particular
focus on logistics and administration, and remedial

S/PV.7591

measures to boost both morale and diminish rates of
attrition, as well as continued international support for
its attempts to build its own air support capabilities.
Afghanistan, as a sovereign nation confronting
countless challenges, has made it through its first
post-transition year, an achievement in itself. But in
2016, it is vital that the National Unity Government
demonstrates increasingly its effectiveness, not only to
the Afghan people but also to donors, on whom it is
largely dependent for financial, material and technical
assistance.
In 2016, the international community will make
critical decisions on the level and type of assistance that
it will continue to offer. In Warsaw, NATO countries
will pledge their further military commitment for
four years, while in Brussels the donor community
will pledge its renewed civilian assistance. The
international community, although committed to
supporting Afghanistan, must make difficult choices as
events elsewhere in the world compete for international
attention and limited resources. For that reason, they
will need to be assured not only that their assistance
meets evident needs, but that it will have a tangible
impact. In particular, Afghanistan must show that it is
commited to tackling corruption, making the necessary
governance reforms and generating hope for the future,
which will decrease the rate of emigration. UNAMA
will be encouraging donors to invest in Afghanistan’s
reconstruction and security, rather than facing the costs
of integrating immigrants
In the long term, the single development that would
allow for material progress towards a stable and selfreliant Afghanistan would be an agreement among
Afghans as to the arrangements by which they can live
together in peace and harmony. Beyond the immediate
suffering being inflicted upon the Afghan people,
the war is impeding efforts to bring the political and
economic progress that ultimately will ensure stability.
Substantial human and material resources are being
blocked or diverted on account of the insecurity.
This situation cannot continue indefinitely; sooner or
later the financial resources currently available to the
country will decrease. Afghanistan needs to find a
political route to peace.
After some promising developments earlier this
year, most notably with the July talks in Murree, peace
efforts reached an impasse as the Taliban leadership
appeared to fragment and strains reappeared in

15-444243/37

S/PV.7591

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghanistan/Pakistan relations. The events in Kunduz
also caused some to question whether the time was
ripe for peace talks. This loss of momentum was
disappointing, but peace processes rarely move forward
in a linear fashion. \We welcome the reiteration,
made on 9 December in Islamabad, by the Afghan
Government of its commitment to a peace process. I
call upon the Taliban, which has not yet committed
to entering into a peace process, to reciprocate the
Government’s commitment by stepping forward to
directly engage with the Government. There is no other
way for insurgent groups to demonstrate a commitment
to the welfare and prosperity of their fellow citizens
than to search for a peaceful resolution to the conflict.
The reliance on violent conflict to achieve political
ends places a question mark over their intentions.
In 2016, UNAMA will continue to support
the Afghan Government and people in laying the
foundations for peace. As part of its broader efforts,
UNAMA will continue to pursue its three track
approach to engagement with the Taliban on human
rights, humanitarian access and political engagement.
On human rights, we will engage with the Taliban,
as with the Government, on the issue of protection of
civilians and on women’s and children’s rights. We
will continue to promote respect for and adherence to
international human rights and humanitarian law.
On humanitarian affairs, United Nations
humanitarian agencies will engage with the Taliban,
again as with the Government, to promote humanitarian
access to health care for those in need, wherever they
are in Afghanistan, while ensuring protection for those
who deliver such aid, especially in regard to polio
immunization.
On political issues, we will continue to meet with
the Taliban, with the knowledge and support of the
Government, to explore possible entry points to a peace
process and ways to conceptualize and promote the best
format for talks to build trust and confidence in a proper
political engagement. During 2015, we have floated
several such proposals for talks and other initiatives,
which, unfortunately, failed to find traction.
We stand by our call for a track-I dialogue — namely,
direct, face to face negotiations between representatives
of the Government and the Taliban leadership. We
are encouraged specifically by the offers made by
Pakistan, the United States and China on 9 December
to support such a process. UNAMA supports all efforts

4/37

21/12/2015

to establish a peace process. We continue to offer our
good offices in any facilitative role, while recognizing
that any peace process must be Afghan-owned and led.
The President: I thank Mr. Haysom for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
the United States for its leadership of the Council
this month and for organizing this very important
debate. I take this opportunity to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his recent report on the situation in
Afghanistan (S/2015/942). I would like to extend my
sincere appreciation to Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), and his team for their tireless efforts and
hard work in Afghanistan, a reflection of which can be
seen in the Secretary-General’s report.
We recognize the importance of General Assembly
resolution 68/11 and Security Council resolution 2210
(2015) requesting the Secretary-General to report on
the situation in Afghanistan every three months. These
reports, which generally align with our insights on
the realities in Afghanistan, provide a comprehensive
account of daily developments in the country, covering
a wide range of issues. The Security Council’s quarterly
deliberations on Afghanistan ensure that Member States
remain informed about the evolving security and sociopolitical dynamics in Afghanistan. It is also helpful for
the National Unity Government of Afghanistan in its
working relationship with the international community.
In addition to providing an immense wealth of
information, the Secretary-General’s quarterly reports
identify problem areas relevant to the Security Council’s
mandate. We hope the Council will take these debates
a step forward and deliver relevant required actions for
the problems raised.
As we deliberate here today, the first post-transition
year of Afghanistan is coming to an end. Despite some
skepticism fuelled by extensive terrorist attacks this
year and our high casualty rates, Afghanistan remains
united and its national resolve against terrorism and
violent extremism is stronger than ever before. The
National Unity Government has become an enduring
phenomenon, spreading its wings over the governance
of the country and aiming to be more inclusive through
its outreach policies. We are continuing our key goal of
improving security through the overarching two-track

15-44424

21/12/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

policy of pursuing the peace process through regional
and international efforts and increasing Afghanistan’s
defensive capacity through national reform and the
NATO Resolute Support Mission, in order to protect
our people and keep the region and the world safe.
Afghanistan is greatly appreciative of the continued
support that the international community has provided
for our ongoing transition towards a stable, secure and
prosperous nation.
Throughout the year, the National Unity
Government has continued its efforts to build trust,
improve bilateral ties and engage with the countries of
the region to foster effective partnership. It has invested
considerable political capital in the peace process. On
9 December, through the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process
Ministerial Conference in Islamabad and the adoption
of General Assembly resolution 70/77, entitled “The
situation in Afghanistan”, the region and the world at
large acknowledged that Afghanistan has been fighting
regional and international terrorist groups. They
recognized that a peace process backed by regional
actors, in particular Pakistan, and supported by the
international community is essential for achieving
long-term peace and stability in Afghanistan.
The participants in the Islamabad Conference
recognized that achieving peace and security is a shared
responsibility in which each regional country must
play its role. They agreed to put into practice specific
measures necessary for countering and eliminating
the menace of terrorism, curbing the spread of violent
extremism and the promotion of violence as a means
of achieving political objectives. They further agreed
to take action to deny terrorists’ access to financial
and material resources, to dismantle their sanctuaries
and training facilities, to curtail their ability to recruit
and train, and to curb their movements. They urged all
Afghan Taliban groups and all other armed opposition
groups to enter into peace talks with the Afghan
Government. They also resolved to begin the process
of identifying and countering the threats associated
with terrorism, transnational criminal narcotics and
weapon smuggling networks. The Conference decided
to explore a collective security approach by adopting
a common counter-terrorism strategy. It tasked the
relevant Heart of Asia senior officials to meet in the
first half of 2016 and come up with measures on security
issues and counter-terrorism.
Along the margins of the Conference, during
bilateral, trilateral and quadrilateral meetings held

S/PV.7591

between the Afghan President, the Pakistani Prime
Minister, the Chinese Foreign Minister, and the United
States Deputy Secretary of State, the parties stressed
the need to enhance mutual trust and cooperation
between Pakistan and Afghanistan. It was made clear
that friendly, mutually respectful relations between
Afghanistan and Pakistan are necessary if an enabling
environment for the peace process is to be created and
if the security, stability, prosperity and national interest
of both States are to be ensured. We once again heard
and welcome the Pakistan leadership’s statements that
Pakistan will play a genuine and constructive role in
supporting security and facilitating peace talks with
the Taliban. President Mohammad Ashraf Ghani
Ahmadzai hoped that the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process, in association with regional and international
security organizations, could reach an agreement on
a verification mechanism to determine what type of
actors threaten our common interest and how to deal
with them in an effective manner.
Talking to the Taliban is not new. We have been
talking to them since they appeared on our country’s
political landscape in 1994. We have experienced their
seasonal and tactical use of war and peace. The latest
potential diplomatic breakthrough in putting the peace
process back on track and opening an effective and
sustainable regional and global approach is a sign of
hope, but it can only become meaningful if words are
translated into deeds. This is the moment of truth — we
must see a genuine paradigm shift on the part of the
regional orchestrators of our insecurity. The recent
attacks in Kandahar and Helmand provinces have
shown that better relations with neighbours can only be
possible when foreign-based sanctuaries are dismantled
and violence is reduced within Afghanistan and across
the region.
Foreign planning, logistical support, safe havens, an
abundance of cash, deadly weapons and suicide bombers
are key enablers of terrorism and violent extremism. The
motivation for this level of support for terror within State
circles, in violation of resolution 1373 (2001), must be
questioned, identified and addressed. In Afghanistan’s
region, apart from other root causes of terrorism,
States’ trust deficit, negative rivalry, fuming hate and
excessive obsession and suspicion are causes for serious
concern. Furthermore, tension between military and
civilian control in domestic politics have instigated
policies that use violence to achieve political objectives.
This has turned our country into a theatre for a proxy
war for others and has provided a comfort zone within

15-444245/37

S/PV.7591

The situation in Afghanistan

which terrorists and violent extremist groups operate
at national, regional and international levels. Targeting
the promoters and drivers of such policies within
State structures through specific reform programmes,
especially in the security apparatus, together with
travel and financial sanctions, would certainly make
the world safer. We also hope the update and expansion
of sanction regimes through resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1988 (2011) will further tighten the noose on the
activities of Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS) and the Taliban.
The incursions of different kinds across the Durand
Line, in clear violation of paragraph 4 of Article of the
United Nations Charter and resolution 2131 (2013),
continued throughout 2015. The flow of militant
infiltrations and large-scale weapon smuggling in our
region, providing manpower, firearms and ammunitions
to the terrorist networks, must be disrupted. Deriding
Afghanistan for its genuine concern over violations of
United Nations Charter and resolutions is not helpful
for any healthy dialogue. We expect better treatment
for our concerns than routinely branding them “rhetoric
from Kabul” or “resorting to the blame game”.
The rapid growth of ISIS in the eastern and other
parts of Afghanistan should be a serious concern for
all of us. Some sections of the Taliban have sworn
allegiance to ISIS. The recent inhumane attacks in
California, Paris, Beirut and Nairobi, and the bombing
of the Russian airliner, have demonstrated how through
a new brand of terrorism a leading global non-State
terrorist actor has emerged and can no longer be
confined to the Middle East or our region. We need a
unified response to strengthen global collaboration and
develop strategies to denounce the extremist ideology
of ISIS and their ilk and combat terrorism in all its
forms.
Despite continuing challenges, 15 years of
collaborative work and joint sacrifices by Afghanistan
and the international community have had significant
gains of which we should all be proud. Given the
emerging challenges, today we fight the world’s war
against international terrorism and violent extremism,
with an average of 30 to 40 civilian causalities a day.
The consolidation and sustainability of our gains are
absolutely vital. The cost of an insecure Afghanistan
and its consequences is far greater than that of a secure
Afghanistan. Handling the fresh flow of Afghan
refugees in Europe is a reminder of that. Removing the
drivers of threats and making Afghanistan capable of

6/37

21/12/2015

defending itself and its citizens is in fact an investment
in the safety of the world. The Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces (ANDSF) need sustainability and
the right enablers to face the war that has been imposed
on us. We welcome the 1 December NATO decision
to extend its training mission in Afghanistan during
2016 and secure funding for ANDSF until the end of
2020. We also look forward to the 2016 Warsaw NATO
Summit’s deliberations on Afghanistan.
Beside the security challenges, the National Unity
Government of Afghanistan has remained focused on
economic issues, in particular addressing the fiscal
gap, poverty, unemployment and delivery of basic
services through a series of initiatives within the SelfReliance through Mutual Accountability Framework
and in line with 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). Our
efforts in the promotion and advancement of regional
economic cooperation within the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan Process have
already yielded results. The recent start of construction
of the Turkmenistan–Afghanistan–Pakistan–India gas
pipeline, our accession to the World Trade Organization
and the establishment of a series of special economic
zones in the country as part of Afghanistan’s economic
development plan are great news for our people, our
partners in the region and the rest of the world. Our
self-reliance reform plan requires the effective use of
development aid and an increase in national revenue.
We look forward to discussing our more vigorous
programmes with the international community
during the 2016 Brussels international conference on
Afghanistan. The relevant actors in our region should
realize that they can benefit from the peace dividend of
Afghanistan.
We are diligently working to strengthen good
governance and the rule of law, protect and promote
the rights of all Afghans, and enhance the fight against
narcotics. In this effort, we are building the internal
capabilities of our nation. We are making progress in
the restoration of credibility in the electoral process. We
have already begun to implement the recommendations
of the Special Electoral Reform Commission.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that despite
constant attacks on our sovereignty and people,
Afghanistan stands strong and united in the face of
terror. We will not be defeated by extremist elements that
want to destroy the progress that we have collectively
achieved since 2001. We have demonstrated time and

15-44424

21/12/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

again that we are willing to move forward and are
committed to working towards bringing about peace.
Currently, extremism worldwide threatens our core
values and aims to divide us. Afghanistan is fighting
terrorist threats every day, and we expect there to be a
stronger global partnership to holistically address the
root causes of those threatening activities. We must
ensure that the voice of reason prevails and present a
unified front against terrorism in all its aspects and
wherever it exists.
In that regard, we are very grateful for the
unconditional support of the Council in the past and look
forward to a fruitful and effective relationship in the
future to create a world of justice and peace. I would like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the courageous
men and women of so many nations that have served and
sacrificed their lives alongside their Afghan comrades
and partners in combating terrorism and seeking a
better future for the people of Afghanistan. We shall
honour their courage and memory by finishing our task
at hand. We also extend our heartfelt condolences to the
families of those civilians who tragically lost their lives
during the recent barbaric attacks by Daesh in various
parts of the world.
As the new representative of a transformed
Afghanistan with a strong popular mandate and high
expectations from the United Nations, I hope that the
Council will continue to act on the plight of millions
of my people who have seen nearly four decades of
imposed conflicts. Let us therefore reaffirm our longstanding commitment to guarantee an Afghanistan that
stands in peace and security because its implications
are, by all accounts, far-reaching and essential for
global peace and security.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish to
welcome Ambassador Saikal to New York. He plays an
incredibly important role in bringing what is happening
in Afghanistan here to the Council. We count on his
wisdom and counsel.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): For more than 10 years, Spain has maintained
an unwavering commitment to Afghanistan and its
future. That commitment has been made by Spain’s
Government, its institutions and its people. We have
committed to building on the principles of freedom,

S/PV.7591

security, democracy and human rights. I think that that
is a goal shared by the Council and by Afghanistan.
In upholding such principles and as part of Spain’s
commitment to supporting Afghanistan, more than 100
Spaniards have lost their lives. The two most recent
fatalities occurred some 10 days ago, when Jorge
García Tudela and Isidro Gabino Sanmartin Hernández,
two police officers who were members of the security
detail of the Spanish Embassy in Kabul, were killed.
They, together with five Afghan civilians, lost their
lives in a Taliban-perpetrated attack that took place
on 11 December. I wish to dedicate the beginning of
this statement to the memory of all of those who died.
I also wish to repeat Spain’s rejection of violence and
extremism in whatever form they take. They are serious
threats to regional and international peace, security
and stability. They must therefore be combated with
the determination and unity of the entire international
community.
Spain fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I wish to thank Mr. Haysom for being with us
today and pay due tribute to the tremendous work that
he undertakes daily and that he has been doing for
almost 14 years — not just Mr. Haysom but also the
members of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, both Afghan and international staff. We
also pay tribute to the work carried out by the United
Nations programmes and agencies operating in the
country.
The year now drawing to a close is the first of the
transformation decade for Afghanistan and the first
in which the Afghan National Security Forces have
been able to take full responsibility for preserving the
security of the entire country. It has been a year full of
challenges and tests for Afghanistan but considerable
progress has also been made, such as the establishment
and consolidation of the National Unity Government,
which we very much welcome. We also wish to
congratulate the Government on the way in which it
has carried out its role and the decisive way in which
President Ghani and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah
Abdullah have rolled out a raft of reforms in the areas of
economy, governance and the fight against corruption.
They are to be commended for such efforts. We call
upon the Afghan authorities to continue to implement
reforms in order to rigorously apply measures adopted
at the policy level and thus to build on the achievements

15-444247/37

S/PV.7591

The situation in Afghanistan

that we have witnessed in recent years in key areas,
such as education and human rights.
Afghanistan will be able to call upon the full
support of the international community as it continues
in its task. We are sure that the ministerial conference
on Afghanistan in Brussels in October 2016 will be a
key opportunity for all of us to renew our commitment
to the development and future of Afghanistan. Until that
Brussels meeting Afghanistan will have to continue to
face ongoing challenges, including electoral reform,
security, the humanitarian situation and the migration
crisis.
The economic situation in the country is one of
the major challenges that the Afghan people currently
face. We very much welcome, therefore, the measures
adopted to boost tax earnings and promote job creation.
Such activities together with the actions that have been
taken to ensure that Afghan citizens, and especially
the young and all who, because of their education, are
able to contribute to the future of the country, stay
in the country rather than emigrating will be key to
laying the foundation for a prosperous Afghanistan.
We also welcome all that has been done regionally at
the economic level to promote cooperation. However,
economic growth requires a secure environment and,
therefore, improving the security situation is vital
and, like economic cooperation, will require regional
support. It will also have a positive regional impact.
We very much welcome the recent ministerial
conference in Islamabad, the fifth in the Heart of AsiaIstanbul Process, which was held earlier this month.
Spain welcomed the opportunity to be able to participate
in the Process as one of the supporting countries. We
believe that the conditions will soon be met to allow
Afghanistan to resume the peace process in a decisive
way and that it will be able to further pursue the process
of national reconciliation for all Afghans. We call upon
all those who are in a position to do so to help rekindle
the national reconciliation process and dialogue. We
would like to highlight the key role being played by
Pakistan, the United States of America and the People’s
Republic of China in that process.
Spain wishes to see work continue on two issues
that we deem to be important: the role of women and
the situation of children. We therefore welcome the
adoption of the first set of measures to apply resolution
1325 (2000), and we urge the Government to pursue
such efforts until the measures apply in all regions of

8/37

21/12/2015

Afghanistan. With regard to the situation of children,
we encourage the Government to continue pursuing the
full and robust implementation of necessary measures
as part of the road map.
Spain is more than willing to cooperate and
collaborate with Afghanistan, including here in the
Security Council, to consolidate and build peace
and security in Afghanistan. We are also more than
willing to support the efforts of the Afghan people and
Government as they seek to bring about stability and
economic and social progress. There are many Afghan
citizens, Spanish citizens and others who have given
all, including their lives, to support this endeavour. We
do not wish to let them down.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
briefing. I also thank the Ambassador of Afghanistan
for his first important statement to the Council.
France aligns itself with the statement that will be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
For Afghanistan, 2015 was a year of progress and
many challenges. First, from a political perspective, the
transition started in September 2014 and the gradual
consolidation of the National Unity Government have
raised the expectations of the Afghan population,
neighbouring countries and the international
community. The Afghan Government has shown its
willingness to move forward in circumstances that are,
at times, difficult. I wish to underscore my country’s
support for the Afghan Government and encourage
it to continue the efforts it has been making for more
than a year and a half now. France also welcomes the
announcement made at the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process Conference in Islamabad on 7 and 8 December
on the resumption of the peace and reconciliation
initiatives, a process critical to the country’s national
reconciliation and lasting stabilization.
On the security front, the conflict has continued to
spread and the level of violence unfortunately remains
high, with numerous casualties, including growing
numbers of civilians. The Afghan security forces have
made notable progress and have kept control over
Afghanistan’s main urban centres. However, the Afghan
Government and its international partners should not
relax their efforts to strengthen the security forces’
capacity, because the situation remains fragile in many
provinces. The Taliban’s temporary occupation of the
city of Kunduz in October revealed the Afghan forces’

15-44424

21/12/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

vulnerabilities as well as the new capacities that the
insurgency has acquired.
In the area of human rights, the situation of women
and children remains precarious, as was shown recently
by the recent tragic stoning of the young woman named
Rokhshana who had been accused of adultery. It is
essential that Afghan civil society and the authorities
continue to act to fully implement their national action
plan on women and peace and security adopted in
follow up to resolution 1325 (2000). The international
community should also continue to support the Afghan
authorities in implementing their commitments
regarding the protection of children in armed conflict.
The fight against narcotics and the illicit economy
is also among these challenges and of great concern
to France. The large-scale production and export of
narcotics in Afghanistan are extremely damaging to
the country’s security, stability and development, since
they help to finance the insurgency, destabilize the
economy and weaken the Government. They create a
threat to public health that affects Afghanistan first
and foremost but that also extends well beyond it to
affect the region and many other countries worldwide.
We welcome Afghanistan’s adoption on 15 October of
a national action plan against drugs for 2015 to 2019,
reflecting its determination to pursue a comprehensive
approach to fighting this scourge in close cooperation
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
France is committed to ensuring that the United Nations
plays a greater role in addressing this major challenge,
particularly in coordinating the United Nations agencies
and programmes involved in the drug war.
In this difficult context, the international community
should not cease its efforts to support Afghanistan in
achieving greater stability, prosperity and democracy.
As Afghanistan continues its political and security
transition, it is more important than ever that the
United Nations adapt the role it plays. Its support to the
Government remains crucial, particularly in enabling
the people to benefit from Government programmes and
international assistance. In that regard, we emphasize
the importance of the joint discussions on the changes
to be desired in the support that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
United Nations can give the country. We hope they will
be a useful guide in the renewal of UNAMA’s mandate
in March.
In that context, France would like to emphasize
its support for the proposals made in the final report

S/PV.7591

of the Tripartite Review Commission regarding
the establishment of a narrow mandate that confers
on UNAMA strengthened powers in the areas of
good offices, protecting human rights, coordinating
humanitarian activities and combating the production
and trafficking of narcotics. France is ready to
contribute to that discussion and will continue to stand
shoulder to shoulder with Afghanistan, particularly
within the framework of our friendship and cooperation
treaty with Afghanistan.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the efforts
of all the United Nations staff in Afghanistan, who,
as we know, are working in particularly difficult
conditions.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I would like to welcome
Ambassador Saikal of Afghanistan to the Council and
to thank Special Representative Nicholas Haysom for
his brutally truthful assessment of the situation.
We stand by the people of Afghanistan and its
National Unity Government. The deteriorating situation
in the Hindu Kush calls for renewed engagement on the
part of the international community. But we also expect
more from the Government and the regional Powers.
The hopes of the transformation decade must not be
lost.
The conflict has already exacted a heavy toll on
Afghans. The Taliban campaign shows no signs of
abating. Fanatics affiliated with the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant add fuel to the conflict. Suicide
attacks and improvised explosive devices maim
and kill hundreds of innocents daily. Human rights
defenders, women’s rights activists, workers from
non-governmental organizations, journalists and staff
members of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) are being targeted, as happened
recently in Kunduz. Kidnappings and beheadings of
Hazaras are inflaming inter-ethnic violence. We call
on everyone in the region to support the Afghan-led
peace process in good faith. President Ghani’s efforts
to restart direct peace talks with the Taliban represent
the only way forward. Any future accord must retain
all the major achievements of the past decade, including
increased protection of Afghan women’s rights.
We call on the National Unity Government to
continue its reforms. A broad consensus is required in
order to improve the rule of law, the protection of human
rights, the fight against corruption and reform of the
electoral process. The economy’s weak performance

15-444249/37

S/PV.7591

The situation in Afghanistan

does not augur well. We are worried that the public
discontent around the country is also an expression of
public uncertainty about its future.
Opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan decreased
this year but, given the nexus that exists between drug
production and trafficking and the insurgency, it is
imperative that the new National Drug Action Plan
does not become just another paper. The addiction rate
among the people of Afghanistan is staggering and
could have a very bad effect on the country’s future.
As the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral noted, young and capable Afghans are leaving
their homeland, and the National Unity Government
should focus on efforts aimed at creating jobs and
improving the country’s business climate. While there
is clear evidence of gains in women’s rights, violence
against women and girls remains widespread. The
stoning of a 21-year-old woman in Ghor province
was despicable, and it must be investigated and those
responsible brought to justice. We commend the
Government’s efforts to promote its national action
plan based on resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security. Women must be able to participate
fully in every aspect of Afghanistan’s public processes.
Enhancing regional cooperation remains an
important element in building a prosperous and
peaceful Afghanistan. All of its neighbours have a
stake in Afghanistan’s stability, and we commend
their continued engagement in efforts towards regional
security and economic advancement during the latest
meetings of the Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan and the Heart of AsiaIstanbul Process.
Lithuania’s diplomatic ties with Afghanistan date
back to the 1930s. We remain a partner, supporter and
contributor in its efforts to achieve prosperity. We will
continue our political, military and civilian support and
promotion of regional initiatives. Lithuania remains
engaged in the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission
and continues to participate in the European Union
Police Mission in Afghanistan. Given the recent spike in
violence, we urgently need to discuss the international
community’s further engagement in Afghanistan after
2016. Lithuania stands ready to increase its military
training and assistance mission within the Resolute
Support Mission format.
The presence of UNAMA remains critical to the
advancement of human rights, democratic processes

10/37

21/12/2015

and development in Afghanistan. We hope that during
next year’s Security Council negotiations on UNAMA’s
mandate, its presence in the field in remote regions of
the country will be seen as vital to achieving peace,
self-reliance and growth in Afghanistan.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would like to
thank Special Representative Haysom for his briefing
and Ambassador Saikal for his statement.
The situation in Afghanistan is a sobering but
compelling demonstration of how hard it is for a
country to escape the ravages of civil war, terrorism
and the breakdown of civil order, even after years of
investment on the part of the international community
in defeating the terrorists, rebuilding the country’s
national security forces and re-establishing the basic
infrastructure of a State. As the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/942) concludes and as Mr. Haysom has
reaffirmed, Afghanistan continues to face formidable
security, economic and political challenges. Kunduz, a
major provincial capital, was captured by the Taliban,
albeit for a short period; Kabul continues to come under
attack and hundreds of thousands have been killed and
wounded. And the fighting has had the multiplying effect
of hindering the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and other international actors
in the country in carrying out their work.
As the Secretary-General’s report also implicitly
recognizes, we have no option but to persevere in the
determination that the situation will improve. To take
any other course would be to concede to the terrorists
and accept the failure of the Afghan State and all of
the consequences that would follow for Afghanistan,
the Afghan people, Afghanistan’s neighbours and the
wider international community.
We commend the Afghan Government and the
Afghan security forces that continue to face challenges
that must at times seem unending and insurmountable.
We also welcome the commitment from the nations
of the Resolute Support Mission to maintain current
levels of support and training, assisting and advising
Afghanistan’s security forces through 2016. At
the same time, we must urge the Government of
Afghanistan to do more to cement the institutions of
governance and build trust across the various dividing
lines of geography, ethnicity and faith. Inclusivity must
be the touchstone in reestablishing Afghanistan as a
fully functioning State. We urge the Afghan people,
including the Taliban, to embrace the reality that their

15-44424

21/12/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

future as a country depends on their overcoming rather
than emphasizing the divisions.
We endorse Mr. Haysom’s exhortations to the
Government of Afghanistan to demonstrate greater
effectiveness, both in governance and in the delivery
of Government to the Afghanistan people and, in
particular, tackling the problem of corruption, which
undermines confidence internally and externally. We
urge Afghanistan’s neighbours to embrace the reality
that there can be no stability in the region without a
peaceful and stable Afghanistan. We welcome the
momentum of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process and
urge participants to carry forward the progress at the
most recent meeting in Islamabad.
I want to draw attention to three specific matters:
the growing threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), the importance of the Taliban sanctions
regime in promoting peace and discouraging those who
have no interest in peace, and the continuing threat
posed by improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and the
need for a stronger response to that threat.
It was perhaps inevitable that ISIL would establish
a presence in Afghanistan, whether by deliberate
strategy or by Afghan groups seeking to take on the
depraved aura. Whatever the motivation, those who
associate with ISIL exclude themselves from a political
dialogue and must be treated in the same manner as
ISIL adherents in Iraq, Syria and elsewhere. It is
important that we heed the call of the Security Council
in resolution 2253 (2015), adopted in the past week,
for Member States to forward listing requests for ISIL
affiliates to the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011), and 2253 (2015), concerning ISIL
(Daesh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities. The framework and tools
are there to target these groups. Their effectiveness
depends on Member States using them.
The Taliban sanctions regime has more nuanced
purposes. It seeks to encourage those members of
the Taliban who are prepared to reconcile with the
Government and to eschew links with those listed as
international terrorists, while at the same time seeking
to isolate those who continue to constitute a threat to
the peace, stability and security of Afghanistan. With
respect to the first element, I note that the resolution
2255 (2015) adopted today clarifies the procedures for
exemptions to the travel ban for peace talks. As Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), I urge full use of those procedures and

S/PV.7591

look forward to close coordination with the Sanctions
Committee in their implementation. With regard to the
second element, I urge Member States to make full use
of the listing procedures to list individuals associated
with the Taliban who profit from ongoing instability.
That is especially important in the effort to counter the
narcotics trade.
As the Secretary-General reminds us, IEDs remain
one of the biggest killers of Afghan security forces
and civilians, including children. The resolution 2255
(2015) adopted today notes the problem, including the
need for enhanced coordination among Member States
and industry. But in New Zealand’s view, that is not
enough. We are disappointed that, unlike the General
Assembly, the Security Council could not agree on
stronger actions to more effectively target the IED
problem. In negotiations, we proposed the incorporation
of component parts in the arms embargo. Regrettably,
that idea was not taken up. As Chair, I look forward to
discussing what more our Sanctions Committee can do
to address this insidious and devastating threat.
Lastly, we commend Mr. Haysom and the staff
of UNAMA for their dedication and commitment to
Afghanistan and to the United Nations.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to extend our profound thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his
comprehensive briefing.
Jordan again emphasizes the importance of
providing ongoing regional and international support
to Afghanistan to help it advance in the peace and
reform processes, which will play a decisive role in the
development and institutionalization of democracy in
Afghanistan and in the fight against terrorism. These
are the most crucial elements required to achieve
security and stability in Afghanistan.
Jordan welcomes all the positive steps taken by
the Afghan Government to improve the economic
and political situation in the country, including
the legislative reforms and the implementation of
the anti-corruption strategy. We also welcome the
constructive recommendations issued by the Special
Electoral Reform Commission, which could enhance
the confidence of the Afghan people in the Government.
In that regard, we urge the Afghan Government not to
delay the scheduling of the parliamentary elections,

15-4442411/37

S/PV.7591

The situation in Afghanistan

and we hope that favourable security conditions will be
created to conduct the elections in a free, transparent
and comprehensive manner.
The recent attack and temporary seizure of the city
of Kunduz perpetrated by the Taliban is an especially
disquieting development. It underscores the importance
of the Afghan authorities’ imposition of its control for
the security situation in the country, especially in the
north, to prevent the repetition of such attacks, which
may increase security challenges, lead to deterioration
of the humanitarian situation and increase the number
of the internally displaced persons in the country. We
also express our grave concern over the growing threat
posed by the terrorist organization the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham in Afghanistan, which demonstrates
the imperative need to confront this threat and not
allow armed elements and terrorist groups to exploit
the withdrawal of foreign forces from Afghanistan. In
that regard, I would like to underline the importance
of improving relations between Afghanistan and
the neighbouring States and enhancing the regional
cooperation to confront the manifestations of violent
extremism and to limit the movement of terrorist
groups.
In addition, international support for the Afghan
authorities to enable them to confront terrorism is an
important element to achieve progress. In that regard,
it will have positive consequences in controlling the
borders and combating terrorism. Therefore, at this
stage, it is necessary to continue support to the Afghan
Government and the Afghan security forces to achieve
security in Afghanistan, to ensure the capacity of the
security forces to control the domestic situation, protect
the Afghan people and contribute to regional security.
We urge all parties to assume their responsibilities
under international humanitarian law, to refrain from
any breaches of the law and to prevent the use of
prohibited weapons, which have been used increasingly
in the recent past.
Jordan underscores the importance of promoting
the rule of law, monitoring all violations of human rights
perpetrated in Afghanistan and investigating all crimes
of violence perpetrated against civilians, especially
women and children, to guarantee accountability and
prevent impunity. It is also important to ensure the
security of UNAMA staff members and to protect
them from any acts of aggression, in order to facilitate
their work and allow them to discharge their duties
in improving the security and other situations in

12/37

21/12/2015

Afghanistan. We also welcome the Afghan President’s
adoption of the Afghan National Drug Action Plan
for 2015-2019. The increasing nexus between the
financing of terrorism from the profits earned from
drug trafficking demands that the Afghan Government
intensify its efforts to follow a comprehensive approach
to fight the illicit use, trafficking and production of
drugs.
Finally, Jordan commends the important role
played by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Haysom, in Afghanistan and expresses its
support for his efforts to promote the peace process and
bringing together the points of view of all the parties to
the conflict and improve relations between Afghanistan
and its neighbouring States, in order to support and
achieve peace and reconciliation between the Afghan
Government and the armed groups. In that respect, we
call upon all parties to the conflict to respond positively
to those efforts and those of the international community,
translating their commitments into constructive actions
on the ground, and to forge ahead with direct talks
among themselves in order to arrive at a sustainable
political settlement. For that is the optimum way and
the foundation for progress in Afghanistan in order to
confront the economic and security challenges facing
the country.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, for his briefing. We would also like to express
our gratitude to the new Ambassador and Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Mr. Mahmoud Saikal,
for his first briefing to the Council.
We reiterate our condemnation of the terrorist
attack in the vicinity of the Embassy of Spain in Kabul
on 11 December and convey our condolences to the
families of the victims and to the Governments of Spain
and Afghanistan. We note with deep-rooted concern that
the security situation in the country has deteriorated
over the past few months, owing to the increase in
the number of attacks perpetrated by the Taliban and
other insurgent groups. The seizure of the city of
Kunduz represents a worrying setback in the situation.
Against that backdrop, we welcome the provision of
security assistance to support the Afghan National
Security Forces. The cooperation of the international
community in the areas of development, infrastructure
and the peace process has been significant and reflects

15-44424

21/12/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

an essential multi-dimensional focus for supporting
the Government and the people of Afghanistan. All
such support must be accompanied by national efforts,
and we therefore hope that the Government will soon
appoint a Minister for Defence and an Attorney General
as soon as possible.
The humanitarian situation cannot be ignored. The
security situation has profoundly impacted the civilian
population, and the earthquake of 26 October has further
exacerbated the humanitarian situation, causing the
mass displacement of persons, particularly in the northeast of Afghanistan. The international community must
stand ready to respond favourably to humanitarian
appeals and support the process of development in that
country. We would like to underscore the importance of
Afghan-led initiatives aimed at promoting inter-ethnic
and interreligious dialogue. For that reason, we attach
particular importance to the convening of the first
Ulema National Conference in Kabul on 12 October.
The Ulema Conference brought together leaders from
all parts of the country to discuss the peace process and
issues of national interest. We hope that that conference
will develop into a standing body, promoting national
reconciliation and contributing to fighting violent
extremism. We are grateful for the support and
assistance provided by UNAMA to the holding of the
conference, which was a UNAMA-led initiative for the
consolidation of peace.
The ceasefire agreement between the Government
and local stakeholders in Baghlan province also
deserves our support and backing. We would like to
express our wish that that agreement will last and even
be replicated in various other regions of the country.
Interaction and dialogue with local representatives
is one way of contributing to building and fostering
trust and of disseminating messages of tolerance and
understanding, which we believe to be core elements,
if progress is to be made in the peace process and if
stability is to be promoted in areas affected by the
conflict.
We hail President Ghani’s decision to adopt the
recommendation of the Special Electoral Reform
Commission, which seeks to re-establish the quota of
seats set aside for women at 25 per cent in elections
to provincial and district councils. We firmly believe
that it is essential to increase the participation and
leadership of Afghan women in society, in order to
establish a lasting peace.

S/PV.7591

The emergence of the self-styled Islamic State
in Afghanistan as a new armed non-State actor has
rendered the security situation even more complicated
and dangerous, representing a serious obstacle to the
peace process, the protection of civilians and the delivery
of humanitarian assistance. It goes hand-in-hand
with the destabilizing effect of the growing clashes
between the various factions of the Taliban. We hope
that the adoption today of resolution 2555 (2015) and of
resolution 2253 (2015) last Thursday will complement
national efforts aimed at appropriately addressing the
actions of those individuals and organizations that seek
to profit from the aforementioned destabilization.
The United Nations system, and the Council in
particular, must be untiring in its commitment to the
people and the Government of Afghanistan, so that
we can comprehensively address together the various
challenges facing Afghanistan. Chile will seek to
contribute, in various bodies, to the efforts of the
United Nations aimed at peacebuilding and fostering
stability in Afghanistan, so that that nation can advance
in achieving inclusive and sustainable development.
Given that this is the last time that we will speak on
this topic in our capacity as a non-permament member
of the Security Council, we would like to convey
Chile’s gratitude to the staff and leadership of UNAMA
for the work that they carry out. We hope that we have
contributed to that work in our activities in the Council,
particularly with regard to the role of women and the
eradication of the practice of the recruitment of child
combatants.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr Nicholas Haysom, for presenting the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (S/2015/942). We
commend the work accomplished by UNAMA in such
difficult circumstances. We welcome the statement by
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations, Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal.
Angola co-sponsored resolution 2255 (2015),
unanimously adopted today, strengthening the
sanctions regime against the Taliban and its associates.
The resolution translates the resolve of Angola and
the international community to stop all forms of
support to extremist groups in Afghanistan, given the
fundamental threat that they represent to international

15-4442413/37

S/PV.7591

The situation in Afghanistan

peace and security. Besides applying sanctions, we
underline the importance of a comprehensive political
process in Afghanistan aimed at supporting peace and
reconciliation among Afghans.
The debate that we are holding today offers another
opportunity to review the unfolding political, security,
humanitarian and human rights situation in Afghanistan,
while the country is completing its first year of the
transformation decade. We took good note, with great
sympathy, of the diligent work being carried out by the
Afghan National Unity Government to strengthen good
governance and the rule of law, promote the rights of
all Afghans and enhance the national capabilities of the
nation, as well as the progress made in the restoration
of the credibility of the electoral process.
However, we are deeply concerned over the reported
increase in the instability and worsening security
situation in Afghanistan, with attacks by the Taliban
throughout the country and the growing presence of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). The decrease
in international military support has exacted a heavy
toll on the Afghan security forces, which, according
to the report, have withstood the mounting pressures,
while being able to retake areas that had fallen into the
Taliban’s control. The commitment of Afghanistan’s
allies to continuing to assist the Afghan security forces
in order to ensure stability and security in the country
expresses the importance, for the country and for the
entire international community, of remaining steadfast
with Afghanistan in crucial and dangerous times.
Events such as the capture of Kunduz by the Taliban,
recovered a few days later by the Afghan armed forces
with the support of American troops, was yet another
demonstration of the danger that that group represents
for the institutions in place and of its ability to continue
destabilizing Afghanistan.
The Afghan people continue to pay an intolerable
price in terms of loss of life. They endure violations of
their human rights, are caught in the crossfire and are
victims of indiscriminate attacks, targeted killings and
intolerance by the forces of darkness. The millions of
Afghan refugees in Pakistan and Iran, the large number
in the current wave of refugees towards Europe, and the
very slow pace of returns clearly demonstrate the sad
plight of the Afghan people and their lack of confidence
in the future.
After some hopeful signs that the peace process
was on the verge of being launched, we note with
disappointment that the possible political solution to
14/37

21/12/2015

the conflict has reached an impasse. We took note of the
statement made by the Prime Minister of Pakistan during
his recent visit to Washington, D.C., on preparations
to facilitate negotiations between the Taliban and the
Afghan Government. We welcome the Heart of AsiaIstanbul Process ministerial conference in Islamabad,
and we stress the need to enhance mutual trust and
cooperation between Pakistan and Afghanistan.
Friendly, mutually respectful relationships between
the two countries are crucial to create an enabling
environment for the peace process and to ensure
security, stability and prosperity for both States. That
is a positive sign that countries of the region can engage
in the pursuit of solutions for peace in Afghanistan and
that other members of the international community are
ready to support an Afghan-led peace process. Local
initiatives and peacebuilding efforts by national actors
with a view to promoting stability, such as the local
ceasefire agreement reached in September covering
regions of Baghlan province, reinforces the idea that it
is possible, through dialogue between the Taliban and
the Government, to come to a peaceful solution to the
conflict. We extend our encouragement to UNAMA in
support of such initiatives.
The Afghanistan Opium Survey 2015 points to a
shrinking of the illegal drug economy — a curse on
which Afghanistan is so heavily dependent. That is a key
development for the country’s normalcy. We therefore
support and encourage the national drug action plan.
The success of that plan is even more important, as it
is a cornerstone in the fight against the financing of
terrorist groups such as the Taliban, ISIL, Al-Qaida and
their affiliates.
In conclusion, in spite of the notable progress
achieved by the Afghan people in the last few years,
the challenges facing the country are immense. The
Afghans still have to achieve new levels of cooperation
and understanding to allow the country to overcome
its present and bloody past. Moreover, we must
stress the international community’s commitment to
Afghanistan and the need to be steadfast in assisting
the country — no matter how high the price might be
and taking into account what is at stake — and the need
to establish the basis for a better and more prosperous
future.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing today’s meeting on Afghanistan. China
listened carefully to the briefing provided by the

15-44424

21/12/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Haysom, and the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Saikal.
The year 2015 marks the starting point of the 10year transitional period in Afghanistan. Over the past
year, the National Unity Government made tremendous
efforts to promote national stability, promote economic
development, strengthen the rule of law and achieve
positive results, which should be acknowledged by the
international community. However, Afghanistan still
faces serious challenges in terms of reconstruction
and economic and social development. In addition,
the achievement of peace and prosperity remains a
long-term task that calls for the unremitting efforts of
the various sectors of Afghan society and the robust
support of the international community. I should like to
stress several points.

S/PV.7591

and to create platforms where the resumption of talks
can be facilitated.
Thirdly, it is imperative to improve the country’s
current security situation, which remains fragile.
Armed clashes and terrorist activities, which have
resulted in serious casualties among civilians, are a
frequent occurrence. Countries in the region and the
international community should adhere to a common,
holistic and sustainable approach to security based on
cooperation, and help the Afghan Government build
capacity in that regard. They should also help the
country’s security and police forces effectively deal
with all types of security threats and challenges. It
is necessary to promote the exchange of information
on counter-terrorism and border control, and to fight
terrorism, transnational crime and drug smuggling
jointly.

First, it is necessary to continue to help the
National Unity Government to strengthen its national
governance. Judging from its rule over the past year, the
Government is still pressing forward to explore its path
of national development, despite the many challenges
it faces. For that reason, the international community
should continue to provide support and assistance on
the basis of respect for the sovereignty, independence,
and territorial integrity of Afghanistan, and effectively
honour its commitment to assist Afghanistan, and
help the National Unity Government strengthen its
capacity for self-reliance. We hope that the different
sectors of Afghan society will grow in unity and
continue to prioritize the resolution of their differences
through dialogue and negotiation, and work together to
achieve national reconstruction and economic social
development.

Fourthly, continuous efforts are required to bring
Afghanistan into the realm of regional cooperation.
China welcomes Afghanistan’s membership to the
World Trade Organization and commends the positive
results achieved at the fifth ministerial meeting of the
Istanbul Process. China is ready to continue to work so
as to ensure that that mechanism plays a greater role
in Afghanistan’s peace and reconstruction process.
Countries in the region and the international community
should continue to provide support and assistance to
Afghanistan in terms of transportation, infrastructure,
trade, investment, markets and tariffs, and should help
the country fully leverage its advantages in terms of
geography and resources with a view to enhancing
its capacity for sustainable self-development. China
welcomes Afghanistan’s active participation in the Silk
Road Initiative and supports the fact that Afghanistan
may soon join the regional development tide.

Secondly, it is important to provide firm support
for the peace process in Afghanistan, to push for an
Afghan-led and -owned peace process and to achieve
broad and inclusive political reconciliation as the
ultimate way forward to resolve the Afghan question.
China calls upon the different factions in Afghanistan
to place the interests of the country and the people first,
and to resume negotiations as soon as possible. We hope
that the relevant countries will continue to provide
the conditions necessary for the resumption of talks
between the Afghan Government and the Taliban, and
to provide assistance in that connection. China is ready,
together with the countries concerned, to continue to
play a constructive role in Afghanistan’s peace process

As a neighbour to Afghanistan and a good friend of
the Afghan people, China has been a strong supporter
of Afghanistan’s efforts to explore a development
path that takes into account its own conditions and
reflects the aspirations of its people. China has been
supporting Afghanistan’s peace and reconstruction
process in our own way, including by providing support
and assistance based on the needs of the country.
Recently, China announced the provision of ¥/RMB
500 million in the form of gratis assistance, which will
be used towards the construction of housing. And in the
immediate aftermath of the recent earthquake, China
provided humanitarian relief, materials and emergency
cash assistance. China is ready, together with the

15-4442415/37

S/PV.7591

The situation in Afghanistan

international community, to continue to work so that
Afghanistan may achieve durable peace and prosperity
as soon as possible.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation thanks
you, Madam President, for organizing this important
debate. We also thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Haysom,
for his update on the situation in Afghanistan.
We acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, and thank him for his
statement. Our comments will focus on the security
situation, electoral reform, national reconciliation and
counter-narcotics efforts.
Concerning the security situation, we note the
ongoing challenges, including arbitrary killings,
violence and criminality linked to the activities of
the Taliban and other anti-Government elements.
The capture of Kunduz and 16 district centres by the
Taliban highlights the grave threat that the group poses
to the peace, security and stability of Afghanistan. We
commend the Afghan security forces for regaining
control of Kunduz and most of the captured district
centres.
According to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2015/942), the fall of Kunduz was preceded by strained
working relations between security institutions and
civilian authorities. Placing that in a context of lessons
learned, we encourage all concerned to make efforts
to improve their working relations. Situations that may
be exploited by the Taliban and other anti-Government
elements to destabilize the country must be identified
and ameliorated.
Regarding electoral reform, we applaud the decision
of President Ghani to approve the restoration of reserved
seats for women in provincial and district council
elections to 25 per cent. That is a clear demonstration
of the President’s commitment to the empowerment of
women and the advancement of their rights. We urge
the Government to continue to work towards enhancing
the participation of women in politics and governance.
With respect to national reconciliation, we encourage
further efforts to resuscitate the peace process. We
consider it vital to national cohesion and stability;
reviving it would therefore be in the national interest.
We note the outcome of the fifth ministerial
conference of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process,
held in Islamabad on 9 December, reaffirming the
commitment of regional stakeholders to resolving the

16/37

21/12/2015

conflict in Afghanistan through peaceful negotiations.
We are convinced that only Afghan-owned and Afghanled peace and reconciliation initiatives can bring
lasting peace, security and stability to the country. We
therefore urge the Taliban and other armed opposition
groups to lay down their arms and engage in dialogue
with the Government. It is crucial that the reconciliation
agenda be sustained in the interest of the people of
Afghanistan. Still with respect to reconciliation, we
applaud the agreement of the first-ever local ceasefire
with the official endorsement of the Government. The
agreement, which prohibits Afghan security forces
and the Taliban from conducting military operations
in the district of Baghlan province, was successful in
reducing violence during the reporting period. We urge
all concerned to abide by the terms of the agreement.
Concerning the issue of counter-narcotics, we note
the decrease in opium poppy production by 19 per cent
with respect to 2014. That is especially significant as
it marks the first time since 2009 that a reduction in
opium poppy cultivation has been achieved. We expect
counter-narcotics efforts in the country to continue
to yield positive results as the authorities implement
the national counter-narcotics plan for 2015-2019.
An important dimension of any counter-narcotics
effort is the fight against money-laundering and illicit
financial flows that may be used for terrorist financing.
International cooperation is essential if that effort is be
effective. In that regard, we welcome the signing of a
memorandum of understanding between the financial
intelligence units of Afghanistan and Tajikistan.
While significant progress has been made in
Afghanistan across various sectors, considerable
challenges remain. In addressing those challenges,
the role of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) remains important.
Sustained regional and international support is also
vital. We pay tribute to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haysom, the staff of UNAMA
and Afghanistan’s development partners for their
commitment to placing Afghanistan on the path to
peace, security, reconciliation and development.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I am very grateful
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom for his briefing and for all his hard work in
Afghanistan leading the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I join others in
welcoming Ambassador Saikal to the Council in his
new role and look forward to working together.

15-44424

21/12/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

I want to begin by welcoming today’s unanimous
adoption of resolution 2255 (2015). By renewing the
Taliban sanctions regime for another 18 months, we have
shown that we mean it when we say that there will be no
weakening of our resolve and no let-up in our efforts to
disrupt the finances and activities of the Taliban. Sadly,
the continued need for this sanctions regime shows that
Council support for Afghanistan remains vital and that
our job is not yet done. UNAMA is a vital part of that
support, and I applaud the Mission’s determination to
continue fulfilling its mandate, often under difficult
circumstances.
The reasons for our continued role are clear.
Together, we want to build a secure and stable
Afghanistan — an Afghanistan that no longer exports
insecurity; an Afghanistan where people can thrive,
prosper and live in peace. Those are aims that all should
share in Afghanistan, its neighbours in the region
and the international community. I believe that there
are two elements at the heart of securing that future:
security and the economy.
Regarding the first point, this year’s fighting
season has shown that making security a reality for all
is exceptionally tough. The Afghan National Security
Forces and all of us face an unrelenting foe in the
Taliban. I want to pay tribute to all the international
service men and women who have lost their lives, and
in particular I offer my condolences to the families
of the six international soldiers killed near Bagram
today. I also join others in praising the bravery and
resilience of the Afghan security forces. There have
been many sacrifices and many challenges this year,
particularly in Helmand province, but the Afghan
security forces are showing that they can overcome
the challenges by holding and retaking district centres
from Taliban control. The Taliban’s continued attacks
against civilians, including women and children near
Kandahar, as well as at the Spanish Embassy compound
in Kabul, undermine any pretence that it is fighting for
religious ideals.
In response to such threats, the Afghan security
forces will need sustained help. That is why the United
Kingdom supports the Afghan National Army Officer
Academy and gives $110 million in annual funding
for security. It is why we have extended our military
presence, as announced in October. I hope that Member
States will all continue their vital assistance. But to
guarantee long-term security in Afghanistan, a peace
process is the only solution, so I warmly welcome the

S/PV.7591

progress made at the Heart of Asia meeting and the
associated meetings in Islamabad. I pay tribute to the
commitment and determination shown by President
Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah in pursuing
improved relations with the region and in starting
peace talks. Let us all urge Pakistan and Afghanistan
to meet their commitments to pursue peace with those
wiling to negotiate and to take concerted action against
those unwilling to do so. The United Kingdom strongly
supports the call of the Heart of Asia conference for
peace talks to begin urgently.
In addition to the Taliban threat, we share concern
at the emergence of small groups of former Afghan and
Pakistani Taliban claiming allegiance to Daesh. As we
showed in this Chamber last week, the Council is united
in its opposition to Daesh and its affiliates. Let us give
our full support to the National Unity Government of
Afghanistan in combatting such groups.
Turning to my second point, economic growth is vital
if Afghans are to remain committed to Afghanistan’s
future. Afghanistan’s potential is significant. The
inauguration of the Turkmenistan–Afghanistan–
Pakistan–India gas pipeline this month shows that this
potential can be realized. I congratulate Turkmenistan,
Pakistan and India, as well as Afghanistan, on their
support for that project. The pipeline, like KASA 1000
and other regional projects, can have huge benefits for
all the countries of the region.
Afghanistan’s potential is also seen in its
people — people like Najina, an 18-year old young
woman studying at the Afghanistan National Institute
of Music in Kabul. Najina once said that she had no
hope of being recognized for any talent, yet today she
has a chance to realize her ambition to become the
best pianist in the country. Students like Najina are not
just continuing Afghanistan’s rich musical heritage;
they are also showing that Afghanistan can retain its
brightest, its best and its most talented. But ultimately,
the people of Afghanistan are the country’s greatest
asset. Economic growth will be secured thanks to their
talents, skills and hard work.
Let me close by restating the United Kingdom’s
enduring commitment to the Government of
Afghanistan, both financially and politically. I am
proud to reiterate our strong support for the work of the
National Unity Government, and I urge all Afghans and
the international community to continue their backing
for President Ghani and Chief Executive Officer
Abdullah. Together, we can help them address the

15-4442417/37

S/PV.7591

The situation in Afghanistan

major economic, security and governance challenges
that Afghanistan faces.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers
in thanking Special Representative Nicholas Haysom
for his briefing. We also commend Mr. Haysom and
all members and personnel of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for
their dedication in carrying out their duties under
challenging circumstances. I also thank Ambassador
Saikal for his statement.
Allow me to begin by reiterating Malaysia’s
firm support for the reconciliation and reintegration
efforts undertaken by the Government of Afghanistan
and for UNAMA’s strong support in that regard. We
also commend the Afghan Government’s continuing
commitment and efforts to address the increasing
political, economic and security challenges faced by
the country. We believe that those steps demonstrate the
Government’s aspirations to establish a more unified
and stable country, which, in our view, will contribute
positively to regional stability.
The maintenance of peace and stability across the
country remains a major challenge and preoccupation
of the Government and the security forces. We are
concerned that the security situation has markedly
deteriorated and the level of security incidents has both
increased and intensified. In particular, the Taliban’s
temporary seizure of Kunduz city and 16 district
centres highlighted how fragile the security conditions
are. We also share the concern that affiliates of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham are making inroads
in Afghanistan. We are also increasingly concerned by
the increased involvement of United Nations personnel
in security incidents and note that 43 such incidents
occurred during the reporting period, including the
murder of a United Nations staff member in Kandahar.
Malaysia strongly condemns the targeting and attacks
on any United Nations personnel and facilities.
It is appalling that Afghan civilians have to
continue to suffer the brunt of the conflict, and what
is worse, children account for close to one fourth of all
casualties. In particular, Malaysia is alarmed that at least
159 children were killed and 505 children were injured
just within the span of three months. We continue to
urge all parties to the conflict to exercise restraint,
and we reiterate that those responsible for violations of
international human rights law and humanitarian law
must be held accountable.

18/37

21/12/2015

Despite the challenging security circumstances,
Malaysia commends the determination and commitments
shown by the Afghan Government in undertaking
political reforms, including electoral reform. In that
regard, we are pleased to note the Government’s
approval of seven of the ten recommendations of the
Special Electoral Reform Commission submitted
in August. Malaysia also welcomes the progress
made towards the formation of the new Independent
Election Commission and the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission. In addition, we are pleased
to note the conclusion of a local ceasefire agreement
in Baghlan province, with the attendant immediate
reduction in violent clashes. Furthermore, the adoption
of a resolution in October by the first Ulema National
Conference in support of peacebuilding in Afghanistan
further illustrates the desire and aspirations of the
Afghan population to achieve lasting peace, dialogue
and reconciliation with all sides of the conflict. In that
regard, Malaysia reiterates that a peaceful, negotiated
political settlement is the only way to achieve
sustainable peace and stability in the country.
Malaysia commends the ongoing efforts of the
Afghan Government to counter the spread of narcotics.
We were pleased to learn of the first decrease in opium
poppy cultivation areas since 2009, specifically, the
cultivation area decreased by 19 per cent in 2015.
Potential opium production in 2015 also shows a
marked reduction of 48 per cent. Those are certainly
significant and encouraging achievements, despite the
myriad of political and security challenges faced by the
country. The National Drug Action Plan, approved by
the President of Afghanistan, is another positive and
important step forward in the efforts to combat illicit
drugs production and trade, and is a manifestation of
the Afghan Government’s determination to counter
narcotics. We are confident that the close cooperation
between the Government of Afghanistan and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime will continue to
yield success in addressing the issue of illicit drugs in a
comprehensive manner.
Malaysia believes that it remains imperative, at
this stage, for the United Nations and the international
community to continue to lend their support,
encouragement and assistance to the Government of
Afghanistan through reconstruction and redevelopment
efforts aimed at rebuilding the country. In that context,
Malaysia greatly appreciates the ongoing efforts of
UNAMA, which has continued to operate in extreme

15-44424

21/12/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

and increasingly challenging conditions. We also
commend the active collaboration of regional partners
in promoting security, development and economic
advancement in Afghanistan and the region.
I conclude by reaffirming Malaysia’s commitment
to working closely with all regional and international
partners in supporting the Afghan Government in its
effort to achieve peace, security and stability.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank
Mr. Nicholas Hayson, Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and the
Ambassador of Afghanistan, Ambassador Saikal, for
their statements.
We would also like to convey our condolences to
the families of the victims in the wake of the terrorist
attack perpetrated in the compound of the Embassy of
Spain in Kabul on 11 December. We robustly condemn
that terrorist act.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela expresses
its concern in the light of the deteriorating security
situation in Afghanistan resulting from the activities
of armed groups operating in various regions. That
violence is reflected in the 19 per cent increase in
violent incidents, when measured against the same
period last year. Such soaring violence explains why
instability remains a negative feature in Afghanistan,
which impacts the peacebuilding process and the
development of that country.
The capture of the city of Kunduz last September
by the Taliban represented a setback for the Afghan
security forces, which saw their response capacity in
the face of the insurgent assault compromised. Such
events, together with the presence of groups associated
with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS),
constitute a further factor of destabilization that raises
the stakes for the international community, particularly
the Security Council, leading to a pressing need for us
to adopt robust measures to curb the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters travelling into Afghanistan from
the armed conflicts in Iraq and Syria. Countering
terrorism means strengthening the capacity of the
Afghan National Security Forces as a core institution of
the State. The military actions of ISIS and the Taliban
represent a setback to the consolidation of peace
and to the national reconciliation process, which is
spearheaded by UNAMA together with the Afghanistan
High Peace Council.

S/PV.7591

The new political phase facing the Afghan leadership
must be shaped by efforts to pursue compliance with the
reforms submitted last year, among which the electoral
calendar is one of the most important. We welcome the
fact that the Afghan Government has approved seven
of the ten recommendations submitted to them by the
Special Electoral Reform Commission. Raising the
quota for the participation of women in district and
provincial electoral processes to 25 per cent constitutes
one of the most important recommendations.
My country welcomes the recent appointment of
officials to various areas of the public administration.
Such decisions also strengthen the institutions of the
State. However, as pointed out in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/942), the Afghan authorities
must take appropriate measures in order to be able
to appoint officials to fill the vacancies in public
institutions that are of paramount importance for
the functioning of the country, such as the Ministry
of Defence and the Office of the Attorney General.
Likewise, it is extremely important to strengthen the
presence and role of the State across the entire country,
a step which would boost the trust of the Afghan people
in their national institutions.
Together with the threat of violent extremism, drug
trafficking represents a serious obstacle to the stability
and development of Afghanistan. That aforementioned
illegal activity is the main source of funding for the
Taliban, enabling them to engage in their terrorist
activities. Today, we welcome the fact that there has
been a decrease in the poppy harvests compared to
last year. Nonetheless, the trade and trafficking in
drugs across the region continue to represent a major
challenge to the Afghan authorities. In particular, we
acknowledge the efforts undertaken by the Government
in this area with the assistance of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. We reiterate that the
effective fight against drugs requires international
cooperation, including with neighbouring countries, to
prevent, combat and eliminate this scourge.
That is why, under the principle of common and
shared responsibility in the fight against global drug
problem, multilateral efforts involving both producers
and consumers countries need to be redoubled. The
reduction and eradication of crops must be accompanied
by simultaneous measures to reduce demand in the
drug-consuming countries. Only then can terrorist
organizations operating in Afghanistan be cut off from

15-4442419/37

S/PV.7591

The situation in Afghanistan

financial resources resulting from the illegal trade in
narcotics.
Moreover, it must be remembered that achieving
a firm and lasting peace in Afghanistan goes beyond
simply using an military approach. Accordingly,
economic and social conditions must be created to
overcome the poverty, exclusion and discrimination that
have affected citizens for decades and have been major
drivers of conflict in the country. The international
community should continue to support the people and
the Government of Afghanistan by providing resources
and building capacity to promote the country’s
comprehensive development.
Our country expresses its concern at the ongoing
attacks by terrorist groups. According to the report of
the Secretary-General, the number of people affected
rose by 26 per cent, with targeted attacks and clashes
being the greatest cause of violence against civilians. In
this regard, we are concerned by the 10 per cent increase
in the numbers of children killed in conflict as well as
by the sexual abuse to which this vulnerable group is
victim. We condemn these actions, as they constitute
a flagrant violation of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, with criminal
consequences. Moreover, we recognize the efforts of the
Afghan authorities to implement the National Action
Plan for Security Council Resolution 1325 (2000).
However, we regret that the Taliban is continuing to
perpetrate attacks and kidnappings against women in
Afghanistan.
In the field of international humanitarian law,
we join the Secretary-General’s expressions of
condemnation on the air attack on a hospital run by
Médecins Sans Frontières in Kunduz on 3 October,
which unfortunately led to the death or injury of some
30 civilians, including patients and medical staff. We
hope that, given the gravity of this unfortunate incident,
the investigations being carried out by Afghanistan and
the United States will shed light on this regrettable
event and apportion the relevant accountability in the
hopes that such actions are not repeated in the future.
Likewise, we express our concern over the
increasing number of internally displaced persons.
This year it reached the figure of 235,000 people, which
amounts to an increase of 70 per cent as compared to
the previous year. According to the Secretary-General’s
report, the year 2015 will be the worst year since 2002
in relation to internally displaced persons caused by
conflict. While it has not been possible to put an end
20/37

21/12/2015

to armed conflict with a view to achieving needed
stability, we have continued to see a steady increase in
such victims.
Finally, we encourage the Government of
Afghanistan to pursue its efforts within a comprehensive
and inclusive political process leading to the
establishment of a firm and lasting peace. We estimate
that achieving this goal is linked to the commitment of
the Taliban insurgency to resume the peace talks that
began earlier this year. To that end, the participation
of all sectors of Afghan society is required, together
with the assistance of the international community and
the United Nations, especially UNAMA, to which we
extend our gratitude for the work done. We pay tribute
to the officials of the Mission, who with professionalism
and dedication, have carried out their tasks in a setting
that is not without risks and challenges.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, who has
been carrying out a very important mission. We would
also like to welcome the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Mr. Mahmoud Saikal, to whom we are
grateful for his substantive, in-depth and objective
statement. We agree with what he said.
The situation in Afghanistan remains complex.
We are concerned by the ongoing deterioration of the
situation in its northern provinces. The seizure of
Kunduz by insurgents and its being held for more than
two weeks confirms the high risk of terrorism. We note
the unwavering efforts of the Afghan National Security
Forces to free that region. Since 2001, the time of the
start of the international Operation Enduring Freedom,
there had been no provincial capitals captured. The
Afghan National Security Forces suffer significant
daily losses in clashes with the opposition. We hope
to see a report on the implementation of the Security
Council mandate on the NATO operations in that
country. Indeed, we have been asking for such a report
for a long time now.
We are concerned by the high number of civilians
in Afghanistan who have been terrorized by this war
for such a long time. The violations of international
humanitarian law, such as the air strike attack against the
hospital in Kunduz, are unacceptable. The possibility
of such actions taking place again needs to be totally
eliminated. Unfortunately, the predictions previously
made in the Security Council on the possible spillover of
instability from the south and the south-eastern regions
15-44424

21/12/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

to the north, which was relatively calm in the past, have
come true. These worrying data are confirmed in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/942), and there
can be no doubt that the forces of the so-called Islamic
State, which are gaining more supporters, including
from the Taliban, are systematically strengthening their
positions. They study the situation, stockpile weapons
and recruit extremists from competing terrorist groups.
Narcotics, whose production in Afghanistan has
reached industrial levels, pose a serious threat to
peace in Afghanistan the region. Drugs fuel terrorism
and transnational organized crime. Narcotics serve to
intensify the turf war among various groups for control
of drug-trafficking routes, which leads to an increase
in instability in Afghanistan itself and in neighbouring
States. In that regard, we believe it is important to step
up the international community’s efforts to combat
narcotics production.
We do not agree with the optimistic assessment
of the current drug situation in Afghanistan. Recently
published official statistics that show a significant
decrease in narcotics production in 2015 were
calculated after significant changes were made in the
way data were collected. As a result, they need to be
cross-checked.
Apart from having a direct, harmful impact, drug
production is a major source of terrorist financing.
In that regard, we think it is necessary to step up the
international community’s efforts to combat Afghan
drug trafficking. We believe today’s depressing
situation with regard to the drug threat in Afghanistan
to be due to a large extent to the passivity of the
International Security Assistance Force. However,
Russia drew attention to this serious problem and
proposed constructive solutions. The military presence
now has a good opportunity to address the problem, but
it is paying scant attention to combating that evil.
We believe in the need to further promote and
bolster cooperation in Afghanistan within existing
regional organizations. We welcome the official
statement made by Afghanistan announcing that it
had become a fully fledged member of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization. That statement was made
by President Ghani during his meeting with President
Putin on the sidelines of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization Summit at Ufa in the Russian Federation.
In the light of the emerging new threats in Afghanistan
and the region, we are banking on the involvement
of our Afghan partners in the provision of practical

S/PV.7591

assistance to the Shanghai Cooperation Organization’s
regional counter-terrorism structures.
In our opinion, international efforts to combat
narcotics from Afghanistan must be comprehensive
in nature and present throughout the entire illegal
drug-trade supply chain. Such efforts should involve
destroying drug crops and drugs laboratories, marking
precursors and arresting drug lords and including them
on sanctions lists. The work of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization is also significant. It has solid
counter-narcotics and counter-terrorism potential.
That was successfully demonstrated during the one-off
military exercises of the Organization in Tajikistan in
May this year.
We support the line taken by the Afghan Government
aimed at achieving sustainable, long-term national
reconciliation. We believe that all States must work
along those lines to help Afghanistan finally achieve
internal peace and stability. The United Nations has
approved the basis for national reconciliation. The wellknown principles of such reconciliation stipulate that
everyone must recognize Afghanistan’s Constitution,
refrain from having any contact with terrorists and stop
fighting against the Government.
Russia has historic links with Afghanistan. We have
friendly ties with that country, and Russia will continue
to provide assistance to Afghanistan, its Government
and its people by strengthening the Afghan National
Security Forces. By the end of the year, we hope to
have carried out cost-free delivery to Kabul of some
large shipments of weapons for the Afghan police. We
have been developing trade and economic links and, by
the beginning of next year, we plan to hold a meeting
of the joint intergovernmental commission on trade
and economic cooperation. We are sure that that will
provide new impetus for our economic cooperation
with Afghanistan.
There can be no doubt about our humanitarian
assistance. On 23 November, we provided the World
Food Programme in Afghanistan with 57 Kamaz
vehicles worth $2.5 million, and they were provided
free of charge. We are ready to continue to build a
peaceful, independent, self-sufficient and economically
prosperous Afghanistan. We are convinced that
Afghanistan can overcome its current challenges.
Mr. Mahamat Zene (Chad) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Afghanistan

15-4442421/37

S/PV.7591

The situation in Afghanistan

and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his briefing. I also thank
Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal, the new Permanent
Representative of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
to the United Nations, for his statement and warmly
welcome him to the Council.
On the eve of the first anniversary of the departure
of International Security Assistance Force from
Afghanistan, the security, humanitarian and human
rights situation in the country is still of concern,
despite the tireless efforts of the new Afghan authorities
and the support of the international community. We
commend the Afghan Government in its unfailing
efforts, which have, among other things, dislodged
the Taliban from Kunduz. We reiterate our support to
the Afghan authorities and repeat our call to Afghan
stakeholders to promote dialogue through the High
Peace Council, in the interests of their people, and to
implement the Peace and Reconciliation in Afghanistan
Programme in line with the Kabul communiqué and the
conclusions of the Bonn Conference. To that end, we
welcome the 12 October meeting in Kabul of the Ulema
National Conference, which was facilitated by the High
Peace Council and supported by UNAMA. Its aim
was to bring together all parties to the conflict so as
to promote peace, and we congratulate President Ghani
for approving its conclusions.
With regard to the security situation, the seizure
of Kunduz by the Taliban, which we firmly condemn,
shows that the situation is unstable and worsening
owing to the unfortunate incidents that have claimed
the lives of many civilians and international expatriate
staff. We deplore the attacks on civilians, and we hope
that they will not happen again in future. We extend
our condolences to the families of the victims and to
the Afghan Government and we hope that those who
were injured make a speedy recovery. We also condemn
the 11 December terrorist attack carried out near the
Spanish Embassy in Kabul. We extend condolences
and solidarity to the families of the victims and to the
Governments of Afghanistan and Spain. We reiterate
our firm condemnation of terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. We underscore the real need to
bring the perpetrators of such barbaric acts to justice.
Furthermore, we express our serious concern regarding
the increase in the number of terrorist attacks and the
serious threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters in
Afghanistan and the subregion, including those from
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. That requires

22/37

21/12/2015

heightened vigilance and strong mobilization from the
international community.
We commend the efforts made by Afghan
Government to combat drug trafficking, as well as
the 15 October adoption, in partnership with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, of the
national drug action plan for the period 2015-2019.
We encourage the Government to continue to work to
combat and eliminate the scourge of drugs. In the same
vein, we urge countries in the region to step up their
cooperation and coordinate their efforts in cross-border
efforts aimed at combating the illicit trade in drugs.
Chad is very concerned about the use of improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) by terrorist groups against
civilians, the Afghan security forces and diplomatic
and humanitarian staff. To that end, we underscore the
need to step up coordination and exchange information,
both locally and regionally, so as to prevent parts for
IEDs from being delivered to terrorist groups and
to better control the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons. By the same token, we are extremely
concerned by the deterioration in the humanitarian
situation, in particular that of persons being displaced
because of natural disasters and a lack of security. We
urge the international community to urgently provide
the necessary assistance to displaced persons, and all
donors to contribute to such efforts.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support to the Afghan
authorities and urge the international community to
further support them in restoring peace and rebuilding
the country.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
Let me begin by again welcoming Ambassador
Saikal to the Security Council and to New York. We look
forward to working with him and with partners from the
various branches of the Afghan Government. I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Afghanistan, Mr. Haysom, for his informative briefing
and for the critically important efforts of the entire
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
team to support the Afghan people.
As we meet today, the Government of Afghanistan
continues to face significant challenges in delivering the
security, good governance and economic opportunity
for which its citizens yearn. Today I wish to speak
to some of those enduring challenges and what the

15-44424

21/12/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

international community can do to help the Afghan
Government succeed in its efforts to overcome them.
As we all know, the Taliban and other
anti-Government groups continue to pose a serious
security threat. In recent weeks we have all been
horrified to witness the Taliban’s attacks, including the
one earlier today on a patrol near the Wagram air base.
That follows the raid of 9 December on Kandahar airport
and the attack of 12 December in Kabul that targeted a
guesthouse attached to the Spanish Embassy. Scores of
innocent Afghan civilians have been killed or wounded
in those and other attacks, as well as two Spanish police
officers who were killed in the 12 December attack
and for whose deaths I would like to extend our deep
condolences to the Permanent Representative of Spain.
The United States is committed to continuing to
help the Afghan people confront this security threat.
In October, President Obama announced plans to
maintain the current level of 9,800 United States troops
in Afghanistan through most of 2016. They will remain
engaged, together with those of our allies and partners,
in the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission, in training,
advising and assisting Afghan security forces. We will
continue to support counter-terrorism operations to
destroy the remnants of Al-Qaida.
We also continue to support and invest in
Afghanistan’s relations with its neighbours. In that
regard, the recent Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process
ministerial meeting on 8 December in Islamabad was
a step in the right direction. We welcome the renewed
commitments made there to support Afghan-led efforts
to enter into negotiations with the Afghan Taliban,
and we will continue to work with all countries in the
region, including China and Pakistan, to create the
conditions necessary for a peace and reconciliation
process between the Afghan Government and the
Afghan Taliban, including elements such as the
Haqqani network. The choice facing the Taliban is
clear — to engage in good-faith negotiations for peace,
or to continue to fight a war they cannot win and face
the consequences. We urge all members of the Council
to come together in sending that clear message.
Beyond the region, the international community
should continue to provide robust political, financial
and security support to Afghanistan. The progress the
country has made is real, but it is also fragile, and the
Afghan Government and people continue to warrant
our firm support. Two major conferences in 2016 — the
NATO Summit to be held in Warsaw in July and the

S/PV.7591

Afghanistan development conference to be held in
Brussels in October — provide important opportunities
for Member States to renew and extend such support.
As we continue to work to degrade and destroy
Afghanistan’s violent extremist groups, all parties,
including the United States, must ensure that they
are doing everything they can to minimize harm to
civilians. To that end, I would like to repeat President
Obama’s heartfelt apology and condolences for the
incident in which staff and patients were killed and
injured when a United States military air strike
mistakenly hit a Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF)
hospital in Kunduz. When others flee conflict and
disaster areas, MSF charges in, and the work its staff
does is quite literally lifesaving. We in the Council
have been repeatedly briefed by MSF on crises
around the world in which the organization’s staff and
volunteers serve with professionalism and courage.
No nation does more than the United States to avoid
civilian casualties, but in this case we failed to live up
to our standards. President Obama has insisted on a
transparent, thorough and objective accounting of the
facts and circumstances of the incident as a critical step
towards ensuring full accountability. The United States
is committed to helping MSF rebuild the hospital and to
making payments to those affected.
Immeasurable as is the pain inflicted by that air
strike, it is important to distinguish a mistake of that
nature from the deliberate and deplorable targeting
of civilians by the Taliban and other violent extremist
groups. Our message to those forces is clear. There
is only one path to peace, security and stability in
Afghanistan, and that path is not through military
action but through an Afghan-led reconciliation that
builds on the democratic and human-rights gains that
the country has made since 2001. The Taliban’s attacks
harm the Afghan people, destabilize the country and
betray the group’s disregard for the people’s lives. They
must stop.
As we all know, the efforts of the Afghan
Government to build greater security and stability
cannot be founded on military efforts alone. Good
governance and economic development are critical to
shoring up Afghan citizens’ support for the Government.
In 2014, more than 7 million Afghans, including
millions of women, cast their vote in elections, marking
the country’s first democratic transfer of power in its
history. The National Unity Government formed by
President Ghani and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah

15-4442423/37

S/PV.7591

The situation in Afghanistan

21/12/2015

reflects the genuine wish of the people for a peaceful
transition. Since then, the Government has made
meaningful progress towards building more transparent
and accountable institutions that can deliver basic
services to the Afghan people. It has also committed to
making progress on electoral reform, which is critical
to strengthening public trust in democratic processes.
The recent recommendations announced by the Special
Electoral Reform Commission are a welcome step. It is
now up to the Afghan Government to implement those
pledges.

Women, whose residents the Taliban called runaway
sluts and immoral girls. The office, a news report said,
appeared to have been attacked with sledgehammers,
the windows shattered, the walls and door frames
smashed. Of the shelter’s director, Hassina Sarwari,
who managed to escape Kunduz before the Taliban
could capture her, the local Taliban commander said: “If
we had captured her, she would be hanged in the main
circle of Kunduz city”. Even the city’s only woman civil
engineer, whose job it was to help restore roads, was
persecuted and run out of town.

We have also seen the Unity Government undertake
significant efforts to lay a foundation for sustainable
and inclusive economic growth. To give just a few
examples, the recent agreement between Afghanistan
and Pakistan allowing construction to begin on the
Central Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission
and Trade Project will bring much-needed Central
Asian energy to both countries. And the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework, which the
Afghan Government adopted in September, outlining
39 reforms and a road map for cooperation between it
and international donors, could boost crucial support
for the country’s development. If implemented, those
and other efforts will help foster greater opportunities
for the Afghan people, and thereby lock in broader
support for the country’s democratic future.

Like so many of the women’s rights advocates
and professional who fled Kunduz and received death
threats, Hassina is too afraid to return. Yet the head
of Hassina’s organization, a woman named Manizha
Naderi, said that they would find a way to open a new
women’s shelter in Kunduz. She said it would be hard
to find women willing to go, but that “people need
us, so we will have to come up with a plan. If we stop
working, it is a big victory for the Taliban”.

I would like to close by reminding everyone why it
is so important that these efforts succeed. As everyone
here knows, on 28 September the Taliban seized the
city of Kunduz, which it held parts of until it was fully
expelled on 13 October by pro-Government forces.
The group’s treatment of the local population during
that time provides a window into how it would rule
were it able to retake control of more of Afghanistan.
According to a United Nations report (S/2015/942),
shortly after taking control of the city the Taliban
carried out house-to-house searches using prepared
lists containing the names and addresses of humanrights defenders, particularly women — women
active in public life, non-governmental organization
(NGO) workers, United Nations staff, journalists and
Government officials, including lawyers, judges and
prosecutors.
The persecution of women was particularly
harrowing. The Taliban looted or burned down three
radio stations run by women, a girls’ high school and
numerous women’s NGOs. One of its targets was a
women’s shelter run by the NGO Women for Afghan

24/37

Groups like Women for Women are not willing
to give the Taliban the victory that would come with
abandoning Afghans in need. We cannot either.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): Let me join others in
thanking Mr. Nicholas Haysom for his comprehensive
briefing today. Germany appreciates the outstanding
work of United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in leading and coordinating
international civilian efforts, including in the promotion
of human rights, humanitarian access, counter-narcotics
and donor cooperation. We also commend his Mission
for its excellent outreach and the good offices provided
in support of the Afghan Government.
With the support of the international community,
Afghanistan has made great strides over the past 14
years. Life expectancy has increased considerably,
the number of maternal deaths has decreased and
millions of boys and girls now have access to primary
and secondary education. Despite these significant
achievements, great challenges remain.
Following the first peaceful and democratic
transition of power in Afghanistan’s history, the
National Unity Government has committed itself
to implementing an ambitious and cross-cutting set

15-44424

21/12/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

of reforms to tackle these challenges. We strongly
encourage the National Unity Government to
make further progress on this reform agenda. The
implementation of difficult economic and political
reforms is at the core of the mutual accountability
principle that Afghanistan and the international
community reaffirmed in Kabul in September. The
ministerial conference in Brussels in October 2016 will
be a highly relevant milestone in measuring the progress
achieved. Afghan ownership and leadership are key
prerequisites in the preparation of the conference and
will be instrumental in reconfirming the exceptional
international commitment to Afghanistan.
The unsatisfactory economic and security situation
are the main drivers behind the rising numbers of
Afghans leaving their country — young, educated
citizens who should be the backbone of their country’s
reconstruction and development. Halting and reversing
this brain drain is first and foremost in the interest of
Afghanistan. To this end, it is necessary to provide the
Afghan population, especially young people, with the
prospect of a future in their own country.
We remain highly concerned over the high number
of civilian lives lost due to incessant fighting and the
outrageous, cowardly acts of violence and terrorism.
We strongly condemn today’s attack near Bagram
and express our deepest condolences to the families
of the victims. I would also like to express our
abhorrence at the recent attacks on Kandahar airport
and the compound of the Spanish Embassy in Kabul
earlier this month. In the face of this difficult security
situation, the Afghan National Security Forces have
shown remarkable resilience during this first year
in which they have carried the full responsibility for
their country’s security. We deeply deplore the many
casualties that they have sustained in their fight for law
and order in their country.
The NATO Summit in Warsaw in July 2016 will be an
important opportunity for the international community
to reaffirm its support for the Afghan National Security
Forces. Germany will continue its financial assistance
and support in the years ahead. Last Thursday, our
Parliament voted to extend our military engagement.
in Afghanistan as part of the NATO Resolute Support
Mission for another year, with a raised troop ceiling
of 980 soldiers. In so doing, Germany joins all of
Afghanistan’s friends and partners in sending a clear
message. We will not abandon Afghanistan at this
critical time.

S/PV.7591

The only path to lasting peace and security in
Afghanistan is a process of peace and reconciliation
among all Afghans. We commend the courageous
leadership shown by the National Unity Government
and President Ghani Ahmadzai personally during his
recent visit to Islamabad. We are encouraged by the
commitment of the Governments of Afghanistan and
Pakistan to promoting an Afghan-led and Afghanowned political process. We call on all regional actors
to lend their active and unreserved support to this
effort.
Let me assure you, Madam President, that Germany
remains committed to supporting Afghanistan during
the current transformation decade, in close cooperation
with the Afghan Government and our international
partners.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of India.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): I am privileged to participate
in this debate of the Council being presided over by
you, Madam. I also thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Nicholas Haysom and Ambassador
Mahmoud Saikal for their briefings.
We are happy that Afghanistan’s historic political
transition remains on course. India is proud to call itself
Afghanistan’s first strategic partner, and stands ready
to do whatever is within its capacity and means to work
with the Afghan Government and its people to realize
our common ambition. We share the Afghan people’s
desire for a strong, independent, united and prosperous
Afghanistan. India will continue to support a truly
Afghan-led and Afghan owned reconciliation process
within the framework of the Afghan Constitution and
the internationally accepted red lines.
During the recently held Heart of Asia ministerial
meeting in Islamabad on 9 December, our External
Affairs Minister said that
“democracy is taking roots in Afghanistan and we
acknowledge the role of President Ghani and CEO
Mr. Abdullah in building on the strong foundation
created by former President Karzai to ensure
peaceful, democratic and inclusive governance for
the whole of Afghanistan”.
In that context, we would like to inform the Council
that India will be hosting the sixth ministerial of the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process in 2016.

15-4442425/37

S/PV.7591

The situation in Afghanistan

Our main concern remains that of the security
situation in Afghanistan. The Secretary-General’s
latest report (S/2015/942) substantiates our view that
it is terrorism which is the main source of insecurity
and instability in Afghanistan. What is alarming is the
revelation in recent reports, including the SecretaryGeneral’s report, of the presence of Daesh-affiliated
groups, particularly in Nangarhar province. The
deteriorating security situation is reflected in the
Secretary-General’s report, which states that there
were 3,693 civilian casualties in the reporting period,
reflecting an increase of 26 per cent over the same period
in 2014. We strongly condemn the dastardly terrorist
attacks attack on the Kandahar airport and the Spanish
Embassy in Kabul on 8 and 11 December, respectively,
as well as the attack outside Bagram airbase today. This
is indeed alarming, and the Council must act against
this threat with a sense of urgency.
We would like to take this opportunity commend
the Afghan National Security Forces and the Afghan
people for countering the forces of terrorism and
extremism with courage and resilience. They need the
continued support of the international community to
defend Afghanistan’s unity and security. For its part,
India is ready to work with Afghanistan to strengthen
its defensive capability. India has always maintained
that any peace talks have to be Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned and should only be with those Taliban
sympathizers who are willing to accept and work within
the Constitution of Afghanistan. .
Afghanistan will be able to achieve its optimal
economic potential only if it is allowed freedom of
transit to major markets in South Asia. We have formally
indicated our willingness to join the AfghanistanPakistan trade and transit arrangement. India is
also working with Afghanistan and Iran to develop
trilateral transit. Participation in the development of
the Chahbahar Port will augment our connectivity with
Afghanistan and beyond. India’s engagement in the
trade, commerce and investment confidence-building
measure within the Heart of Asia Process as the lead
country complements our bilateral development
cooperation with Afghanistan, including in the spheres
of infrastructure, connectivity and capacity-building.
In conclusion, it is our view that UNAMA
must continue to play a leading role in shaping and
coordinating the efforts of the international community
to support Afghanistan’s political and economic
reconstrucitonprocess.

26/37

21/12/2015

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): This Security Council debate
comes at the end of a difficult year for Afghanistan.
The National Unity Government, under the leadership
of President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah,
has confronted a determined insurgency, significant
economic challenges and the imperative tasks of reform
and countering corruption. Progress has been made, but
there is much still to do.
Security remains a major challenge, as the brief fall
of Kunduz reminded us. The insurgency has continued
its horrendous attacks against civilians. The Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces remain bravely
resolute in their mission to confront the insurgency,
and we honour their sacrifices. International forces also
face a constant threat of violence. We commend their
efforts.
Australia remains committed to assisting the
Afghan Government to deliver a secure and stable
future for its people. To that end, we are one of the
largest donors to Afghan security forces sustainment,
providing $A500 million from 2009 to 2017. Since
2001, over 25,000 Australian personnel have served in
Afghanistan, with 250 continuing to serve in NATO’s
Resolute Support Mission at the current time.
Afghanistan continues to face human rights
challenges. Violence against women and children is
of particular concern for Australia. Through our aid
programme to Afghanistan — Australia’s fourth largest
at $A80 million per year, we provide shelter and support
to over 2,300 women and children, and training for
over 2,800 police- and justice-sector officials to uphold
women’s rights.
Electoral reform is another area that requires
urgent action. We welcome President Ghani’s approval
of most of the recommendations of the Special
Electoral Reform Commission. Implementation must
be a priority. Parliamentary elections should be held in
a timely manner to meet the expectations of the Afghan
people.
Economic reform is key to a brighter future for
Afghanistan. The Government’s Self-Reliance through
Mutual Accountability Framework will be an important
mechanism to improve the effectiveness and efficiency
of donor funding. We welcome President Ghani’s vision
for Afghanistan’s economic future, and we encourage

15-44424

21/12/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7591

his Government to persevere in its efforts to combat
corruption.

its role as framework nation in the western region of
Afghanistan.

While it has been a difficult year, much has been
accomplished in Afghanistan by both the Afghan
Government and the international community. Australia
recognizes the role that the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has played. We
applaud the efforts and dedication of all United Nations
personnel in Afghanistan. The work of the Tripartite
Commission on future priorities for UNAMA provides
a useful assessment of the role, structure and activities
of all United Nations entities operating in Afghanistan.
We look forward to the Council renewing the UNAMA
mandate in March 2016 so that UNAMA can continue
to play its important role in Afghanistan effectively.

We are all well aware, of course, as underscored
in the General Assembly resolution on Afghanistan
adopted in recent weeks, internal reconciliation is
paramount to achieve long-lasting peace and stability.
Promising signs have emerged from the Islamabad
Conference of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process,
with the high-level participation of the region’s main
countries, and of President Ghani in particular. Those
are positive indications for strengthened cooperation
among the region’s main actors, particularly Afghanistan
and Pakistan, with the support of the international
community, in the fight against terrorist groups and in
creating conditions that are conducive to resuming the
negotiation process between the Government and the
Taliban.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): In the period following the
most recent Security Council debate on Afghanistan
(see S/PV.7526), the security situation in the country
has deteriorated, as highlighted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2015/942). In recent months, we
have seen a further increase in violence by insurgent
groups, confirmed as well by data of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
on civilian victims, indicating a 26 per cent increase
between August and October 2015, as compared to the
same period in 2014. We strongly condemn the most
recent terrorist attacks in Kandahar and Kabul, as well
as today’s attack in Bagram.
The National Unity Government continues its
steadfast commitment to combat those aiming to
destabilize the country and to foil the progress made in
democratic and social sectors, and the achievements on
civil rights and on the situation of women in the past 14
years through the efforts of Afghan institutions and the
support of the international community.
Italy will continue to support the Afghan
Government and institutions, in its commitment
to sustaining the country’s security and stability
and to fulfilling the aspirations of its people for a
future of peace and prosperity. Evidence of that is
our decision to maintain in 2016, together with our
partners, our contribution to the train, advise and
assist mission — Resolute Support — led by NATO to
continue efforts in strengthening the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces units that are fighting
insurgent hostile groups. Italy will also continue to play

Italy supports all efforts and initiatives in that
direction, based on closer cooperation among actors
that can lead to an internal and inclusive peace process.
That entails the rejection of violence; breaking all
links with terrorism; and respect for human rights,
in particular those of women, whom we hope to see
actively participating in future peace negotiations, and
of girls.
This year has witnessed a worrying increase in the
flux of Afghan citizens fleeing their country because of
the worsening security situation.
Self-sustaining development will be untenable
without the necessary internal reforms. We reiterate
our appreciation for the efforts of the National Unity
Government and the plans arranged under its SelfReliance through Mutual Accountability Framework,
launched last September. An articulated programme
based on indicators and clearly defined timelines is
certainly the best premise for any action on reform. But
that must be accompanied by effective implementation
with measurable results in the areas of political
governance, electoral reform, the rule of law, the fight
against corruption, economic governance and human
rights.
Against that backdrop, priority must be given to
the protection and promotion of women’s rights, to
strengthening women’s empowerment in all sectors
of society, and to their physical protection — because
episodes of violence against them have increased in
recent times, as shown by some extremely serious
cases, which we strongly condemn. This, despite the

15-4442427/37

S/PV.7591

The situation in Afghanistan

commendable efforts of the Afghan Government,
shows how much work must still be done. Of course,
we commend the work done by the United Nations and
Special Representative Nicholas Haysom.
In conclusion, the hard work of the Afghan
authorities and institutions, with the support of the
international community, is crucial if the reform
process is to achieve its goals of further democratic
consolidation and self-reliance. The Brussels ministerial
conference of 4 and 5 October 2016, to be co-hosted by
the European Union, will be an opportunity to confirm
this partnership, which, considering the extraordinary
level of mutual commitment between the international
community and Afghanistan, must lead to concrete
progress in the area of reform.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2015/942), as well as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, Nicholas Haysom, for his detailed
briefing this morning and for his continued good work
in the country.
The one common thread running through the report,
the briefing and the statements today is the deteriorating
security situation in Afghanistan. As the SecretaryGeneral states in his report, the temporary capture of
Kunduz by the Taliban was a result of the formidable
security, economic and political challenges facing by
the country. Continued international support therefore
remains critical. Pakistan, for its part, has condemned
the violence and rising number of civilian casualties in
Afghanistan. Nothing justifies indiscriminate killing.
We have vowed our full support to the Government of
Afghanistan with a view to improving the situation, but
it is the Afghan people itself who must put their house
in order.
The two possibilities for ending instability in
Afghanistan, in our view, are the military option or the
negotiated peace process. There is clear international
consensus that the use of force alone may not achieve
peace in the country. A robust and meaningful
reconciliation process, if pursued seriously, is the only
sustainable way to achieve our common objective. It
was in that spirit that Pakistan, in good faith and at the
request of President Ghani, facilitated the first-ever
direct talks between the Afghan Government and the
Taliban. We stand ready to play a similar role again.

28/37

21/12/2015

No one, however, should cast aspersions on
Pakistan’s sincerity. After Afghanistan, Pakistan and
its people have suffered the most from the 35 years of
wars, violence and terrorism in Afghanistan. Pakistan
is the primary victim of terrorism. Our resolve to root
out the scourge of terrorism from our territory is clear
and visible. We have targeted, and continue to target,
all terrorist groups. We have made substantial progress
in cleansing our country of terrorists. However, these
objectives will not be fully accomplished until the
sanctuaries and safe havens of those terrorists who
have fled our operations to Afghanistan have been
eliminated. We cannot allow our people to be the target
of cross-border attacks launched from those safe havens.
When Pakistan initiated its counter-terrorism operation
in North Waziristan, we called for coordinated action
from Kabul to prevent the escape of terrorists into
Afghanistan and their resort to cross-border attacks
from Afghan territory. That cooperation is still absent.
I would like to reiterate our call for that collaboration.
We cannot achieve diplomacy through statements. We
have to resolve our issues through dialogue.
The successful holding of the fifth ministerial
conference of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, in
Islamabad on 9 December, was another manifestation
of our commitment to stability and peace in
Afghanistan. The conference provided an opportunity
for the ministers of the region and beyond to agree on
a broad-based Islamabad declaration. We believe that,
if implemented with sincerity, it will pave the way for
a peaceful neighbourhood, which is a foreign policy
objective of Pakistan. The conference was inaugurated
jointly by the President of Afghanistan, Ashraf Ghani,
and the Prime Minister, Nawaz Sharif. The two leaders
also had a constructive bilateral meeting thereafter,
their second in 10 days. The first was in Paris on
the sidelines of the Climate Change Conference. A
number of Afghan-focused bilateral, trilateral, and
quadrilateral meetings were also held in Islamabad.
While recognizing Pakistan’s role and commitment to
facilitate peace talks, those meetings helped to reach
consensus on several areas.
First, peace in Afghanistan is vital for the region
and beyond. The focus of the international efforts
should therefore be on regional and international efforts
to achieve peace and stability in the country. Secondly,
closer collaboration and coordination between Pakistan
and Afghanistan are essential to promote peace in
Afghanistan and to effectively combat terrorism.
Thirdly, reconciliation through a politically negotiated
15-44424

21/12/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7591

settlement is the only viable option for promoting longterm peace in Afghanistan. The Islamabad declaration
also commits to the return of Afghan refugees to their
homes with dignity and honour, and the international
community’s support for their smooth resettlement.
Pakistan is considering the extension of the tripartite
agreement at this stage. That, however, would be with
a clear road map to ensure the return of refugees with
dignity.

one in Kunduz — the fifth largest city in Afghanistan.
Improving the security situation is the most important
prerequisite for the development of Afghanistan. It
is crucial that an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned peace
process be advanced. In that context, Japan welcomes
the positive outcome of the meeting held in Islamabad
in early December. I would like to call upon all
stakeholders to move the ultimate goal of peace and
reconciliation forward.

Regional connectivity will be key to the economic
development of Afghanistan and the region. The groundbreaking ceremony for the Turkmenistan-AfghanistanPakistan-India pipeline earlier this month and the work
on the CASA-1000 and other similar projects augur
well for that endeavour. The pipeline project alone,
for instance, would create tens of thousands of jobs in
Afghanistan. We agree with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan that these
are the kinds of objectives and activities on which the
region should focus its energy.

When I made a statement on Afghanistan at the
Security Council in September, I emphasized the
notion of self-reliance. My key word today is again selfreliance. As the former Special Representative of the
Government of Japan for Afghanistan and Pakistan, I
believe that Afghanistan has great potential to realize
self-reliance. Allow me to elaborate by mentioning
three areas.

For decades, the peoples of Afghanistan and
Pakistan have confronted the common threat of
terrorism. Pakistan has made notable gains in its
counter-terrorism campaign through its military
operations and the comprehensive national action
plan. We sincerely hope that in working together, the
two countries will, fulfilling the expectations of their
peoples, cooperate closely to defeat all terrorists and
establish lasting peace in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Three years ago in Tokyo,
we all agreed to achieve Afghanistan’s self-reliance.
In the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, the
principle of mutual accountability between Afghanistan
and the international community was agreed. While
Japan appreciates the progress made in various areas
of priority, such as counter-corruption and electoral
reform, it is disappointing that key positions, such as
attorney general and defence minister, have not yet been
filled. In view of the spirit of mutual accountability,
I strongly hope that the Afghan Government will
undertake further efforts in that regard.
As described in the Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2015/942) on Afghanistan, Afghan security
forces continue to face challenges. Since the last open
debate in September (see S/PV.7526), we have seen a
series of high-profile security breaches, including the

First, the agriculture sector is key to generating
jobs and income, with a view to building greater social
stability and significantly reducing crime. Dr. Tetsu
Nakamura, a Japanese medical doctor, launched an
irrigation project in the Gamberi Desert in Nangarhar
province in 2003. By utilizing centuries-old traditional
Japanese irrigation technology, combined with
Afghanistan’s own traditional methods, his Green
Ground project succeeded in establishing a highly
effective irrigation system. With an investment of
approximately $24 million to date, the desert has been
transformed into fertile land in the span of 10 years,
The Government of Japan has been cooperating with
the Afghan Government and other organizations to
introduce the same irrigation system in other areas of
Afghanistan. Two days ago, on 19 December, Japan
announced an agriculture and irrigation project worth
approximately $13.5 million, covering such northern
provinces as Kunduz, Baghlan and Takhar. That is
one vivid example of Japan’s commitment to exploring
Afghanistan’s potential in agriculture with a view to
achieving self-reliance.
Secondly, enhanced regional cooperation, with
improved regional connectivity, will provide a stronger
foundation for economic growth and self-reliance.
Afghanistan is rich in agricultural and mineral resources,
but they are not fully accessed or utilized owing to
many obstacles. The underdeveloped transportation
infrastructure, both within and outside Afghanistan, is
one such obstacle. This year, the Government of Japan
and the Asian Development Bank jointly promoted
preliminary studies on improving interconnectivity

15-4442429/37

S/PV.7591

The situation in Afghanistan

in the region. One such study focuses the feasibility
of a railway connecting western Afghanistan to
Turkmenistan, which will hopefully open the door to
new economic opportunities. Another obstacle is the
lack of appropriate border controls. When effectively
put in place, border controls greatly enhance regional
economic activity. They also help to address the illicit
drug trafficking problem and its linkage with terrorist
financing. In that regard, Japan has been steadily
supporting counter-narcotics measures in the region
for the past 10 years, in cooperation with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Afghanistan and
its neighbouring countries.
Thirdly, human resources can lay the foundation for
Afghanistan’s economic development and self-reliance,
and can enhance the capacity of future Government
operations. To give just one example, more than 400
young Afghan Government officials have received
postgraduate education in Japan under the Japan
International Cooperation Agency’s programme for the
promotion and enhancement of the Afghan capacity for
effective development.
As a member of the Security Council starting in
January, we are determined to continue our assistance
to Afghanistan so that the Afghan Government can
achieve peace, stability and self-reliance. As the
Afghan Government implements its commitments on
the basis of mutual accountability and makes a crucial
transition towards self-reliance, Japan stands ready to
offer its support in cooperation with the international
community.
Finally, I wish to extend my appreciation to Special
Representative Haysom and his team in Kabul for their
tireless efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Mr. Thöresson (Sweden): Sweden aligns itself
with the statement soon to be made on behalf of the
European Union. I would, however, like to make a few
additional remarks in my national capacity.
First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Haysom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for both his comprehensive briefing on the current
situation in Afghanistan and for his tireless efforts.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Saikal for his
valuable remarks.

30/37

21/12/2015

It was often said that 2015 would be a critical year
for Afghanistan — a year for the implementation of
reforms in order to contribute to peace, stability and
a brighter future for the Afghan people. As the year
draws to a close, we should take this opportunity to
reflect on the progress that has been made and on the
challenges for the years ahead.
The Afghan Government has taken important steps
in pursuing the reform agenda of the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework. Such
reforms are necessary in order to achieve the long-term
objectives of a self-reliant and prosperous Afghanistan,
where women and men, girls and boys, can fully enjoy
their human rights. To achieve that, Afghanistan will
need continued international support, and to that end,
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
will play an important role. I would like to highlight
three issues.
First, 2015 has seen an alarming increase in
violence throughout Afghanistan, resulting in a
significant number of civilian casualties. The attack on
Kunduz and the tragic events that followed, including
the bombing of the Médecins Sans Frontières hospital
and the recent attacks on Kandahar airport and on the
Spanish Embassy compound in Kabul, are discouraging
examples. The deteriorating security situation has
a devastating impact on the civilian population, not
least on women and children. Attacks on the civilian
population are of grave concern. International
humanitarian law must be respected at all times and
by all parties, and we welcome investigations that
contribute to that end.
Secondly, a peace process remains the only viable
option for a prosperous and stable Afghanistan. We
would like to commend the Afghan Government for
reaching out to all parties in the region. The Heart
of Asia Process is crucial in strengthening regional
cooperation, connectivity and confidence-building,
with the aim of a prosperous Afghanistan and increased
regional security. We welcome the latest Islamabad
declaration, in particular its wording on regional
security cooperation. We would also like to express
our appreciation to Pakistan for hosting the ministerial
meeting, and we welcome the constructive dialogue
with Afghanistan during President Ashraf Ghani’s visit
to Islamabad. We hope that the agreement to restart
peace talks will yield positive results soon and that
women will be an integral part of the process.

15-44424

21/12/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

Thirdly, the increasing number of refugees and
migrants leaving Afghanistan — and, not least, the
regrettable outflow of young people, who are much
needed to rebuild the country — is a matter of serious
common concern. It is important to restore hope for a
better future for the Afghan people. Peace, stability and
improved living conditions will contribute to that aim.
The Afghan jobs-for-peace initiative has the potential
to contribute to that in a short- and medium-term
perspective.
During President Ghani’s recent visit to Stockholm,
Sweden confirmed its support to Afghanistan through
the signing of a bilateral agreement on development
cooperation. Our support to Afghanistan remains
substantial and long-term, with the aim of contributing
approximately $1.2 billion during the transformation
decade. Those efforts will specifically target increasing
respect for the human rights of women, as well as the
representation of women in every area of society and
their access to resources. That is a prerequisite for
sustainable development and stability in Afghanistan.
Sweden will continue its contribution to developing
the Afghan security and defence forces through its
participation in the Resolute Support Mission during
2016.
As this critical year draws to an end, several
challenges remain, with important milestones ahead,
such as the Warsaw summit and the Brussels ministerial
conference. The Afghan National Unity Government,
although faced with many difficulties, has remained
united. That is a reason for hope. It is important that
the United Nations, the international community and
regional partners continue to stand by the Afghan
people and the National Unity Government in their
struggle for peace, stability and a vision for a brighter
future.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union and its member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and
Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
First of all, allow me to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2015/942) on

S/PV.7591

Afghanistan, issued on 10 December. We are also very
grateful to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Haysom for his briefing and commend him and
all the staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan for their commitment and very hard work
to bring Afghanistan onto the path to progress.
Afghanistan has made considerable progress in
the political, security, economic and development
areas over the past decade. The recently adopted
General Assembly resolution highlights many of those
advances, for which the Government of Afghanistan
and the Afghan people deserve much credit. But the
gains made are fragile and major challenges remain.
In our statement at the Security Council debate
on Afghanistan in September (see S/PV.7526), we
highlighted the role of institutions in Afghanistan and
of the new Self-reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework, which provides important benchmarks and
timelines for deliverables in key priority areas. That
will allow for stepping up the pace of reforms and
ensuring more effective implementation and lead to
greater aid effectiveness.
As the Secretary-General’s report underlines,
continuous insecurity threatens the progress made in
stabilizing the country and remains a real concern. The
past months have seen a new spike in the exodus of
refugees and migrants from Afghanistan. It is all the
more urgent that the Government of Afghanistan, with
the support of the international community and all
regional stakeholders, provide for a secure and stable
environment. In that regard, we welcome the continued
regional presence of NATO’s train-advice-assist
Resolute Support Mission. In that connection, I would
like to express our deep condolences to our NATO and
United States colleagues for the suicide attack that
cost three NATO soldiers their lives earlier to day in
Bagram.
It is crucial that the Afghan people can regain
confidence in the future. Implementing reforms to
create economic opportunities will be as important
as improving the State’s capacity to deliver basic
services, to maintain human rights standards and to
agree on credible and timely reforms of the electoral
system. We underline the importance of an Afghanled and Afghan-owned political process of peace and
national reconciliation aimed at achieving a sustainable
resolution of the conflict and at building trust and
stability among all segments of Afghan society.

15-4442431/37

S/PV.7591

The situation in Afghanistan

Insecurity and instability are also fuelled by
the illicit production and trafficking of narcotics,
which remain an important concern for the European
Union and have severe consequences on Afghanistan
itself: high consumption rates within the population,
the growth of the illicit economy, the corruption
of institutions and the financing of international
terrorism. The EU welcomes the recent adoption of
Afghanistan’s national drug action plan and encourages
its swift and effective implementation. We encourage
the Government of Afghanistan to continue to pursue a
balanced and integrated approach, with the full support
of the international community and in cooperation with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
other relevant regional frameworks, such as the Paris
Pact initiative.
The European Union remains committed to
Afghanistan and, as we have already announced, we
are honoured to co-host the next ministerial conference
in Brussels from 4 to 5 October 2016. Afghanistan
will need the ongoing commitment of the international
community to continue on the path to sustainability.
The ministerial conference will set out the framework
for the Government of Afghanistan and donors until
2020, thereby contributing to a stable and reliable
environment for Afghanistan to move progressively
towards self-reliance and acting as important catalyst
for further mobilizing much-needed political and
financial support from the wider region, as well as
inside Afghanistan, with the help of the international
partners. That exceptional level of international
support will need to be matched by an equally strong
commitment to reform and change by the Government
of Afghanistan. The consequences of disengagement,
as witnessed in other regions, are stark reminders of the
costs we otherwise face.
Respect for human rights, and in particular the
situation of women and girls, has advanced considerably
in the past decade. That deserves praise. But much
remains to be done, which demands continued efforts.
The EU welcomes the launching of Afghanistan’s
national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, for the period 20152022. The EU fully supports the National Unity
Government in that endeavour and has put in place a
special support programme for its implementation. We
must protect the gains made by Afghan women since the
fall of the Taliban regime, as their active involvement
in rebuilding the State remains crucial. With a view

32/37

21/12/2015

towards enhanced women’s empowerment and full and
equal participation in all sectors of society, it is crucial
that women be actively involved in negotiations on the
future of their country.
It is also significant that the recent General Assembly
resolution recognizes the risks faced by human rights
defenders in Afghanistan. Those individuals, groups
and civil society organizations play a central role in
protecting and promoting the rights of others, often at
great personal risk. The resolution rightly condemns
violence against them.
The economic outlook for Afghanistan remains
mixed, after impressive progress over the past decade.
The sources for aggregate demand will be scarcer in
the future, and public investment and services will
remain an important driver of growth — and so will
the related international transfers. It is all the more
critical to further improve the business and investment
climate and to foster the development of intraregional
trade and infrastructure, which will provide benefits
for all countries in the region. We support all efforts
at maintaining and improving such regional relations.
There is no alternative to increased regional
cooperation in order to break out of the vicious circles
of fragility, poverty, violence and extremism — from
trade and energy cooperation, to protecting minorities,
fulfilling the protection of human rights as well as
combating jointly the militant groups that murder
indiscriminately with no respect for international
borders. All stakeholders in the region will need to
invest real political and financial capital to that end.
We applaud President Ghani’s recent trip to Islamabad
on 9 December as an important step towards a closer
bilateral relationship between Afghanistan and
Pakistan. With regard to cooperation within the broader
region, the ministerial meeting of the Heart of Asia
Process in Islamabad on 9 December sent important
and encouraging signs of an improving dynamic in the
region, which deserve all our support and help in the
coming months. The European Union will be a reliable
partner on that path.
In conclusion, it is important that the international
community remain strongly committed to supporting
Afghanistan towards long-term progress in the country.
From our side, we will continue to support the transition
process to promote the emergence of a fully self-reliant,
peaceful, democratic and prosperous society for the
benefit of all Afghans.

15-44424

21/12/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to express my appreciations to you, Madam
President, for holding this debate on the situation in
Afghanistan. I would also like to welcome and thank
the Ambassador of Afghanistan for his statement, as
well as Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative
of the Secretary- General for Afghanistan and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his briefing.
As the latest report (S/2015/942) of the SecretaryGeneral suggests, Afghanistan continues to face
major security, economic and political challenges.
Those challenges, as well as such cross-cutting issues
as counter-narcotics, displacement and refugees are
interconnected in nature. The continued support of the
international community is needed to help the National
Unity Government in addressing those challenges, in
the framework of the national ownership and leadership
of the Government of Afghanistan.
The 19 per cent increase in the number of securityrelated incidents a compared with the same period
in 2014, and the deterioration of security, especially
in northern and western Afghanistan, is a matter of
concern. The capture of Kunduz and 16 other district
centeres during the reporting period is another alarming
sign that the Taliban and other violent extremist groups
are on the rise and threaten fghanistan and the region.
The report of the Secretary General once again refers to
the emergence of Daesh and its affiliate in Afghanistan,
along with a spectrum of other terrorist and extremist
groups. That is another reason for international and
regional Powers to support and assist the National
Unity Government on all fronts, especially in its fight
against terrorism.
Iran condemns all violent attacks committed on
the part of the Taliban and all other terrorist groups, as
well as any cooperation with them, because we believe
that such cooperation encourages them in their odious
behaviour and is counterproductive to establishing
peace in Afghanistan.
Strengthening regional cooperation is the path
to consolidating peace and economic development in
Afghanistan. We see the expansion of our political
and economic ties with neighbouring Afghanistan as
a priority. We see great potential results to explored in

S/PV.7591

cooperation with Afghanistan, particularly on security
matters, counter-narcotics efforts, developing projects
and economic cooperation in the fields of infrastructure
and agriculture, as well as in finding a durable solution
for Afghan refugees.
During the reporting period, the first expert meeting
on the Islamic Republic of Iran-India-Afghanistan
Agreement on Transit and International Transportation
Cooperation was held in Tehran in order to finalize
the Chahbahar port facilities agreement between the
three countries. Once completed, that port will provide
Afghanistan, a land-locked country, with access to
international waters and will be very beneficial for
Afghanistan’s development. The completion of the
two ongoing railroad projects from Iran to the Afghan
cities of Harat and Farah will also boost economic
activity between the two countries and in the region.
The official visits of Afghanistan’s Minister of Urban
Development and Minister of Mines and Petroleum to
Iran in October also concentrated on investment and
infrastructure issues.
With regard to counter-narcotics efforts, the
Secretary-General’s latest report suggests a 19 per cent
decrease in opium poppy cultivation compared to 2014,
but that is mainly attributed to a drop in the opium yield
per hectare, rather than to the success in national and
international efforts. We are particularly concerned
about opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan. That
phenomenon is due mainly to prevailing insecurity
and poverty. It is a real threat to the region and beyond
and should be addressed by the entire international
community and in a very serious and comprehensive
manner, which unfortunately has not been the case. We
welcome the regional initiatives taken by the countries
of the region, including China, Pakistan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Iran to that end.
The international community should especially
appreciate and support the triangular initiative on
cooperation in countering narcotics among Afghanistan,
Iran and Pakistan. That is a useful initiative that will
benefit Afghanistan, as well as transit and destination
countries, and must be supported by the international
community. The strong support and commitment
of international donors, the Afghan authorities and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime are
essential to deter the menace of drug cultivation and
drug trafficking. Narcotics are not only a social and
health challenge, but also, and more importantly, a

15-4442433/37

S/PV.7591

The situation in Afghanistan

major source of income for terrorist an extremist group,
which is now a top priority for the Council and the
international community.
We support the work of Tripartite Commission
in planning the voluntary, safe, dignified and gradual
repatriation of Afghan refugees, while continuing
to support the remaining Afghan refugees through
sharing our own community services, such as health
care and education. At the same time, we consider
the decrease in voluntary repatriation as an important
reason to improve living conditions inside Afghanistan
in order to reverse that trend. We support UNAMA
and the United Nations agencies in their efforts to
provide development and reconstruction assistance to
Afghanistan through robust regional engagement on
issues such as border security, immigration, the return
of refugees and drug control measures.
The role of UNAMA should be further streamlined,
taking into account the priorities of the Government as
the main partner, as well as those of the international
donor communities, in order to be able to effectively
implement its mandate. We firmly believe that
Afghanistan should become the focus of regional and
international cooperation, rather than a subject for
competition. That is the only approach that will help
strengthen peace, security and development in the
region.
In conclusion, Iran once again expresses its
full support for the promotion of security, stability
and comprehensive and sustainable development
in Afghanistan and the efforts of the National Unity
Government of Afghanistan in that regard.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Netherlands.
Mrs. Pellegrom (Netherlands): The Kingdom of
the Netherlands aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
detailed and thorough report (S/2015/942) and Special
Representative Haysom for his briefing and for all the
hard work carried out by United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in Afghanistan,
and, of course, I would like to thank Ambassador Saikal
for his informative statement.
The UNAMA report describes an increase in the
overall number of security incidents, which have also
intensified in nature. That is a worrisome trend. Recent

34/37

21/12/2015

attacks in Kunduz, Kandahar, Kabul and, just today, in
Helmand underline the conclusions of the report that
Afghanistan faces ongoing and increasingly pressing
security challenges. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
stands by the Afghan Government and the Afghan
people and offers its condolences for the lives lost
in recent attacks, including those of civilians as well
as those fighting for the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces. The continued support of the
international community, including the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, remains essential.
The developments , such as those seen in Kunduz,
have shown the need to ensure women’s protection
and their meaningful participation. For that reason,
the Netherlands welcomes the implementation of the
Afghan National Action Plan for Security Council
Resolution 1325 (2000) and the establishment of
prosecution units dealing with violence carried out
against women in all provinces.
Lasting peace and stability cannot be established
without a regional peace and reconciliation process.
That process should be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned,
and needs the buy-in of countries of the region whose
security is closely interlinked with Afghanistan. I
would like to stress that the sincere commitment of the
countries of the region is crucial to achieving a peaceful
and stable Afghanistan. In that context, we welcome the
positive steps that were taken during the recent Heart
of Asia Conference held in Islamabad. Apart from the
security issues, Afghanistan also faces serious economic
challenges. Recent reforms, such as the tax reform, are
encouraging. Both the National Unity Government
of Afghanistan and the international development
partners must remain focused on building confidence
in the Afghan economy, including by strengthening the
rule of law. The Netherlands will continue to support
that effort through contributions to reconstruction
programmes, such as the Afghanistan Reconstruction
Trust Fund, but also through the political and economic
empowerment of Afghan women.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands has been a
long-time partner of Afghanistan, having contributed
significantly in the areas of security, justice and
development. We are committed to supporting
Afghanistan throughout the transformation decade.
Therefore, the Netherlands is assessing its post-2016
contributions, which will be made in the context of
increased Afghan ownership and leadership. The
Netherlands recently pledged to continue to support

15-44424

21/12/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

the NATO Resolute Support Mission to train, advise
and support Afghan security forces and institutions
in northern Afghanistan. We also contribute staff to
UNAMA and to the European Union Police Training
Mission.
The NATO Summit in Warsaw in July 2016 and the
Brussels summit in October 2016 will mark significant
moments to show our commitment to Afghanistan
beyond 2016, be it military, political or through
development assistance. It is important that both the
international community and the Afghan Government
demonstrate their commitment to achieving progress in
these fields.
The continued engagement of the international
community will remain crucial to safeguarding the
progress that has been made. In the years to come
the Kingdom of the Netherlands will stand by the
Afghan people. We are committed to our partnership
with Afghanistan, based on a mature and productive
relationship and broad cooperation, focusing on peace,
justice and development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland.
Mr. Sauer (Finland): I wish to align myself with the
statement made earlier by the observer of the European
Union.
At the outset, let me thank the Special Representative
Nick Haysom for his briefing, and the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive and realistic analysis of
the situation in Afghanistan.
The situation in Afghanistan remains very fragile.
While security is key to stability, it is only one of
many challenges that need urgently to be addressed.
Economic opportunity and social development are
equally important elements of sustainable stability.
Job creation is of particular importance. Encouraging
the participation of women in creating conditions for
security and development should be one of the primary
measures in building a stable and just society in
Afghanistan.
Civilians, women and children in particular, always
pay the highest price in conflicts. We should therefore
also give women a voice in designing the peace. We
see women’s equal and active participation in peace
processes as crucial, and we sould like to commend
the Government of Afghanistan for its launch of the
National Action Plan for Security Council Resolution

S/PV.7591

1325 (2000) on women and peace and security last
June. We look forward to the Plan’s full and swift
implementation.
Finland welcomes continued Afghan efforts in the
fields of improving governance, anti-corruption and
the rule of law. We encourage the Afghan Government
to live up to the commitments in the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework, presented
recently by President Ashraf Ghani.
Finland is supporting through participation in
NATO- and European Union-led crisis management
by providing significant amounts of humanitarian
assistance and development aid, as well as cooperation
in trade and diplomacy. We recognize that long-term and
comprehensive international engagement is essential. In
order to strengthen stability and economic development
in Afghanistan and its neighbouring countries, we wish
also to express our support for regional cooperation via
the Istanbul Process.
It remains difficult to make a precise estimate of
the mid-term outlook for the development of Afghan
society. The most likely path includes gradual progress
with occasional setbacks. What ultimately counts is the
unity and commitment of the Afghan leadership and
its ability to pursue the most urgent reform measures.
Finland’s role in that process is to remain a steadfast
partner of those who advocate such change.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
welcomes the latest report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(S/2015/942), which provides a good overview of
developments in the country. We wish to thank the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Nicholas Hayom for their ongoing work.
Afghanistan is now one year into its transformation
decade, a crucial period for strengthening Afghan
security and moving beyond aid dependence through
the implementation of the National Unity Government’s
self-reliance reform agenda. Canada remains committed
to working with the Afghan Government to implement its
reform agenda and is making significant commitments
through 2017. These include $227 million in bilateral
development assistance to support programming
in education, health, women’s and girls’ rights and

15-4442435/37

S/PV.7591

The situation in Afghanistan

empowerment, humanitarian assistance and capacitybuilding in disaster management.
Social and economic outcomes are improved when
all citizens are able to participate in and contribute
to the societies in which they live and to have a voice
in the decisions that affect their lives. Afghanistan’s
full potential cannot be fully realized without the
participation of all of its people. We therefore call on
the Government of Afghanistan to fully implement
the law on the elimination of violence against women
and to make every effort to ensure the participation of
women in all facets of Afghan life. Canada stresses that
Afghan laws must offer strong protections for women
and girls, as guaranteed by the Constitution and in
line with Afghanistan’s international commitments to
protecting human rights, and in particular to protecting
women and girls from sexual and domestic violence
and child, early and forced marriage.
(spoke in English)
Improved security and stability remain central to
the achievement of Afghanistan’s long-term economic
and development goals. Canada participates in broader
NATO-led security efforts by providing $330 million
over three years to help sustain the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces. Canada agrees with the
conclusion of UNAMA’s assessment that the Afghan
security forces have stood strong in the face of
considerable challenges, but the brief fall of Kunduz
and the Taliban expansion in other areas of Afghanistan
cannot be overlooked. These are worrying signs of a
broader deterioration in the security situation — one
made more complex by the entrenchment of affiliates
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Civilians
continue to bear the brunt of the violence, with incidents
up 19 per cent this year, including the targeting of
United Nations staff and humanitarian workers.
Peace and reconciliation remain a necessary
foundation for long-term security, stability and
prosperity. Canada supports an Afghan-led peace
process and welcomed the initiative in Murree this
summer as a first step towards peace negotiations.
We were heartened by the Afghanistan-Pakistan talks
in Paris, aimed at reinvigorating this process, as well
as recent discussions at the Heart of Asia meeting in
Islamabad. While peace will not come easily, we are
encouraged by these steps and urge further efforts to
revive the peace talks.

36/37

21/12/2015

Terrorism knows no borders. What threatens one
state threatens its neighbours, and what menaces its
neighbours menaces us all. With this interconnectedness
in mind, it is imperative that we work together to
confront Afghanistan’s security challenges and to
ensure that militant groups are not able to exploit areas
of instability to gain footholds from which to propagate
their violence on a regional or global scale.
Canada recognizes that Afghanistan’s long-term
economic development requires not only improved
security and stability, but also large-scale private sector
engagement, a skilled labour force, infrastructure
development, enhanced social service delivery and
good governance. Canada continues to stand with the
Afghan people as they strive for a more secure and
more prosperous future for their country. We call on
Afghanistan’s leaders to redouble their efforts to work
collaboratively for and with all Afghans to improve
security, bolster democracy and the rule of law, increase
transparency and uphold and protect human rights for
all Afghans.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): Allow me to thank the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador
Mahmoud Saikal, for his statement, and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, for his briefing.
We welcome the comprehensive report (S/2015/942)
of the Secretary-General. Overall, we share the contents
of the report, as well as the Secretary-General’s
observations.
The achievements of the past 14 years in
Afghanistan, including in the areas of security,
democracy, governance, economic development and
human rights, deserve to be applauded. Nevertheless,
those achievements are not at a point of no return;
many challenges remain. In order to maintain the
achievements and to be able to build upon them, the
international community’s continuing support to
Afghanistan during the transformation decade is of the
utmost importance.
We appreciate the role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
coordinating the efforts of the international community
in Afghanistan. Turkey will continue to support the
work carried out by UNAMA. Turkey will also continue

15-44424

21/12/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

its bilateral and multilateral efforts with a view to
assisting Afghanistan in overcoming the challenges it
faces. We attach importance to the efforts exerted by
the Afghan National Unity Government. There may
be some areas where the desirable level of success
has not been achieved, and which might therefore be
subject of criticism by the legitimate opposition. We
also believe that such criticism should be expressed
with a constructive spirit with a view to strengthening
the confidence of the Afghan people, especially in the
face of the National Unity Government’s fight against
terrorism and efforts towards a peace process.
Maintaining security and stability in Afghanistan
should remain a key priority. The stability of
Afghanistan, and subsequently that of the region,
will depend upon improved security. The SecretaryGeneral’s report points out to a considerable increase
of 26 per cent in civilian casualties as compared to the
same period in 2014. Nevertheless, that figure should not
be perceived as an indicator to the overall performance
of the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF). While
in 2014 the ANSF had the support of the International
Security Assistance Force, 2015 has been the first year
for them to operate under full security responsibility.
The ANSF gained considerable experience in the past
fighting season. We are confident that that experience
will lead to an enhanced performance in 2016.
The Taliban’s temporary seizure of Kunduz
constituted a major setback. Nevertheless, on the
other side of the coin, the retaking of Kunduz could
be seen as a success of the ANSF. We believe that, as
the shortcomings of the security forces in terms of
equipment, training and operational capabilities are
addressed, the ANSF’s victories against the Taliban and
other armed groups will increase. The success stories
of the Afghan National Security Forces would further
increase the confidence and hopes of the Afghan people.
Many of the problems faced by the countries of
the region — such as terrorism, organized crime and

S/PV.7591

the illegal narcotics trade — are of trans-boundary
nature. Close cooperation among the countries of the
region is crucial in tackling those challenges. In thiat
regard, the Istanbul Process continues to serve as an
effective cooperation model that is capable of bringing
about practical solutions to the current challenges in the
Heart of Asia region.
We welcome the recent initiatives to overcome the
stagnation in the relationship between Afghanistan and
Pakistan. The talks that took place between President
Ghani and Prime Minister Sharif on 30 November and
9 December in Paris and Islamabad, respectively, were
important. President Ghani’s statements following
those meetings — that the two countries had agreed
to eliminate the terrorist groups who insisted on
continuing violence and that the following round of talks
within the peace process would likely start within a few
weeks — were encouraging. The successful outcome of
the peace and reconciliation process is a sine qua non
for lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan and the
region.
Turkey will continue its support to the Afghan
Government in its endeavours towards bringing peace,
stability and prosperity to Afghanistan, as long as our
help is needed. Turkey’s assistance to the Afghan people
is the most comprehensive development aid programme
directed to a single country throughout its history.
Within this aid programme, Turkey has completed
more than 800 projects since 2004. The programme
will continue in the years ahead with a commitment
of $150 million for the period 2015-2017. As a display
of our commitment to the security of Afghanistan,
Turkey is one of the four framework nations of the
Resolute Support Mission. Turkey will continue its
capacity-building programmes, both within the NATO
framework and on a bilateral basis with regard to the
Afghan National Army and police.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

15-4442437/37
