Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee
qualifications in the functional fields studied by the
Committee,
Considering that this is a practice which might be
extended with advantage to the work of the Committee,
in that the pooling and exchange of knowledge and
experience thus achieved will enable it more efficaciously
to assess the economic, social and educational problems
of Non-Self-Governing Territories in the light of the
solutions being found to those problems elsewhere in
the world,
1. Commends the action of those Members which
have included specialist advisers in their delegations
to the Committee;
2. Expresses the hope that those Members which
have not hitherto found it possible to do so, will find
it appropriate to associate with their delegations persons
specially qualified in the functional fields within the
Committee's purview.
459th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.

746 (VID). Employment of international staff
from Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
Considering that the paragraph 3 of Article 101 of the
Charter of the United Nations, regarding the employment of the staff of the United Nations, states that, in
addition to the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity in employment of Secretariat staff, due regard should be paid to
the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible,
Having regard to the objectives set forth in Chapters XI and XII of the Charter in respect of the advancement of the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
and Trust Territories,
Considering that the services of individuals from
Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories in the Secretariat of the United Nations will contribute to a
wider geographical coverage in the recruitment of staff,
Considering the statement 4 made by the SecretaryGeneral that he has already taken note of the wishe~
expressed in the Fourth Committee on this matter,
l. Recommends that the Secretary-General consider
the desirability of continuing and increasing the recruitment of suitably qualified inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories for the Secretariat of the
United Nations;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to draw the attention of the specialized agencies to the present resolution with a view to a similar policy being followed as far
as possible in the secretariats of those agencies.
459th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.
7 4 7 (VIII). Cessation of the transmission of in•
formation under Article 73 e of the Charter
in respect of the Netherlands Antilles and
Surinam
The General Assembly,
Recalling that in its resolution 650 (VII) of 20 December 1952 it invited the Committee set up to study

the factors which should be taken into account in deciding whether a Territory is or is not a Territory
whose people have not yet attained a full measure
of self-government to examine carefully the documents
submitted by the Netherlands Government relating to
the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam in the light of
resolution 648 (VII) of 10 December 1952,
Having received and considered the report 6 of the
Ad Hoe Committee on Factors (Non-Self-Governing
Territories) established by resolution 648 (VII),
Having taken note of the statement 6 of the representative of the Netherlands that the negotiations between representatives of the Nether lands, the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam, which were adjourned in
the year 1952, will shortly be resumed,
1. Notes urith satisfaction the progress made by
the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam towards selfgovernment ;
2. Considers that the new status of the Netherlands
Antilles and Surinam can only be rightly appraised after
the said negotiations have led to a final result and this
has been embodied in constitutional provisions;
3. Expresses to the Netherlands Government its
confidence that, as a result of the negotiations, a new
status will be attained by the Netherlands Antilles and
Surinam representing a full measure of self-government
in fulfilment of the objectives set forth in Chapter
XI of the Charter;
4. Invites the Government of the Netherlands to
communicate to the Secretary-General the result of these
negotiations as well as the provisions mentioned in
paragraph 2 above;
5. Invites the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories to examine these communications in connexion with the information already transmitted and to report thereon to the General Assembly ;
6. Requests the Government of the Netherlands
to transmit regularly to the Secretary-General the information specified in Article 73 e of the Charter in
regard to the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam until
such time as the General Assembly takes a decision
that the transmission of information in regard to these
Territories should be discontinued.
459th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.

748 (VIII). Cessation of the transmission of in•
formation under Article 73 e of the Charter
in respect of Puerto Rico
The General Assembly,
Considering that, in resolution 222 (III) of 3 No~ember 1948, the General Assembly, while welcommg any development of self-government in Non-SelfGoverning Territories, considers it essential that the
United Nations be informed of any change in the constitutional status of any such Territory as a result of
which the government responsible for the transmis~ion. under Article 73 e of the Charter, of information
!n respect_ of that T~rritory thinks it unnecessary or
mappropnate to contmue such a practice,
Having received the communications 7 dated 19 January and 20 March 1953 informing the United Nations
'' See document A/2428 .
See Official Reco,:ds of the General Assembly, Eighth Sess10,1, Fourth Co111mittec, 343rd meeting, para. 70.
7
See document A/ AC.35/L.121.
•

4
•
See Official RecC!rds of the General Assembly, Eighth Session, Fourth Committee, 342nd meeting.

25

6
