UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3340
28 February 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
THREE HUNDRED AND FORTIETH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Monday, 28 February 1994, at 9 p.m.

President:
Members:

Mr. OLHAYE

(Djibouti)

Argentina
Brazil
China
Czech Republic
France
New Zealand
Nigeria
Oman
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America

Mr. ZAWELS
Mr. SARDENBERG
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. KOVANDA
Mr. LADSOUS
Mr. van BOHEMEN
Mr. AYEWAH
Mr. AL-KHUSSAIBY
Mr. MARKER
Mr. LOZINSKIY
Mr. BIZIMANA
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO
Sir David HANNAY
Mrs. ALBRIGHT

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.

94-85221 (E)

S/PV.3340
2
The meeting was called to order at 9 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION IN THE OCCUPIED ARAB TERRITORIES
LETTER DATED 25 FEBRUARY 1994 FROM THE PERMANENT
REPRESENTATIVE OF EGYPT TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE
PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL (S/1994/222)
LETTER DATED 25 FEBRUARY 1994 FROM THE PERMANENT
REPRESENTATIVE OF PAKISTAN TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO
THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL (S/1994/223)
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform the Council that I

have received letters from the representatives of Afghanistan,
Algeria, Egypt, Greece, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Qatar, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia,
Turkey and the United Arab Emirates, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda.

In conformity with the usual practice, I

propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

S/PV.3340
3
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Yaacobi (Israel) took
a place at the Council table; Mr. Farhadi (Afghanistan),
Mr. Lamamra (Algeria), Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Exarchos (Greece),
Mr. Nasier (Indonesia), Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran),
Mr. Bataineh (Jordan), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr. Makkawi
(Lebanon), Mr. Elhouderi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Razali
(Malaysia), Mr. Al-Ni’mah (Qatar), Mr. Yassin (Sudan), Mr. Awad
(Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia), Mr. Batu (Turkey)
and Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform the Council that I

have received a letter dated 26 February 1994 from the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued
as document S/1994/232 and reads as follows:
"I have the honour to request that, in accordance with its
previous practice, the Security Council invite
Dr. Nasser Al-Kidwa, Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, to participate in the current debate of the
Security Council with regard to the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory."
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to participate in the current
debate in accordance with the rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine)
took a place at the Council table.
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform the Council that I

have received a letter dated 26 February 1994 from the Permanent
Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations which reads as
follows:

S/PV.3340
4
(The President)
"In Pakistan’s capacity as Chairman of the Islamic
Conference of Foreign Ministers, I have the honour to request
you kindly to allow the Permanent Observer of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference to the United Nations in New York to
address the Security Council in the debate on "The situation
in the occupied Arab territories."
That letter will be published as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/1994/227.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to His Excellency
Mr. Ansay.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on the agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in response to

the requests contained in the letters dated 25 February 1994 from
the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council, document
S/1994/222, and the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council,
document S/1994/223.
I should like to draw the attention of members of the Council
to the following documents:

S/1994/214, containing the text of

identical letters dated 25 February 1994 from the Chargé d’affaires
ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the
Security Council; S/1994/218, letter dated 25 February 1994 from
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General; and S/1994/220, letter dated
25 February 1994 from the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise

S/PV.3340
5
(The President)
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to
the Secretary-General.
Members of the Council have received photocopies of a letter
dated 28 February 1994 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the text of a resolution adopted by the
League of Arab States on 27 February 1994.

This letter and its

enclosure will be issued as a document of the Security Council
under the symbol S/1994/233.
The first speaker is the Permanent Observer of Palestine, on
whom I now call.
Mr. AL-KIDWA (Palestine) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me at the outset, Mr. President, during these final hours of
February, to extend to you my warm congratulations on your
stewardship of the Security Council.

We are pleased to see the

representative of Djibouti, a fraternal Arab country, presiding
over our very important meeting.
Allow me also, Mr. President, to take this opportunity to
convey our congratulations to the new members of the Security
Council: Argentina, the Czech Republic, Nigeria, Oman and Rwanda.
We wish them every success in their work in the Council.
We are pleased that the Council has unanimously agreed to
allow the Permanent Observer of Palestine to participate in the
work of the Council, without the right to vote.

We appreciate the

positive change in the American position in this regard; we
attribute it to the new political climate now generally prevailing
in the Middle East region.
At the same time, we regret the Council’s delay in taking
decisive measures with respect to this very important question that
has been before it since Friday last.

While very much appreciating

S/PV.3340
6
(Mr. Al-Kidwa, Palestine)
your having called this formal meeting of the Council,
Mr. President, we stress the need for the Council to act quickly.
Last Friday, at dawn, local time, yet another abominable
massacre was perpetrated against our people in the occupied
Palestinian territory:

it was the most heinous massacre in our

history since Israel’s occupation of our territory began in 1967.
It is perhaps difficult to imagine anything worse, because this
crime was committed during the holy month of Ramadan, in the city
of Hebron, the site of the tomb of Abraham - in a holy place, in a
place of worship, in the Ibrahimi mosque, while worshippers were
saying the dawn prayer, bowing down before God.
Fire was opened on them indiscriminately, killing many
faithful.
wounded.

More than 50 martyrs fell, and more than 200 people were

S/PV.3340
7
(Mr. Al-Kidwa, Palestine)
This abominable massacre was committed by elements introduced
into Palestinian territory in flagrant violation of international
law, in particular the provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949 and a number of Security Council resolutions.

The cause of

this act is the policy pursued up to this very day by successive
Israeli Governments in connection with the establishment of
settlements.
The settlers have been heavily armed.

Israel and its

occupying forces have carried out all kinds of illegal practices,
not in keeping with law or logic.
understood in that context:

What has taken place must be

it is a result of the campaign of

illegitimate Israeli settlements and the climate this has created,
and not an isolated act, regardless of the numbers involved in the
commission of the crime.

In any event, we remain convinced - and

all the evidence points in this direction - that the massacre was
committed by several persons, including the main perpetrator, who,
unfortunately, had arrived in the occupied territories from the
United States of America.
What has made the situation more serious is that the Israeli
army, after the massacre had been committed, and faced with the
legitimate outrage of Palestinians, shot at them in the cruel
manner that we all witnessed on our television screens.

This

resulted in the death of 10 Palestinians and the wounding of some
hundred others, in the vicinity of the Mosque of Abraham and
throughout the occupied territories, including Jerusalem.

These

incidents are continuing, causing more victims among the
Palestinian people each and every day.
The situation is very dangerous and continues to deteriorate
daily.

It therefore requires urgent and decisive action on the

part of the international community, represented by the Security

S/PV.3340
8
(Mr. Al-Kidwa, Palestine)
Council, as well as on the part of Israel, the occupying Power.
International law, justice and the natural duty of the Security
Council require such action.

Urgent action is called for also in

order to save the peace process, which is currently under way.
We thank the international community for its condemnation of
this crime, this massacre.

On behalf of the Palestinian people, we

thank all those who have expressed condolences to and solidarity
with our people, in particular the Secretary-General,
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali.

We also acknowledge with heartfelt

sentiments the initiatives taken by several parties, in particular
by President Clinton, to ensure that the peace process continues
and yields results.

We believe that the measures I have referred

to are required in order to convince our suffering Palestinian
people that the parties are acting in good faith and that they
understand the Palestinians’ concerns, in order to convince them
that the peace process is credible.

In this context, we believe

that the Security Council should rapidly adopt a new resolution in
which it would strongly condemn this massacre perpetrated against
our people and would assume its responsibility for the protection
of the Palestinian people in the occupied territories, in
accordance with previous resolutions adopted by the Security
Council, in particular resolution 681 (1990).
I turn now to the measures we are calling on the Israeli party
to take.

First, we must reaffirm that Israel and the Government of

Israel are responsible for what has taken place, given the fact
that the Israeli army is usually present in considerable strength
in the area of the Mosque of Abraham and did nothing to prevent
what took place; indeed, it could be said that it even participated
in the act.

Israel’s responsibility in this matter results from

the official policy adopted regarding settlements in general.

What

S/PV.3340
9
(Mr. Al-Kidwa, Palestine)
we ask today of the Israeli Government is that it adopt a number of
measures reflecting a real change in its policy regarding
settlements.

The settlers must be disarmed, all the settlements

must be dismantled and the activities of the settlers in all the
occupied territories, including Jerusalem must finally cease; it is
not a question of merely limiting or reducing the number of
settlements.

We also ask that the settlers be immediately offered

the possibility of leaving the territories quickly, after receiving
compensation from the Government of Israel.
Furthermore, in the framework of the Declaration of Principles
signed in Washington on 13 September 1993, the pace of the
negotiations on the settlements must be speeded up, in accordance
with certain priorities, in order to defuse the explosive situation
which exists as a result of the existence of these illegal
settlements.

We therefore call for a new policy that will respond

to the dangerous situation and will take seriously into account the
question of the settlements and, hence, the question of peace in
general.
Unfortunately, this is not the first time that we find
ourselves here in the Security Council as a result of a massacre
committed against the Palestinian people, with all the suffering
this entails.

But we hope that this will be the last time.

depends on the international community.

It all

S/PV.3340
10

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the Permanent Observer of

Palestine for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt, who is also
the Chairman of the Arab Group for the month of February.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. ELARABY (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):

Allow

me to express our sincere appreciation, Sir, for your strenuous
efforts during this month.
The Security Council is meeting today to discuss a serious
development in the occupied Arab territories, a development
unprecedented since the Israeli occupation began.

Dozens of

innocent people fell victim to a criminal attack on Palestinians at
prayer in the Ibrahimi mosque during the holy month of Ramadan, a
month that is sacred for all Muslims the world over.
There has been international unanimity in condemning this
abominable crime and in calling for the imposition of the severest
penalties on its perpetrators.

Meeting in extraordinary session

yesterday, the Council of the League of Arab States adopted a
resolution.

As Chairman of the Arab Group this month, I would like

to quote some of the paragraphs of the resolution, which the Arab
Group has requested should be distributed, as document S/1994/233.
The Council of the League of Arab States decided:
"1. To condemn the Israeli crime against the defenceless
Palestinian citizens at prayer in the Ibrahimi Mosque ...;
"2. To place upon the Israeli occupation authorities the
responsibility for this crime and the crimes committed by
Israeli settlers by reason of the continuing practices and
measures adopted by those authorities; and to call upon them
to disarm the Israeli settlers immediately;

S/PV.3340
11
(Mr. Elaraby, Egypt)
"3. To ... call [upon] the United Nations to establish an
appropriate mechanism for the implementation of the fourth
Geneva Convention through the assignment of an international
force to provide protection to Arab citizens in the occupied
Palestinian and Arab territories, with a view to the
implementation of the provisions of Security Council
resolution 681 (1990); and to call upon the co-sponsors of the
Madrid Conference to play a major role in ensuring the
necessary protection for the Palestinian people in the
occupied territories;
"4. To call upon the Security Council to send an international
commission to investigate the grave incident and to take the
necessary measures to enable the commission to carry out its
mandate;
"5. [To call] upon the Security Council, in particular the two
co-sponsors of the Peace Conference, for the immediate
implementation of the Security Council resolutions ruling the
Israeli settlements in the occupied Arab territories
illegitimate and a serious obstacle to the achievement of a
comprehensive and just peace, in particular Security Council
resolution 465 (1980) concerning the dismantling of existing
settlements and a halt to planning for new settlements in the
occupied Arab territories, including Jerusalem;
"6. To call upon the co-sponsors of the Conference to make a
serious endeavour to ensure the success of efforts for peace
by halting Israeli procrastination, putting an end to the
occupation of Arab territories, and enabling the Palestinian
people to exercise its inalienable national rights, including
its right to self-determination and the establishment of its
independent State with Jerusalem as its capital".

S/PV.3340
12
(Mr. Elaraby, Egypt)
This massacre requires all parties willing to establish a
comprehensive, just and permanent peace in the Middle East to face
important issues - issues that should also be faced immediately by
the international community.

Otherwise, the possibilities for

establishing peace and stability in the region will be negatively
affected.
First, full attention should be given to providing protection
for the Palestinian people until it achieves its complete
independence through the peace process, and to reaffirming that the
Government of Israel, as the occupying authority, is fully
responsible for providing protection for Palestinians in the
occupied territories until the occupation is over, in accordance
with the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Times of War.

Regrettably,

instead of protecting them from a recurrence of similar attacks and
taking the steps necessary to disarm the settlers and guarantee
that they will not commit similar attacks against innocent
Palestinians, the Israeli security authorities have reacted in a
manner that has led to the death of dozens more Palestinians.

The

Israeli authorities have failed so far to adequately fulfil their
responsibilities.
International protection has therefore become urgently
necessary.

The international community should consider playing a

positive role through the United Nations.

This should include

implementing the provisions of Security Council resolution 681
(1990) regarding the application of the Fourth Geneva Convention.
In this regard I would like to express our sincere thanks and
appreciation to the Secretary-General for all his efforts and
constructive initiatives in support of the contents of that

S/PV.3340
13
(Mr. Elaraby, Egypt)
resolution and other resolutions adopted by the United Nations
regarding this matter.

S/PV.3340
14
(Mr. Elaraby, Egypt)
Secondly, that shameful massacre proves anew what Egypt has
repeatedly stated:

that it is not only the Israeli side in the

peace negotiations that has security reequirements.

Similar

attention should be paid to the security requirements of the
Palestinian people, particularly during the coming period.

There

is no doubt that the massacre that took place a few days ago is a
loud warning that should spur the parties to cooperate in order to
guarantee that such a crime will not be repeated.
Thirdly, no party interested in the establishment of peace in
the Middle East should allow a biased, extremist minority to impose
its will on the overwhelming majority that aspires to put an end to
the aggression and to the shedding of innocent blood.

The parties

to the peace negotiations, particularly in Israel, should not
listen to those calling for expansion or to the advocates of hatred
and religious lunacy.

We are confident that the speedy achievement

of an Israeli-Palestinian agreement on the implementation of the
Declaration of Principles signed by Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) could be a first step, to be followed
by other courageous steps by both parties, thus proving their
ability to coexist peacefully.
Fourthly, the international community should convey to the
children of the Palestinian people a clear message of solidarity,
reaffirming that their future within the peace process will not be
fraught with the danger of similar massacres, but, rather, that
they will witness positive results from the peace process and that
individual States, the United Nations and other international
organizations will give them every possible assistance in all
areas, including their security.
I should like to reaffirm, on behalf of the Government and the
people of the Arab Republic of Egypt, our condemnation of that

S/PV.3340
15
(Mr. Elaraby, Egypt)
abominable massacre.

His Excellency President Mohamed Hosni

Mubarak has expressed his extreme concern over and condemnation of
the atrocities committed at the Ibrahimi Mosque.

He is following

the details and the developments of the situation and is making
contacts at the level of the United Nations and in various world
capitals.

He has issued instructions in support of the holding of

a Security Council meeting and in support of taking the necessary
measures to protect the Palestinians and their security, in order
to avoid a recurrence of such an atrocity and to prevent the
settlers from intimidating and threatening Palestinian citizens.
All those steps should be considered in the current negotiations
regarding the Palestinian-Israeli agreement, which is aimed
essentially at the restoration of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, its territory and its security.
In that regard, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt has
issued a declaration reaffirming the need to stand up to the
scourge of extremism that has afflicted various societies with
different religions, political orientations and creeds, and stating
that this incident reaffirms the importance of preserving
Palestinian security, and not just Israeli security.

The security

requirements are not Israel’s alone.
There is no doubt that this incident reaffirms that the fate
of Jerusalem should not be left to the extremists, criminals or
lunatics.

The blood of innocent victims shed in this massacre

should not be in vain.

We hope this painful incident will mark a

comprehensive beginning in facing up to the extremist lunatics and
putting an end to their crimes.

We hope that speedy and far-

reaching progress in the peace process will be an effective
guarantee that such crimes will not be repeated.

We also hope that

the Security Council will unanimously adopt a resolution condemning

S/PV.3340
16
(Mr. Elaraby, Egypt)
this abominable atrocity and reaffirming the need to provide
stability and security for the Palestinian people until the
occupation is over.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Egypt for

his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Israel, on whom I
now call.
Mr. YAACOBI (Israel):

At the outset, I should like to

congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council.

I have no doubt that your wealth of diplomatic

experience and personal skills will be invaluable in your conduct
of the affairs of the Council.

I should also like to congratulate

your predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Karel Kovanda, on the very
able manner in which he conducted the affairs of the Council.
Israel regrets and condemns the criminal murder of Palestinian
worshippers in Hebron.

We express our sincerest condolences to the

families of those killed, and we wish all those wounded a speedy
and complete recovery.
In an appeal to Israelis and Palestinians alike, the President
of the State of Israel, Ezer Weizman, has said:
"At this difficult time, I call upon all the people of
this land - leaders, clergy, Jews and Arabs, Christians
and Muslims - to grieve together over every needless loss
of life."
Our Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, spoke by telephone with PLO
Chairman Yasser Arafat.

Prime Minister Rabin conveyed the sorrow

of the Israeli Government and people to Chairman Arafat and to the
Palestinian people.

He said:

"As an Israeli, I am ashamed of this deranged, brutal act."

S/PV.3340
17
(Mr. Yaacobi, Israel)
I join the Prime Minister in this sentiment, as do the overwhelming
majority of Israelis.
Both Chief Rabbis of Israel have condemned the massacre.

The

Sephardi Chief Rabbi, Eliahu Bakshi Doron, said:
"I am simply ashamed that a Jew carried out such a
villainous and irresponsible act, and I am distressed that
it is viewed as the act of a religious person."
Chief Ashkenazi Rabbi Yisrael Meir Lau said:
"The attacker did not act in the name of the Jewish
faith....

It is a desecration of God’s name to connect

faith to this incident."
The fanatic individual - and I repeat, individual - who
committed the violence sought not only to kill people, but also to
kill the chances for peace between Israelis and Palestinians.
Extremists on both sides believe that they can derail the peace
process by creating a vicious circle of violence and bloodshed.
They are wrong.

We believe that all sides know that we have

passed the point of no return on our way to a new era of peace,
security and cooperation.
have to be overcome.
latest events.

Difficulties will arise.

Obstacles will

We were all reminded of this sad truth by the

But the only way to put an end to the violence is

through peace and reconciliation.

There simply is no alternative.

We all have a responsibility to the future not to walk away from
the historic opportunity which stands before us.

S/PV.3340
18
(Mr. Yaacobi, Israel)
For that reason, it is imperative that all people, Arabs and
Jews alike, act with the utmost restraint, despite the sorrow, the
grief and the anger.
Israelis, of all people, understand the pain of losing
innocent lives.
restraint.

It is with this understanding that we call for

We, the Israeli people, have faced decades of violence

by fanatic Palestinians and others.

We have mourned hundreds of

Israelis killed in terrorist acts.
I do not wish to specify those attacks; I should like simply
to mention that, since the signing of the Declaration of Principles
on 13 September 1993, 33 Israelis have been killed in terrorist
attacks by militants, in Israel and in the territories, and 213
have been wounded.

Those acts were committed not only by

individuals, but also by organized terrorist groups.

Despite this,

we never lost hope for peace; we never came to the conclusion that
those acts were justifications to abandon the search for
reconciliation between our peoples.
Some Palestinian and Arab leaders have said that they want
Israel to change its policies.

This was also said here in the

Security Council by the two previous speakers.

Allow me to call

attention to some relevant facts on this matter.
Following the formation of the present Government, on
13 July 1992, Israel made far-reaching changes in its order of
national priorities:

The Government of Israel stopped construction

of new settlements in the territories; we reallocated resources
away from the territories and into Israel; the Government of Israel
decided to recognize the PLO as the representative of the
Palestinian people and to commence negotiations with the PLO within
the Middle East peace process; Israel signed the Declaration of

S/PV.3340
19
(Mr. Yaacobi, Israel)
Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements, with the PLO,
on 13 September 1993; we announced our readiness to negotiate,
without preconditions, a permanent settlement with the Palestinians
by no later than the third year of the interim period; and we
announced our readiness to negotiate a peace treaty with Syria on
the basis of territorial compromise.
At two meetings, held on 25 and 27 February, the Cabinet
discussed the massacre in Hebron and authorized a number of steps:
First, a Commission of Inquiry headed by the Chief Justice of
the Supreme Court of Israel has been established to fully
investigate the massacre.
Secondly, a series of measures has been taken against radical
elements among the Israeli residents of the territories.

These

measures include the imposition of administrative detentions, the
extension of restraining orders and supervisory orders against the
entry of certain persons into the territories and especially into
the Hebron area, and the disarming of specific individuals and the
cancellation of their permits to carry weapons.
Thirdly, the Attorney General will explore and propose options
for outlawing the radical organizations "Kach" and "Kahane Chai".
Fourthly, the Government has decided to release up to 1,000
Palestinian detainees and prisoners within the coming week.
Fifthly, new security and prayer arrangements will be made for
the Tomb of the Patriarchs in Hebron.

The site will be reopened

when these new arrangements are made.
Sixthly, the Government will provide compensation to the
families of the victims.
Unfortunately, some Palestinian leaders have called the
Government’s decisions "empty, hollow and superficial".

This is

S/PV.3340
20
(Mr. Yaacobi, Israel)
very regrettable.

I want to stress here that the Government of

Israel is fully committed to doing its utmost to protect Arabs and
Jews alike.

Measures are being taken to halt the activities of all

radical elements which are a source of incitement in the
territories.
The Israel Defence Forces will continue to do all they can to
maintain public order and to prevent further incidents and
bloodshed.

Once the implementation of the Israeli-Palestinian

agreement begins, the Palestinian police will take its part in
ensuring security.
We believe that the only sincere solution to the conflict
between Israelis and Palestinians is to enhance the implementation
of the agreement between Israel and the PLO.

We all have to focus

on accelerating the progress towards peace.
As Foreign Minister Shimon Peres said, "peace is the true
answer to the hate-mongers and the sowers of grief".
Faithful and speedy implementation of the agreement on interim
self-government arrangements will frustrate the plans of extremists
and swell the ranks of those who believe that Israelis and
Palestinians can and should live in peace, dignity and mutual
respect.
The Security Council has a responsibility to support these
proponents of peace by calling for accelerated progress towards
implementing the Israeli-Palestinian agreement.
I will conclude with these words, delivered by Prime Minister
Rabin to Israel’s Knesset today:
"I say to the Palestinians ... we understand your
feelings, and suffer this terrible tragedy together with you.
We identify with the heavy sorrow, the distress and the tears,

S/PV.3340
21
(Mr. Yaacobi, Israel)
and we know that, even when peace comes, both you and we will
bear the scars of war.
"We call upon you to return to the negotiating table, to
resume the talks.
negotiations.

We shall sit down and continue the

For after the blood, after the tears, that

which we have so long sought and dreamed about may lie waiting
in the near future:

to put an end to 100 years of war and

terrorism, and to begin to exist, to begin to live, like all
nations."
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Israel for

the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Pakistan, who is
also Chairman of the Organization of the Islamic Conference group
in New York.
Mr. MARKER (Pakistan):

The people and the Government of

Pakistan have been profoundly shocked at the massacre on Friday,
25 February 1994, in the Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi mosque in the town of
Al-Khalil, which resulted in the deaths of a very large number of
innocent civilian Palestinians as well as in serious injuries to
several hundred others.
The Government of Pakistan strongly condemns this cowardly act
of terrorism against people who were fasting and offering their
morning prayers during the holy month of Ramadan.
On behalf of the people and the Government of Pakistan, I
convey our deepest sympathies to the bereaved families and to the
people of Palestine.
Pakistan joins in the expressions of outrage and condemnation
by the international community at this cold-blooded and wanton
attack directed against the people of Palestine.

We strongly urge

S/PV.3340
22
(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
that the individuals behind this criminal act be brought to
justice.
The widespread spontaneous disturbances which took place in
the occupied Palestinian territories in the wake of the 25 February
2massacre were a natural consequence, and have served to compound
the tragedy.

S/PV.3340
23
(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
We are therefore deeply concerned at the violent suppression
of Palestinian demonstrations by the Israeli forces, thus leading
to the deaths of many more Palestinians.

This cyclical wave of

killings can only be prevented if the Israeli authorities assume
their responsibility with statesmanship and a sense of realism, and
take measures which would restore some semblance of confidence to
the Palestinians living in the occupied territories.
We also call on the Government of Israel to put an immediate
end to the repressive measures against the people of Palestine and
to take the necessary steps to ensure the safety and protection of
the Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian territories, in
accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949.
In another cruel travesty of justice, while the Palestinians
in the Israeli-occupied territories are prohibited from acquiring
any arms whatsoever, the Israeli settlers enjoy legal sanction to
possess and bear even sophisticated automatic weapons.

If the

Israeli leaders are genuinely serious in their criticism of this
tragic event and would want to prevent similar tragedies in the
future, then they should adopt suitable measures to stop the
illegal actions of Israeli settlers and to disarm them.
The outrageous action of 25 February serves to underscore with
even greater force the urgent need for a just and lasting solution
of the Middle East conflict.

Pakistan had welcomed the

13 September 1993 Declaration of Principles between the Palestine
Liberation Organization and Israel as a first step towards a
comprehensive settlement based on the principle of land for peace
and on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

It

was our hope that this initial accord would constitute a sound
foundation for a durable peace in the Middle East region.

At the

time, we had urged the speedy implementation of the Palestine

S/PV.3340
24
(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
Liberation Organization-Israeli agreement, both in letter and in
spirit.
The massacre at the Al-Ibrahimi Mosque underlines the need for
quickening the pace towards an early agreement on the full
implementation of the Declaration of Principles.

Procrastination

can cause irreversible harm to the peace process.

We urge the

parties concerned, in particular Israel, to demonstrate the
requisite flexibility and accommodation.

The vision of a better

tomorrow must not be allowed to succumb to the divisions and
hatreds of the past.

It is only through a just peace that the

peoples of this war-ravaged region will be able to freely pursue
their basic human right to a life of well-being and prosperity.
In this connection, my delegation would wish to pay a special
tribute to the Secretary-General of the United Nations for his deep
commitment, courageous actions and indefatigable efforts for the
cause of peace in the region.
The PRESIDENT:

The next speaker on my list is the

representative of Tunisia.

I invite him to take a place at the

Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. ABDELLAH (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):

It

is with horror that the entire world heard the news on Friday
morning of the abominable killing perpetrated by Israeli settlers
at the Mosque of Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi in the town of Al-Khalil.
In the face of the barbarity and the premeditated nature of
this carnage, which is unprecedented in the painful history of
Israeli occupation, an outraged international public expressed its
anger and indignation.
In these tragic circumstances, Tunisia shares the mourning of
the Palestinian people, who continue to suffer daily martyrdom and
to shed tears over the death of their sons.

S/PV.3340
25
(Mr. Abdellah, Tunisia)
It most emphatically condemns this abominable crime, which was
perpetrated at a holy site, during a holy month and on a day which
too was holy.
An impartial inquiry should establish all those responsible
for this killing, which cannot be attributed to one single
murderer.

Indeed, the Israeli soldiers responsible for protecting

the holy shrine must also assume their share of the blame, inasmuch
as, at the very least, they let it happen without intervening to
protect the lives of the worshippers.

Furthermore, the Israeli

army attacked the people, who were demonstrating their feelings of
desolation and consternation, by killing other Palestinians, thus
adding to the number of victims.
By allowing the settlers to arm themselves to the teeth, to
freely patrol the roads and to act with total impunity, the Israeli
Government has encouraged them to establish the law of the jungle.
Disarming all the settlers - and not just a handful of them, as was
announced - ought to be the first measure undertaken in order to
protect the Palestinian citizens.

This is, in fact, the prime

obligation of the occupying Power, in conformity with the Fourth
Geneva Convention.
An international presence is needed more than ever to protect
the lives of civilians and to neutralize Israeli extremists, who
seek to perpetuate their domination over Palestinian territory and
to undermine the peace process.
Only the dismantling of the settlements established in the
occupied territories, in violation of the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council and more particularly of resolution 465
(1980), could avoid the repetition of serious incidents caused by
Jewish activists.

S/PV.3340
26
(Mr. Abdellah, Tunisia)
The implementation of resolution 681 (1990), which emphasizes
the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention to the occupied
territories, including Jerusalem, is becoming an increasingly
urgent necessity if international law is to prevail and if the
protection of civilians is to be guaranteed against demands and
acts of terrorism.
The delay in the entry into force of the Declaration of
13 September has only strengthened the determination of the Israeli
extremists to torpedo the peace efforts in order to create war and
chaos in the region.
In any event, we need to make up for lost time and to ensure
the immediate implementation of the provisions of the Washington
agreement, most particularly regarding the withdrawal of the
Israeli forces.

Disarming the settlers, pending the dismantling of

the settlements, is a determining factor in the success of this
agreement, which represents the first stage towards a solution of
the Palestinian problem.
Tunisia, which, in its own history of decolonization,
experienced similar moments when extremists tried in vain to
obstruct the course of history, feels confident that thanks to the
firmness that will be displayed by the international community and
the determination of the Palestinian people, Friday morning’s
massacre will only hasten the moment of liberation.
President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and the Tunisian Government,
for their part, will continue to undertake every effort to help
bring about a just and lasting peace in the region.
The international community is called upon today to assume its
responsibilities towards the Palestinians who have suffered
repression and been the victims of the most odious crimes.

The

Security Council, during this delicate phase of the peace process,

S/PV.3340
27
(Mr. Abdellah, Tunisia
must play its full role by reminding the occupying Power of its
obligations, by providing concrete measures for the protection of
Palestinian civilians and by ensuring that the peace process is
brought to fruition.

S/PV.3340
28

The PRESIDENT:
Jordan.

The next speaker is the representative of

I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to

make his statement.
Mr. BATAINEH (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic):

Allow

me, Sir, to congratulate you once more on your successful
presidency of the Security Council this month.

On behalf of my

delegation, I thank you for your efforts at all levels to resolve
the issues that have been discussed this month, particularly the
issue before us today.
My delegation’s thanks go also to Secretary-General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali for the sincere and continuing efforts he has
made in this regard.
This incident was a serious and unforeseen one that could have
political repercussions:

it was a terrorist massacre, perpetrated

in a shrine that should have been kept safe for all the civilians
praying there during this, their holy month.

The crime was

committed by extremist settlers implanted by the Israeli
authorities, which provided them with land and weapons so that they
might serve as a cordon sanitaire around civilian Palestinian
communities; they were then given freedom of movement so that all
the elements could come together for such a massacre to be
perpetrated.
The Israeli authorities are also determined to deny the
Palestinian people not only the right to security and safety but
the right to freedom of worship; and even the right to exist within
its own homeland.
We are determined to put this terrorist massacre in its true
context, for it was inevitable:

the result of the "arrangements"

that have been perpetrated by Israel in violation of international
law and the decisions of this Council.

For this - belated -

S/PV.3340
29
(Mr. Bataineh, Jordan)
meeting, and for the Council’s discussions to be serious,
productive and effective, the Council should not content itself
with well-deserved condemnations or condolences; rather, it should
go further and meet its responsibilities face on:

it should put a

final end to massacres of this sort and to all of Israel’s
oppressive practices and continued violations of human rights
against Palestinian civilians in the occupied territories.
First of all, it behoves the Council, as a matter of urgency,
to despatch a commission of inquiry to investigate this most
serious massacre and to take the necessary steps to ensure the
commission’s ability to carry out its work successfully and report
back to the Council.
In short, we believe that the Council, if it seriously wants
to examine this massacre and its repercussions, must examine what
has occurred in the light of the following considerations.
Firstly, Israel’s settlement policy is illegal, as is its
policy of arming the settlers.

Indeed, should those policies

continue, they would not only endanger the safety of the unarmed
Palestinians languishing under the yoke of occupation, but would
cause chaos and give rise to even greater extremism and fanaticism.
There would be no stability anywhere in the region, which, in turn,
would lead to the collapse of the peace process.

We cannot,

therefore, afford to bury our heads in the sand:

the success of

the Palestinian-Israel negotiations cannot be achieved if we turn a
blind eye to massacres and crimes, or if we condone violations of
human rights and international law.
What we must do is remove the root causes of these crimes and
atrocities, in accordance with international norms and
international law, and in the spirit of the moral and human values
in which our modern world believes.

S/PV.3340
30
(Mr. Bataineh, Jordan)
To achieve this, the Council must provide protection for
Palestinian civilians.

It should be guided by the resolutions that

it has adopted over the years concerning the illegality of the
Israeli settlements, and particularly by resolution 465 (1980),
wherein it determined that Israel’s settlement policy constitutes a
serious obstruction to achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.

This issue of the settlements now falls

within the purview of the declaration of principles between Israel
and the Palestine Liberation Organization; it is to be discussed
directly by those involved in the negotiations.
However, the issue of disarming all the settlers and
safeguarding Palestinian lives should in no way be linked or be
subjected to any criteria:

the right to life must be protected,

legally and morally, at all times, including under occupation, and
it is the duty of the Council to safeguard this right without
delay.
Secondly, Israel has not abided by the Geneva Convention
Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and
does not apply it in the occupied territories.

As members are

aware, this Convention is the basis of international humanitarian
law and is the legal and international guarantee under which the
rights and lives of the people in the occupied territories must be
safeguarded.

It is incumbent on the Council to uphold the

application of the Geneva Convention to the territory of Palestine.
Indeed, in several unanimous resolutions, the Council has called
for the protection of the Palestinian people.

Those resolutions -

605 (1987), 681 (1990) and 726 (1992) - are still in force.
The question now is whether the Council is to be held
responsible, even indirectly, for what has just taken place and for
previous massacres that have been perpetrated against civilians in

S/PV.3340
31
(Mr. Bataineh, Jordan)
the occupied Palestinian territories.

In my view, having failed to

force Israel, the occupying Power, to abide by the provisions of
the Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War and to apply that Convention to the
civilians in the occupied territories, and having failed also to
implement its own resolutions on this issue the Council has not
lived up to its responsibility to protect the people who are now
suffering under the yoke of occupation.

S/PV.3340
32
(Mr. Bataineh, Jordan)
The Council is aware that these people are unarmed and face
the armed Israeli occupation forces and the armed settlers.

The

settlers armed themselves for the purpose of terrorizing people and
killing civilians, when the Israeli military forces want to hide
behind the settlers in committing these disgraceful, cowardly acts.
Therefore, the Security Council is called upon now more than
ever before to shoulder its responsibilities and, in accordance
with its previous resolutions, to provide an appropriate mechanism
for implementing the provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention.

I

wish to call attention to article 1 of that Convention, in which
"The High Contracting Parties undertake to respect and to
ensure respect for the present Convention in all
circumstances."
There are many measures which the Security Council could take,
but what is urgently required is only this:

to provide effective

and constant protection to the Palestinian people so long as they
are suffering under occupation - protection that will ensure their
safety and security and their basic rights, that will ensure the
sanctity of their Holy Places and the discontinuance of all
desecration and that will ensure the stability and security of the
entire region.

The Israeli settlements must be dismantled; indeed,

the Security Council itself has stated that they are illegal and
should be dismantled.
If we can do all that, we shall create a climate that will
enable us to continue the peace process, so that we may finally
have a just and honourable settlement of the question based on the
withdrawal of Israel from all the occupied Arab and Palestinian
territories and on the safeguarding of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people, including the right to self-determination
and to the establishment of a national State on their homeland.

S/PV.3340
33

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Jordan for

the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is His Excellency Mr. Ahmet Engin Ansay,
Permanent Observer of the Organization of the Islamic Conference to
the United Nations, to whom the Security Council has extended an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure.

I

invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. ANSAY:

We deeply appreciate the tireless efforts you

have made, Mr. President, during this entire month in the search
for peace.

I thank you for giving me the opportunity of addressing

the Security Council on a matter of extreme gravity that is of
concern to the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC).
I should also like to take this opportunity to pay a tribute
to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his
strenuous efforts to bring an end to various international problems
facing the world, in particular the question of Palestine and the
Middle East.

In the presence of several actors on the

international scene, all trying to find solutions in their own way
to various

difficult issues, we believe that with the sagacious

guidance of the Secretary-General remedies will most likely be
found.
Like probably the rest of the world - except for a few
murderous criminals - the Islamic countries and the OIC were
shocked and profoundly grieved and indignant when the news was
received about the odious carnage that resulted in the martyrdom of
over 60 innocent people and the wounding of more than a hundred
worshippers who were fasting and offering their morning prayers
during the holy month of Ramadan in the Al-Ibrahimi Mosque at

S/PV.3340
34
(Mr. Ansay)
Al-Khalil in the early hours of Friday, 25 February 1994 - at the
hands of bloodthirsty extremist Jewish settlers.
In the declarations and statements issued immediately
following this tragedy, the OIC Summit Chairman, President
Abdou Diouf of Senegal; the Chairman of the Islamic Conference of
Foreign Ministers, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Pakistan; the
Secretary-General of the OIC, Mr. Hamid Algabid; and the Islamic
Group of the Whole, which met at ambassadorial level here in New
York, while strongly condemning this perfidious crime against
peaceful, innocent worshippers, voiced the OIC’s anguish and rage
over this barbaric attack and made the following solemn
observations and urgent calls.
The Organization of the Islamic Conference expresses its
profound grief at the death of these innocent martyrs, extends its
heartfelt condolences, and reiterates once again the Islamic
Ummah’s solidarity with the brave Palestinian people and its full
support for them through all possible ways and means in their just
struggle until they achieve their inalienable national rights,
including their right to return, to self-determination and to the
establishment of their independent State on their national
homeland, with its capital Al-Quds Al-Sharif, under the leadership
of their sole legitimate representative, the Palestine Liberation
Organization.
The OIC calls upon the United Nations to continue to play an
active role in the current peace process and expresses the hope
that it will lead to the early establishment of a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
The member States of the OIC call for the immediate
implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 681 (1990), and they recall that the

S/PV.3340
35
(Mr. Ansay)
occupying Power has a responsibility to protect the Palestinian
people in accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention, which is
applicable to the occupied Palestinian territory, including
Jerusalem, and the will of the international community as
manifested in relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly.

The member States of the OIC also demand an

immediate end of the Israeli policies of repression against the
Palestinian people.
The OIC calls for effective international protection to be
provided to the Palestinian people in the occupied territories and
the disarming of the Israeli settlers as a step towards the
dismantling of the Israeli settlements in the occupied territories,
which are illegal according to international legitimacy.
The recent barbaric carnage perpetrated by gangs of settlers
against Palestinian citizens constitutes yet another blow dealt to
the peace process to which the Palestinian people and their
leadership have committed themselves, and casts further doubts on
the extent of the other party’s earnestness and commitment to the
peace process and to the various agreements concluded within its
framework, which were welcomed across the world as a first step
towards a promising rehabilitation of the whole region.
In conclusion, the OIC once again condemns this heinous crime
and appeals to the Security Council to act resolutely.

We believe

that by adopting a resolution of determination the Council can help
all the parties involved in the peace process, but especially can
assist Israel to take the required bold measures conducive to
achieving an honourable and lasting peace in the region.
Otherwise, the thorny settlements issue, involving a few thousand
criminal-minded fanatics only, will continue to mortgage the entire

S/PV.3340
36
(Mr. Ansay)
peace in the area with unfavourable terms for an indefinite time.
If this carnage was, as is alleged, the result of an act of a
lunatic, then our conclusion is that there are a few thousand more
lunatics "Rambo-ing" around freely, brandishing their assault
weapons and attacking innocents in a territory to which they have
no legitimate claim whatsoever, as has been repeatedly declared by
the United Nations during the course of the past 27 years.

Israel,

the occupying Power should, before anything else, remedy that
illegitimate situation.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank Mr. Ansay for the kind words he

addressed to me.
A number of names remain in the list of speakers.

In view of

the lateness of the hour, I intend to adjourn the meeting now.
With the concurrence of the members of the Security Council and
after consultations with the President of the Council for the month
of March, the next meeting of the Council to continue the
consideration of the item on its agenda will take place tomorrow
afternoon, Tuesday, 1 March.

The precise time of the meeting will

be communicated in due course.
The meeting rose at 10.20 p.m.
