S/PRST/2012/18

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 June 2012
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6796th meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 June 2012, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Central African
region”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council strongly condemns the ongoing attacks carried out
by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) in parts of central Africa, which pose a
continuing threat to regional security. The Council reiterates its grave concern
at the atrocities committed by the LRA, which have serious humanitarian and
human rights consequences, including the displacement of over 445,000
people across the region.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the continued violations of
international humanitarian law and the abuses of human rights by the LRA.
The Security Council condemns further the recruitment and use of children,
killing and maiming, rape, sexual slavery and other sexual violence, and
abductions. The Council demands an immediate end to all attacks by the LRA,
particularly those on civilians, urges LRA leaders to release all those abducted,
and insists that all LRA elements put an end to such practices, and disarm and
demobilize.
“The Security Council welcomes the development of the United Nations
Regional Strategy to Address the Threat and Impact of the Activities of the
LRA and takes note of the five strategic areas of intervention identified in the
strategy, developed in close collaboration with the AU, United Nations
missions and country teams in the LRA-affected areas, and affected Central
African States. The Council urges the United Nations Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), the United Nations political and peacekeeping missions in the
region and other relevant United Nations presences to support the
implementation of the strategy, as appropriate and within the limits of their
mandates and capacities, and calls on the international community to provide
assistance as possible to advance these strategic goals.
“The Security Council welcomes the strong collaboration between the
United Nations and the AU in addressing the LRA threat, and encourages its
continuation. The Council encourages the African Union (AU)’s Special Envoy,
Francisco Madeira, and the Secretary-General’s Special Representative for
Central Africa and Head of UNOCA, Abou Moussa, to continue to work

12-39782 (E) 290612

*1239782*

S/PRST/2012/18

together with the governments of the region to strengthen further their
cooperation.
“The Security Council commends the continued efforts undertaken by the
Central African Republic (CAR), the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC),
the Republic of South Sudan and Uganda to apprehend top LRA commanders
and to protect civilians from the LRA threat. The Council welcomes the
capture of the senior LRA commander, Caesar Acellam, by the Uganda
People’s Defence Force on 13 May.
“The Security Council welcomes the official launching of the African
Union-led Regional Cooperation Initiative (AU RCI-LRA) against the LRA on
24 March 2012, including a Joint Coordination Mechanism, a Regional Task
Force and a Joint Operations Centre. The Council encourages all governments
in the region, working through this Initiative, to renew and strengthen their
collaboration to end the LRA threat. The Council also calls on the AU, the
LRA-affected States and the international community to work together to
secure the necessary resources for successful implementation. The Council
welcomes the AU’s ongoing efforts to increase tactical coordination,
information-sharing, and joint planning between the relevant militaries through
the Regional Task Force, based in Yambio, South Sudan.
“The Security Council underlines the primary responsibility of States in
the LRA-affected region to protect civilians and calls upon them to take all
appropriate measures in this regard. The Council notes the important role
being played by United Nations peacekeeping missions in the region in
protecting civilians and stresses the need for continued coordination and
information-sharing between these missions. The Council stresses the
importance of coordination among humanitarian, development, gender, child
protection, peacekeeping and military actors in the region. The Council
recognizes the challenges the Governments in the region face and urges the
international community, in coordination with the AU and the United Nations,
to continue to strengthen the operational capabilities of countries participating
in the regional task force initiative in order to conduct effective operations
against LRA and better protect civilians. The Council underlines the need for
all military action against the LRA to be conducted in compliance with
applicable international law, including international humanitarian, human rights
and refugee law, and to minimize the risk of harm to civilians in those areas.
“The Security Council encourages the remaining LRA fighters to leave
the group’s ranks and participate in the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Repatriation, Resettlement and Reintegration (DDRRR) process. The Security
Council emphasizes its support for continued efforts across the affected
countries to disarm, demobilize and reintegrate former LRA fighters back into
normal life. The Council acknowledges the important ongoing efforts under
MONUSCO’s DDRRR programme to encourage and facilitate further LRA
defections. The Council urges MONUSCO to continue to work with BINUCA,
UNMISS, and other United Nations actors in the LRA-affected region to help
implement a coordinated region-wide effort to promote defections and support
the DDRRR efforts across the LRA-affected area. The Council calls on
international partners to provide strategic support.

2

12-39782

S/PRST/2012/18

“The Security Council recalls the International Criminal Court’s arrest
warrants for Joseph Kony and two other senior LRA leaders on charges of,
inter alia, war crimes and crimes against humanity, including murder, rape and
the enlistment of children through abduction, and calls upon all States to
cooperate with the Ugandan authorities and the International Criminal Court in
order to implement those warrants, and to bring to justice those responsible for
the atrocities. The Council recalls its statement of June 2006 (PRST/2006/28)
and reaffirms the vital importance of promoting justice and the rule of law,
including respect for human rights, as an indispensable element for lasting
peace.
“The Security Council commends efforts by international donors to
provide humanitarian assistance to LRA-affected populations in CAR, DRC
and the Republic of South Sudan. The Council reiterates the need for an
enhanced, comprehensive, and more regional approach to the humanitarian
situation, including assistance to victims of sexual violence and other attacks
and reaffirms the requirement for all parties to promote and ensure safe and
unhindered access for humanitarian organizations to the civilian population, in
accordance with international law, including applicable international
humanitarian law, and guiding principles of humanitarian assistance.
“The Security Council requests that the Secretary-General keep it
informed on the activities of UNOCA, the progress of implementation of the
Regional Strategy and the efforts being undertaken respectively by missions in
the region and other relevant United Nations agencies to that end, including
through a single report on UNOCA and the LRA to be submitted before
30 November 2012.”

12-39782

3
