UNITED

r,i

NATIONS

OFFICIAL

RE

TWENTY-FIFTH

YEAR

[‘\i,.-,

1 !i;‘i/:1,;

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l534)

. , a. . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . 1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I..I...I.......I...

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 3 March 1970 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9675);
Letter dated 6 March 1970 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, the
Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of),
Dahomey, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, the Ivory
Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland,
Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the United Arab Republic, the United Republic
of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia (S/9682) . . . . . . . . . . I . . . . . . 1

SlPV.1534

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letter combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . , . ) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of. the Official Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document itidicaiss the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
syskxn adopted in 1964, are‘ published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND THIRTY-FOURTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 17 March 1970, at 3 p. m.
Presi&nt:

Mr. Joaquin VALLEJO
(Colombia).

Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, the
Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Republic, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta
and Zambia (S/9682)

ARBELAEZ

P/*eserzt: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi,
China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua,
Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l534)
1.

Adoption

2.

Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhod’esia:
Letter dated 3 March 1970 from the Permanent
Representative
of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9675!;
Letter dated 6 March 1970 addressed to the President of the Security Council by the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, the
Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar,
Mali,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia,
Uganda, the United Arab Republic, the United
Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia (S/9682).

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
In accordance with previous decisions of the Council
and with its consent, I intend to invite the representatives of Algeria, Senegal, Pakistan, Yugoslavia and
India to participate in the debate without the right to
vote. Since there is not sufficient space at the table
itself for all, in accordance with the practice followed
in the past in similar cases, I would request those representatives to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber, on the understanding
that they will be invited to sit at the table when it
is their turn to address the Council,

of the agenda.

At the indfation
of the President,
Mr. N. Hnrbi
(Algeritr), Mr. I. Boye (Senegal), Mr. S. A. Karirn
[Pnkistnn), Mr. Z. JaziP (Yugoslavin) and Mr. S. Sen
(India) took the places reservedfor them in the Council
chamber.

2. Mr.

ORTEGA

URBINA

(Nicarzua)
(interPresident. allow me
first to state that your excellent qualities as a sta.tesman,
your wealth of diplomatic experience and your natural
propensity to reflection lead us to feel highly honoured
to serve under your presidency. I also wish to convey
a cordial greeting to the Minister of State for Foreign
Affairs of Zambia, who has come here specially to
participate in the work of this Council.

pretation fio~n Spanish): Mr.

Adoption of the agenda

3. I have listened carefully to the enlightening statements that have been made on the question of Southern
Rhodesia; and many such statements indeed have been
made because this is a question of concern.to. all. It
is also a source of particular concern to the United
Nations and has been so from the very moment when
this Council decided that it was likely to constitute
.a threat to international peace and security and because
it involved not only the fate of the people of Southern
Rhodesia, but also cherished principles of justice and
equality that should govern relations between men and
between nations. We cannot fail to be concerned at
the maintenance of a system which denies to a man,
because of his race, the right to participate on an equal

Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 3 March 1970 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9675);
Letter dated 6 March 1970 addressed to the President of the Security Council by the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Equatorial
1

with his fellow nationals
life of his country.

footing

in all aSpeCtS Of the

the message to go out from this Council to Africa and
to the world? Should it be a clear and strong message
of agreement or should it be merely a confused noise
of division and desperate dispute?

4. My delegation condemns the illegal regime of
Southern Rhodesia and its legal system, which is based
on racial discrimination, and extends its sympathy and
moral support to the people of Rhodesia. We cherish
the hope that in the near fUtUre a democratic system
may be set up which will allow that people to enjoy
in its institutions based on mutual respect and equal
rights. My Government does not recognize the unlawful rkgime of Ian Smith, nor does it maintain consular
or trade relations of any kind with that Government,
and we are faithfully carrying out the resolutions
adopted by this Council.

11. I accept most readily that unanimity and agreement are of value only if we have something positive,
something worthwhile to say, but I put it to you, Sir,
and to the Council that we have things we can say
now-things of great significance and far-reaching consequence. We have a duty to say them. I trust that
we can say them now and say them together. Consequently, I very warmly welcome the speech to which
we have just listened by the representative of
Nicaragua.

5. After hearing the representatives who have already
participated in this debate, I believe I am not mistaken
in thinking that not a single delegation disagrees with
the idea that the state of affairs now unfortunately
obtaining in Southern Rhodesia should be changed.
I have not heard a single voice raised to state the
contrary, And this should satisfy the international conscience although not lull it into resignation.

12. It is in the hope that we can avoid further recrimination that I shall not go back for long over past arguments. Those who have taken part with me in past
debates on Rhodesia will at least admit that I have
never failed to state plainly what my country can do
now and what it cannot do.
13. My country took a decision of the greatest importance. We proposed and participated in comprehensive
mandatory economic sanctions against Rhodesia. It
was a decision based on principle and determined
policy. By carrying it out we have suffered and still
suffer heavy financial loss-heavier
indeed than any
other country, but we have not wavered in pursuing
the policy which we declared. I have at the same time
plainly stated that we cannot now do more.

6. We should seek the means which would make it
possible to translate into reality this unanimous desire
to find a favourable-and,
of course, a viable solution-to the problem of Southern Rhodesia. And if
our purpose is unanimous, it is only fitting that the
methods and means that may be agreed upon should
also meet with the unanimous support of this Council.
7. It has been said here-and I must agree with the
statement-that
a divided opinion would be selfdefeating in its effects. Indeed I believe that a split
now would serve to blur the clear picture of unanimous
repudiation by this Council of the alleged republic
recently proclaimed by the racist minority.

14. The main demand made of us, and repeated in
this debate, has been that we should attempt to settle
the future of Rhodesia by the use of force, and I shall
first deal with that. On the use of force, I ask YOU
to remember what I said in this Council at the 1479th
meeting ,_on19 June 1969:
“On this issue I know that there has been strong
feeling, but that strong feeling is, I believe, partly
based on alack of understanding. Comparisons made
in our debate have shown the extent of that misunderstanding. The misunderstanding of the military and
practical factors in the minds of some speakers is
so serious that they even compare the situation in
southern Africa with that in Anguilla. This suggests
extraordinary misconceptions. Comparisons have
been made between Rhodesia and other British cob
nial Territories where force has been used in the
past to deal with disorder or violence, but there has
been no recognition of the fact that the situation
in Rhodesia has been and is quite different from that
in the other Territories which have been named.
“Since Rhodesia was first formed as a selfgoverning colony in 1923 there has. never been a
British army there, nor since that time has there
been any British official in administrative authority
there. In these respects Rhodesia has been selfgoverning, with its own forces, for nearly half a century. What is the importance of that? It means that
it is not a question of merely deciding to adopt a
new local policy or of taking local action to maintain order as we did in colonies which Britain 1

8. In the opinion of my delegation, the draft resolution
submitted by the Finnish delegation [s/9709] could
serve to unify our thinking and lead to the approval
of a resolution by unanimous vote. It confirms the
decisions taken in previous resolutions of this Council
and adds new constructive points, such as that spelt
out in paragraph 19 (c), which may well be useful in
helping us to find a favourable solution. it also takes
up the initiative reflected in the United Kingdom draft
resolution [S/9676/l?ev.l] and a good portion of the
text sponsored by Burundi, Nepal, Sierra Leone, Syria
and Zambia [S/9696 and &r-r. I arzd 2).
9. In concluding this brief statement, I should like
to lay emphasis on my desire and my hope that Southern Rhodesia may come to be a democratic, free,
sovereign and independent State.
10. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I do not
wish to go back over the many past debates on Rhodesia
in this Council and in the Committees
of the
Assembly-nor,
I believe, would the Council wish me
to do SO. I am primarily concerned now-as I am sure
we all are-with the question of what action, what
effective action, can now be taken. What should be
2

administered. It is a question of an invasion-an
invasion in the middle of a continent. It is a question
of starting a war. We know that once force is used
escalation can easily ensue. We know that the results
of violent action are incalculable.
We cannot tell
where force would lead, We all know that it is much
easier to start a war than to end one. At least we
are entitled to expect recognition of the fact that
those of us who are against starting a conflict are
serious and sincere in our reluctance to resort to
force.
“It should not be regarded as strange or even
unusual in this Council, charged with the responsibility for the maintenance of peace and security and
with the peaceful settlement of disputes, when we
defend our opposition to starting a war. We have
seen so many examples in the world of the results
of violence and force that some of us may be forgiven
for believing that, rather than use force, every possible alternative should first be explored-explored
in peace and explored to the end.
“Since the demand is that my country should
undertake the military expedition, since the demand
is that a British army should start this war, we have
a right to be consulted and we have a right to be
heard.‘”
I make no excuse for having restated our position on
the use of force.

This is no time to relax, let alone give up. It is a time
to Press on and press harder.
18, The facts have not changed. They cannot be
wished away. But these are not arguments for
defeatism, for doing nothing. They are arguments for
considering together most carefully exactly what we
can do, always insisting that there must be no comPromise with racial discrimination and no compromise
with racial suppression. These are the issues on which
we must never be on the wrong side.
19. It is with the hope that we can now act positively
and unanimously that I will forgo replying to some
of the speeches to which we have listened in this debate.
Some things were said which seemed to me distorted
by spite-it would perhaps be more charitable to put
them down to ignorance-but there would be no value
in pursuing them. In a spirit of brotherly co-operation
I shall even forgo the full reply I had intended to make
to my friend Ambassador Malik.
20. When he first spoke on Rhodesia I paid him the
compliment of saying that there was much in his speech
that was new and much that was true though, unfortunately, what was true was not new, and what was ’
new was not true. Now I must sadly admit that in
his latest speech [1532nd meeting] there was neither.
He repeated a number of false accusations. He suggested that my Government had not fully and faithfully
respected the comprehensive sanctions which we first
proposed and have since rigorously put into effect.
Let me tell him that no country has done more than
mine. We respect the part that Zambia has played,
but no other country has suffered greater loss in giving
effect to the comprehensive sanctions than mine. What
is more, no country has taken more effective punitive
legal action against any of its citizens shown to have
engaged in trade with Rhodesia, either directly or
through South Africa or Portugal. Furthermore, no
country has done more in the Committee of this Council
dealing with sanctions against Rhodesia. We have ourselves brought nearly 100 reports of possible broaches
of the sanctions to the Sanctions Committee. I assure
the Ambassador of the Soviet Union that when we
accept an obligation we carry it out.

15. Now let me turn to the arguments for imiosing
economic sanctions against the whole of southern
Africa, With regard to proposals for extending sanctions against South. Africa and Portugal I have
repeatedly and carefully explained our position to the
Assembly and to this Council. As regards South Africa,
this is what I said as long ago as 1965:
“We must accept the fact that in the circumstances
of Sou th Africa anything less than a major economic
and strategic blockade would fail to achieve the
required result. We, must accept the fact that, as
far as my country is concerned, it is impossible at
present to go beyond the arms embargo which we
have already imposed. We must accept the fact,
moreover, that a full campaign of economic sanctions
backed by a blockade would require resources
beyond the present capacity of our Organization.“’

21. Ambassador Malik went further and even suggested that my country had actually encouraged and
supported the illegal rCgime. He spoke of my country
affording that regime open support. That is, as he well
knows, the exact opposite of the truth.

16. For my country, which as much as any country
in the world depends on its foreign trade, to cut off
trade with all those countries whose policies we dislike
or oppose would be economic suicide. I might add
that refusal to commit suicide may be unpopular but
it is not immoral,

22. He goes on to make even wilder statements. He
spe&s of mortal hatred for the Africans and enslaving
the African peoples, These are very offensive remarks
to those of US who have had the privilege of working
in Africa, and particularly to those of us who have
had experience of working with Africans in Africa’s
advance to self-determination and independence.

I7. Nevertheless, in view of our direct responsibility,
we have initiated atid implemented comprehensive sanctions against Rhodesia. We are anxious to make them
more effective. In spite of what has been said by some
members of this Council, I do’not believe that anyone
here recommends that sanctions should be abandoned.

23. We may, and often do, have differences and disputes between us here in this Council. It does not help

’ This stktement was made at the 472nd meeting of the Special
POlitical Committee, the record of which is published in SummarY
form.

to resolve them when resort is made to the kind of
allegation which we heard from the permanent rep3

I

r’C,entative of a great Power for whom personally
all have such high regard.

we

3 1. Let me finally say this, I never myself bring personal considerations into our debates. We speak fat
our Governments rather than for ourselves, but some
personal references have been made in this debate.
The Ambassador of Syria has been good enough to
quote ~1532nd/77eeti/?g]from a book I wrote some years
ago. I am much flattered and I congratulate him on
his excellent taste in literature but in reply to what
he and others have said to me, let me repeat what
I have said in this Council before. I myself served
many years ago in North Africa and West Africa and
I have been involved in the problems of southern Africa
for some time. I do not forget that I once had the
honour of being appointed by the Secretary-General
to give advice with others on those problems. Before
that I had resigned from my position as an ambassador
here, as the Minister of State from Zambia has
reminded me, because I disagreed with my Government at that time. I disagreed on the issue of the need
to consult all the people of Rhodesia on their constitutional future. Would that they had been consulted at
that time.

24, So let me turn from controversy to the constructive search for agreement. Let me again plead for
agreement. To search for it is, we all know, the perma.nent obligation of this Council. If we abandon the
search for agreement we are failing in our primary task
in this Council. Always it is our duty to harmonize
our actions and to search diligently for common
ground. The longer I serve in this Council the more
I realize that this is an obligation which transcends
all others.
25. When we agreeouractions can be effective. When
we disagree we encourage the forces of conflict and
tyranny. On the question of Rhodesia now before us
we have in the past acted unanimously, as the Ambassador of FinIand reminded us [1.533rd meeting]. If we
disagree and divide now we shall bring comfort and
rejoicing to the regime which we all heartily condemn.
26. Condemnation
is not enough. I certainly agree
with those who have so argued here. I did not come
here merely asking for a repetition of past condemnations. I have asked for action on recognition and foi
action on the related issue of representation. No one
has suggested that these questions are unimportant.
They are vital. I say again that they are issues of first
importance to the illegal regime and to the world.

32. Permit me also to confirm that I would not have
hesitated to resign again rather than be associated with
any dishonourable
settlement in Rhodesia which
offended against the principles of consultation and consent; but permit me to say too that I myself do not
disagree with the two main decisions which I have
defended-the decision that the United Kingdom cannot now send an army to start a war in southern Africa
and the decision that the United Kingdom cannot now
justify an economic war against all southern Africa.
As I have said, these are hard facts and hard decisions
but they are facts that have to be faced. None of US,
least of all I, can run away from them.

27, Already we have made good progress since I
asked the Council to meet, and achieved good results,
as the representative of Pakistan told us last week
[ibid.].
Every speaker in this Council has called for
refusal to recognize the illegal regime. The African
draft resolution[S/9696 nrld COV. I rrr~l2) incorporated
the same call. So did the Ambassador of Finland. On
this it is already absolutely clear that we are unanimous.

33. There is one final word I should like to say, I
make no complaint about expressions of furious frustration and even bitter impatience, Indeed I often share
them. It is galling, to use the mildest word, that no
drastic or dramatic measures can now be advocated
to assist the peoples of southern Africa to advance
to self-determination
and freedom. But, for what it
is worth, I put it to those who are furious and bitter-and I do so most earnestly-that
we shall not
be serving the interests of the peoples of southern
Africa if we now divide and disagree here at the United
Nations. It is my judgement that we must be content
for the moment to hold fast and hold together, and
maintain a common front against the evils we oppose.

28. Equally important, the call for refusal to recognize
has been followed by positive action on representation.
Nine countries have now followed up the action which
my Government
took last June by ending their representation in Salisbury. I pay my tribute to Belgium,
Denmark, the Federal Republic of Germany, France,
Italy,
Netherlands,
Norway, Switzerland
and the
United States for the action they have taken. This has
been a most welcome and spectacular response to the
call. Our call to bar the door of recognition now and
for the future has been accepted, That was our purpose
and it has been achieved,

34. I realize that what I say may be misunderstood
or misrepresented. I cannot help that. But I greatly
hope that what I say will be heeded, for I assure you
that it is honestly intended,

29. I have never suggested, however, that action to
refuse recognition and end representation was enough,

35. I go back to what I said earlier, to the question
of what effective action we can take now. I am not
SO much concerned with procedure or the method of
our decision provided it can be agreement in the end,
It is the end and not the means that matters. Again
and above all I repeat and urge the arguments for acting
within our capacity and acting together. That, Mr.
President, has been the object of the consultations you

30. I have listened with the greatest respect to the
proposals
of the Ambassador of Finland,
whose
resource and initiative are such assets to the Councii.
We are, Iassure him and other members of the Council,
very ready, as we have‘always been ready, to search
for action on which we can agree and which.is within
our capacity. We stand ready to do so now.
4

have wisely initiated. I trust that, with the co-operation
of us all, that object will be secured.

is almost unanimously inclined to favour a reinforce-’
ment of the sanctions laid down in Council resolution
253 (196Q of 29 May 1968. The Spanish Government
has scrupulously applied the provisions of that resolution and remains convinced that that policy must be
maintained.

36. Mr,

DE PINIES
(Spain) (interpretation from
Hearing you, Mr. President, speaking our
language is for me a source of both pride and satisfaction. And this to be sure is not the only tie that binds
us together; it is but one among many. To see Colombia
so worthily represented by you, Sir, presiding over
this eminent organ of the United Nations, is cause
for congratulation
not only for the members of this
Council, but for you personally as well. For although
YOU have held so many public offices in your lifetime,
this is, in essence, a further recognition of your great
qualities and of the mastery with which you are conducting our debates. In the discharge of your functions,
Mr. President, you shall never lack the collaboration
of the Spanish delegation.
Spnnish):

42. There is no full agreement, however, as to the
scope of the responsibilities involved. In that regard,
my delegation, in its intervention on this item last June
[1481stmeeting], pointed out that theprimaryresponsibility devolves upon the United Kingdom as the
administering Power. The situation created inRhodesia
is the result of Great Britain’s colonial policy, built
upon laws that remain in force under the secessionist
rCgime. The United Kingdom is responsible for having
tolerated the attitude of the British minority that continues to maintain its domination, based on racial discrimination and contempt for the value and worth of
the human person, over the Zimbabwe people, which
possess inalienable rights over the territory.

37. I wish also to offer a special word of appreciation
to Ambassador Terence of Burundi for the skill and
dexterity with which he guided our debates last
January, I should likewise wish to offer at this time
a cordial word of congratulation to the representative
of China, who, by his quiet efforts relieved us from
having Council meetings so that we could prepare for
the meeting that is being held now.

43. My delegation has already drawn the Council’s
attention to the fact that this attitude on the part of
Britain ill accords with its previous assertions that the
interests of the people are, as stated in the United
Nations Charter, “paramount”.
It conveys the impression that once again the interests that are being
safeguarded are those which suit the artificially
imported British minorities contrary to the legitimate
rights of peoples deprived of their freedom or their
territory.

38. The Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Zambia is participating in our deliberations. My delegation
offers him a warm word of thanks for the contribution
he is making to this .important debate.
39. After listening carefully to the speakers who have
taken part in our discussion, my delegation has reached
the conclusion that there appears to be unanimity concerning the attitude of condemnation adopted by the
members of this Council in the face of the deplorable
situation that the British settlers have created in Southern Rhodesia. Many previous speakers, and in particular the Minister. of State for Foreign Affairs of
Zambia, have depicted for us the tragic situation in
which the Zimbabwe people finds itself, deprived as
it is of its legitimate
rights by a people artificially
imported and settled in a land which does not belong
to them, The international
community cannot remain
indifferent to these facts. All the formal acts by which
the settlers in Rhodesia have sought to legalize their
situation in the territory-the
political declarations, the
constitutions
and the referendum-are
devoid of
meaning. To ask theusurpers themselves for their opinion concerning the colonial situation that they and the
administering
Power have created is a manoeuvre that
can deceive no one.

44. Apart from that responsibility, which we might
term causal, there are other aspects too. The representative of the United Kingdom has told us that his
Government is scrupulously applying the sanctions
agreed upon by the Security Council, thereby evading
all other responsibility in view of the obvious failure
of the policy of sanctions. But in my delegation’s
opinion, the policy of sanctions should be understood,
within the context of the Charter, as a continuing and
intensifying process directed toward one goal, that of
putting an end to a situation which, under the terms
of the Charter, constitutes a threat to international
peace and security. The Salisbury rCgime knows that
the sanctions will be limited because the United Kingdom does not seem prepared to use all the resources
at its command. With such moral support it is not difficult to withstand an economic blockade.
45. In the course of this debate many delegations have
recalled that in similar situations-and
T believe that
I remember hearing Northern Ireland and the territory
of Anguilla mentioned in this connexion-the
United
Kingdom has had recourse to all sorts of methods to
maintain its authority, and there are many well-known I
cases in which British naval demonstrations have coincided with political decisions that unquestionably have
served the purposes of the United Kingdom Government.

40. The United Nations has declared that those formal acts to which I have refered are contrary to the
provisions of the Charter and the resolutions of the
United Nations, and cannot therefore ever be a basis
for any legitimate status.
41. Apparently there is also agreement on the necessity of adopting measures to put an end to this intolerable situation. There are, however, certain divergences
concerning the scope of such measures, bu .t opinion

46. In view of everything I have just said, my
delegation, though appreciating the efforts of the British Government to find a solution to this problem and
5

53. We are isolating ourselves from the whole world
by force of habit. We come to our offices. Some of
us receive certain instructions. We are becoming cogs
in the machines of politicians all over the world, with
hardly any exceptions. One might ask what bearing
this has on the item before us. The crux of the matter
is whether the United Nations can devise machinery
that will work or whether we should continue with
oratory and verbiage and then, as I say, lose the cotidence of the whole world in us.

dnderstanding the difficulties of a political nature that
prevent it from satisfying its desire to go further, considers that the United Kingdom draft resolution, being
inadequate, will not help to solve this grave ‘cdnflict.
In our desire to facilitate the task of the British Government itself, we believe that a resolution which focuses
on the problem of direct responsibility for Rhodesia,
without diminishing
it or shunting it off on other
countries, since’it would thus reflect the clamour of
world public opinion, would make it possible for the
British Government to undertake all the measures
necessary to enable it to settle the dispute.

54. The question of Southern Rhodesia is a case in
point. We cannot afford any more to peddle promises
which cannot be fulfilled. I have listened very carefully
to and read the deliberations of this Council. I commiserate with my good friend the representative of the
United Kingdom. I have mentioned in the Fourth Committee time and again, when this question was discussed at length, that one cannot ask the United Kingdom
to do what it perhaps cannot do.

47. The PRESIDENT
(inte~pretatiorzfronz
Spanish):
I am very grateful to Ambassador De Pinies for the
generous words he addressed to the President.
48. I should now like to inform the Council that I
have just received a communication from the representative of Saudi Arabia [S/9710) to the effect that he
would like to be invited to participate in this debate,
without the right to vote. If P hear no objection and
with the consent of the Council, I propose to invite
that representative to take a place at the Council table.

55. Many of us here doubt the intentions of the United
Kingdom. Unfortunately,
the United Kingdom, like
a few other European Powers, at one time had a vast
empire and the remnants of that empire, one of which
is Southern Rhodesia, make us suspicious. I will hold
no brief for the United Kingdom.

At the invitation of the President, Mr+. J. Baroody
(Snucli Arabia) took n place at the Security Council
table,

56. In my younger days-although I was an insignificant person, I was not like Lord Caradon--I did my
little bit to fight colonialism in my area. I would still.
fight it wherever I find it if I had the physical energy
to do so. But the United Kingdom cannot be expected
to make itself bankrupt; nor, I believe, is the Government prepared to fall because of the sentiment of the
majority of the white people in the United Kingdom-and
I visit the United Kingdom every year on
fact-finding tours, not to talk with the Government
but to talk with many of my friends there, whom I
met in the late twenties and the whole decade of the
thirties. That majority of white people will bring down
any Government that sends troops to fight Southern
Rhodesia.

49, The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfiom
Spanish):
I now call on the representative of Saudi Arabia to
make his statement.
50. Mr. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia): Mr, President,
it is indeed an honour for me to address the Council
under your presidency. As we all know, we are on
‘the threshold of spring. The United Nations, including
the Security Council, has been proliferating resolutions
and all kinds of documents in all seasons, so that one
is reminded of the profusion of spring leaves on sappy
boughs,
5 1, Promises have been peddled ever since the inception of the United Nations. What we need is language
that can be translated into action so that we may not
become the laughing-stock
of peoples all over the
world. We in the United Nations can hardly afford
further abortive efforts, whether in the Council or in
the General Assembly. We should learn from the fact
that the League of Nations foundered. If we cannot
learn anything from the League of Nations, I think
that we may have a trauma in the not-too-distant future,
because faith in this Organization is being lost.

57. Of course, I am saying it bluntly. Lord Caradon
will say it in his own politic way, embellishing it with
his eloquence and diction, and once in a while cracking
a few jokes, which relieves the tragedy. Whether or
not the white people of the United Kingdom are right
in feeling that way is beside the point. They feel that
way-they
may be prejudiced-and
they are prejudiced. But does the Council think that they are the
only people that are prejudiced? No, Sir. Even in our
part of the world we have certain prejudices.

52. If there were an alternative to this Organization,
one would perhaps console oneself and try other
methods of solving intricate problems, but each one
of us knows that there is no alternative
to this
Organization.
If it falls we fall with it; the whole world
will fall with it. That is why I venture to speak to
sound a warning that time may be running short and
we should take heed so that we do not fall into the
abyss because of our rhetoric and self-complacency
inside this Council and the Headquarters itself.

5’8. But speaking on this particular issue, the United
Kingdom Government would fall overnight if it were
to wage war on Ian Smith and his cohorts. Therefore,
my African and Asian brothers-because
we are all
united in submitting resolutions hoping that something
can be done by way of the Council-rule
out any intervention by force on the part of the United Kingdom.
59. How happy I was and how lucky the British
people were when the British Empire fell-and
its fall
6

was mighty. Mr. Churchill saw the liquidation of that
British Empire before he was interred. We were all
proud. How lucky the British people are. None should
be praised more than that gentleman who sits on the
Council, Lord Caradon, who, as he mentioned, and
I remember, opposed his Government when he was
fighting for the liberation of certain African people.

are the Mongdl
type, the yellow, the white, the
brown-all shades of colour. From my knowledge and
from my conversation I do not think there is any discrimination on the grounds of colour in the Soviet
Union.
65. Then there are the anti-colonial attitudes of both.
We know that the United States was a colony. It was
only’in 1776 that the United States was freed or liberated. We do not have to go into the history of Russia.
But we salute Mr. Khrushchev, who introduces the
famous anti-colonial
resolution 1514 (XV).” Both
countries have power. Both are anti-racial and both
are anti-colonial.
What are those two super-Powers
doing with their power? Let us see. Are they bringing
justice to people who are not allowed to exercise the
right of self-determination?
I submit that some of them
try. But maybe they are right. They do not wish to
have a confrontation.
I go back to the conversations
I had four or five years ago-confidential
talks, They
are no longer confidential now; four or five years pass
and the whole thing is like a broken record. The Russian
representative-I
do not want to name him; it was
before our friend Mr. Malik returned to us here, and
I had the privilege and pleasure of knowing him for
twenty years-communicated
with Moscow, and he
replied to me: “Our hearts are with the Southern
Rhodesians and with the peoples of Africa, but, to
put it succinctly, we do not want to have a confrontation
because a confrontation might. mean war, We are in
the United Nations. We cannot afford to have a war
with all those atomic bombs flying around-the whole
world would come to an end,”

60. There is an Arab proverb which says: “God does
not expect any person to carry more than he can bear”.
That is why I sometimes feel sorry that some of our
African friends and Asian brothers are labouring under
the impression that the United Kingdom still has the
power of the Empire. That Empire is gone. Do not
expect anything from the United Kingdom and, I say,
fortunately for the people of the United Kingdom. They
are no longer burdened. There is no more rationalizing
power as the white man’s burden and such balderdash,
to use an American expression that I learnt here.
61. Therefore, I sometimes really feel sad when I
see the United Kingdom condemned-and
I mean that.
Perhaps it could do more and perhaps it should do
more. But the onus is placed on the United Kingdom-and
I think it is wrong. On whom shall we place
the onus? We should find a solution, otherwise I will
be engaging in rhetoric, in oratory, signifying nothing.
62. 1 shall deal with this subject, as I submit, in an
unorthodox manner. We know that throughout history
the mantle of power falls on the shoulders of certain
States. It so happens that the mantle of power, after
the Second World War, fell on the shoulders of the
‘United States of America and the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics-I
should like to say “Russia”,
it is easier for me. I will disclose to the Council that
four or five years ago I was active on this question.
I spoke to my American friends and I spoke to my
Soviet friends-if
I may call them so, a monarchist
like me, I have friends amongst them. I found out that
both are committed
to fight discrimination
and colonialism. The persons with whom I talked were honourable men and they were not hiding anything. They
were really against colonialism and racialism. It was
no surprise, for after all the people who populated the
United States fled from Europe at one time because
of persecution on racial grounds and because their
human rights were trampled underfoot.

66. A very serious-minded American-I
do not want
to name that American gentleman-told
me, in
unequivocal words, that this was aquestion that should
be the responsibility of the United Kingdom. “Passing
the buck”, they call it in America. The United Kingdom at that time-1 do not think Lord Caradon was
here then-was
doing its best to find a solution. It
brought pressure; it spoke of sanctions; it spoke of
many things, but all those efforts, unfortunately, were
abortive.
67. Q~lo v&is? Where now? The two world Powers
do not want to have a confrontation; thus the people
who do not exercise self-determination are left “in the
cold”. Is there not a way, on this particular issue-I
am not talking of South-East Asia now-for
both
Powers to agree and, if necessary-and I am far from
recommending that they should use force-take drastic
measures-what
drastic measures? I shall come to
that-and stop Ian Smith and the other racists in that
part of Africa?

63. So it was not unnatural for the United States to
be against racial discrimination.
Although I must say
that, with the years, some of them have assumed certain-what
shall I saylself-righteous
rrianners with
regard to people that are not lily-white. To speak
plainly they-not
all of them, because the civil rights
movement is to be lauded in this country-are
against
the blacks. We know that-the
25 million of them.
But I think this problem will be solved one day because
after all those blacks are as American as Abraham
Lincoln and Washington. If they do not say that they
are, then the only Americans are the Red Indians who
are put in reservations. But I believe that the civil
rights movement is making great progress.

68. Incidentally,
I do not want to mention Portugal
in this context, because Portugal is not racist; I have
relatives in Brazil; and remember that Brazil was a
Portuguese colony. You should not lump the Portuguese with Ian Smith: they may be colonial, yes,
but they are not racist. They mix, there is intermarriage and they are not self-righteous. They do not

64. We come to the Soviet Union. It is a conglomeration of Republics-I
believe sixteen of them. There

2 Ofjkinl Records of’ the General Ameddy,
Plenary Meetings, 869th meeting.

7

Fijteerdl

Session,

i

believe, like some people of the North-not
all people
of the North-that
God has made a mould for them,
and then He made several other moulds. I do not know,
as an Arab, what mould I would be in. That, however,
is parenthetical.

going on in the world and to indoctrinate them in the
principles and lofty ideals of the United Nations, and
not to allow Ian Smith and his cohorts to brain-wash
them with the idea that whites are supermen.

69. There are several ways open to both the Soviet
Union and the United States if they agree on this question. They should, through the United Nations, agree
to train Africans who will form a real cordon sanitaire
around Rhodesia, to the extent it is humanly possible.
There should be United Nations guards in Zambia,
for example, and the other contiguous countries,
financed and officered or advised by the Soviet Union
and the United States.

74. It can be done, but it needs funds. The United
Nations budget is suffering. Why should it suffer? *
Every day we hear of the loss in South-East Asia of
planes that cost several million dollars each and are
used to kill people in war. Money is spent right and
left on war. Why is it not spent for a good cause here?
The Office of Public Information of the United Nations
must be strengthened; we must have educational pro,grammes for the whites as well as for the blacks in
Southern Rhodesia and other parts of Africa. It costs
money for announcers, and so on.

70. Why do they send advisers to the Far East? I
hear about nothing but advisers in South Viet-Nam
and North Viet-Nam. Why do they not send advisers
to organize and form, through the United Nations, a
cordon sarzitnire against the racists in Africa? Why
not? Because the Africans and the Asians happen to
be weak; they do not exercise power. All right, we
are Members of the United Nations, we have rights,
just as they have. Why not exercise those rights here
through the United Nations?

75, I am not a technician, but I should think they
could “bug” those radio programmes. “Bugging” is
something that will alert the people. Why are we not
listening? When I was discussing this plan, when I
said that some of those planes like the ones that were
sent over Russia at one time to spy on it-1 do not
recall what they were called-should
be sent to drop
educational leaflets over Southern Rhodesia some said
that most of the blacks do not know how to read or
write. Then let our Japanese friends donate about
20,000 transistor radios every year to be parachuted
over Southern Rhodesia so that the people can hold
them and hide them and listen to what is going on

7 1. This is short of using force. I said once that force
could be used, provided it did not cost a lot of life
and treasure, by training paratroopers so that they
could pounce on Government House, round up the
racists, put them in strait-jackets and have their minds
examined, without treating them badly. They must be
living in the Middle Ages to engage in such racism
in the second half of the twentieth century. But I am
sure they are not going to do that. They use force
when they abduct one another; they send troops into
Europe when they are fighting one another; they send
paratroopers into Europe. Many paratroopers were
dropped behind the lines and performed wondrous feats
I hear. Even Mussolini was abducted by paratroopers.
Why do they not use paratroopers? They will not use
them. That is why I spoke of a sort of cordon
sanitnire-not
that I do not agree with all the sanctions
and other measures that are embodied in this draft
resolution before us.

76. There are many ways, Where there is a will there
is a way. There are many ingenious methods in which
you can do something, instead of each one coming
here and reading prepared notes. The United Nations
is not even interesting as a debating society any more.
We want something drastic, something done by people
who are committed to the United Nations. I am committed to the United Nations and I am not the only
one committed to the United,Nations.
Many, of my
colleagues are committed to the T,Jnited Nations, which
we consider transcends national interests. Otherwise
why should we be here as members?
77. These are stray thoughts. I am not going to
elaborate a plan now. I hope I am sowing a few seeds
that may germinate into something in the future. I will
wager that a year from now somebody will come here
to speak on the same subject and with a similar draft
resolution and nothing will happen. There are tW0
world Powers. They should ginger themselves UP and
do something. There is a war in South-east Asia. One
of the two mightiest Powers has committed about half
a million troops allegedly to fight the spread of an
ideology--communism.
Yet they sit here with the communists, they wine and dine and drink cocktails. I said
“allegedly”,
because it is a small Power. They do not
let them determine their own future. I am not
incriminating
anybody, but I have a right to talk. I
am an Asian, and in my part of the world an alien
people is fighting as the proxy of certain Western
Powers. We are the chess-board and the pieces are
not wooden pieces but human beings. We are the
pawns. Why is it that there are half a million men
in South-east Asia, but when it comes to Southern

72. Then the United Nations should take the lead,
with all its membership-not
depend only on those,
two States-by
educating the whites of Southern
Rhodesia to their responsibilities
and obhgations
towards their black brethren-if
they want to call them
‘ ‘brethren’ ’ , because, after all, they are all hojno
sapiens-and
they have been colonialists there; those
whites had come from the outside; they were not
natives. But the Africans will accept them-1 guess
they have no choice but to accept them-but
will not
be discriminated
against by them because of their
colour.
73. The Office of Public Information of the United
Nations could be strengthened; the budget could be
replenished with more funds; and let there be a programme for Rhodesia and other places in Africa where
racism is practised to enlighten the whites to what is
8

become a club for concoctions or for consensuses,
which have been abused. At one time I thought the
veto was nefarious. I thank God sometimes for the
veto, because the consensus is subversive sometimes,
though not all the time. In the consensus everyone
looks after his own little interests. They have a common
denominator
and a circle over the common
denominator-where
the rights of other people are concerned they are thrown into the East River.

Rhodesia they say they cannot do it? One thousand
and one excuses are found not to touch a hair on the
heads of Ian Smith and his colleagues. Whom are we
fooling by this talk around this horseshoe’table?
It
is not a good-luck horseshoe any more. Whom are
we fooling here? Ourselves? Some here are gullible
enough or smug enough in their positions but the
peoples of the world are more important. The Charter
begins with the words “We the peoples of the United
Nations” not “The Member States of the world”. Do
not think I am angry. This is my style. I am very
cool inside. But really one should be angry.
78. Lord Caradon has submitted a draft resolution
[S19674/Rev,I],
and, with his permission, I want to
draw his attention to certain things in it-if I remember
rightly, I did draw his attention to them-just
for the
sake of clarity, to show how certain interests are
served, but I am sure that on the part of Lord Caradon
it was not intentional, It is the word “urges” in paragraph 2. It says: “ . . . urges States not Members of
the United Nations, having regard to the principles
stated in Article 2 of the United Nations Charter, to
act accordingly”.
Since when have we been urging
States not Members of the United Nations? I have
been crying to the high heavens on human rights that
we should call on all States, regardless of whether or
not they are Members of the United Nations or of
the specialized agencies, Mentioning the specialized
agencies came later as an escape clause for some who
wanted to include certain countries which my country
does not recognize. But that is beside the point. We
are the United Nations here. How can we urge? We
may request. This is a step forward, in this sense, that in
good causes we should call on all peoples of the world,
whether or not they are members of the club called
the Uniteh Nations and wheiher or not they are members of the specialized agencies, But my point is this.
I do not know whether it will be adopted anyway,
but I think the word “urges” should be replaced by
“requests”,
“calls upon” or something like that. If
I know the English language correctly, “urges” has
a slight connotation of prodding. When it suits us we
urge them. When it does not suit us we neglect them.
That has been the case quite often, especially on questions of human rights, Whenever I had a draft resolution
in the Third Committee or elsewhere and addressed
a request to the whole world community, somebody
used to come and amend my request, saying that it
shouId be addressed only to the Member States--or,
if they are not Member States of the United Nations,
they should be members of the specidized agencies.
I think this is a step forward. We are having this Organization universalized-I
hope not only in this instance
but in all instances.
79. I am sorry if I have been a little blunt in my
frankness, but as1 have,said time and again, we should,
in the United Nations and all its oI;gans, say what we
mean and mean what we say. Quite often we resort
to the nineteenth-century
diplomacy of saying what
we do not mean and meaning’ what we do not say.
It is high time the United Nations became the sounding
board for all the world and not a place’for negotiations
in the antechambers. It is high time everything we s.aid
here was listened to by all the,world. This should not

80. I was really moved by the intervention of our
brother, the illustrious Foreign Minister of .?ambia
[1531st meeting]. He was not speaking from his head
alone. He was speaking from his heart. He came here
to express the feelings, the inner thoughts, of the African people, and I can feel with him, because I know
what it is to live under a foreign yoke. One of our
friends said, “He is a very nice man but he is
emotional,” Emotion is a healthy sign that he is alive.
He is expressing the feelings of his own people-not
only his own people in Zambia but the people of Africa
that are still being suppressed. When one of us from
Asia or Africa speaks, they sometimes crack jokes
about us as if we were only children. We consider
most Europeans children in civilization and culture and
here in the United States they are infants. If we do
not exercise power, it does not mean that we are not
human, that we do not have minds, that we do not
have the right to express our ideas humbly-and
not
superciliously or sanctimoniously as those who exercise power do.
81. I shall reserve the elaboration of my plan and
shall consult many of my colleagues between now and
the General Assembly, hoping that we can devise a
way-if I am still around and the United Nations is
still going strong, as I hope it will be-to get out of
this impasse of proliferating documents that 1sbecoming the laughing-stock of the world. We should see
that our language can be translated into deeds, into
action, and not become academic and mere dissertation
on what can be done and what cannot be done.
82. Mr. MAIJK (Union ofSoviet Socialist Republics)
(tmnslntedfrom &s&n):
This is the second time during the relatively short period in which the Security
Council has been debating the question of Southern
Rhodesia that the representative of the United
Kingdom, Lord Caradon, has reacted with extreme
nervousn&s to the statements of the Soviet delegation,
which were frank, true and based on incontrovertible
facts. This is neither new nor origin.al. We are, of
course, flattered that in his remarks he should have
devoted the greafer’ part of his attention to our’ state-,
ment, making only passing references to the statements
of the representative; of Syria and the Zambian Minister
of Foreign.Affairs. We were given first place, and we
are proud of it. We intei-pret the note of irritation in
Lord Caradon’s reply as a’healthy sign that we made
a cotiect appraisal of the United Kingdom’s role in
the tragedy which has befallen the Zimbabwe people,
who, as a result of the policy pursued by the’united
Kingdom, are now in the power of present-day white
imperialist pirates and .racists. That appraisal and the
general conclusions we drew are fully in keeping with
9

what has been said in the same connexion by the representatives of Zambia, Algeria, Burundi, Senegal,
Poland, Syria, Nepal and Pakistan. Thus the overwhelming majority of the members of the Security Council
and of the representatives who have taken part in the
discussion of this question emphatically condemn the
United Kingdom’s policy on the Rhodesian question.
Consequently, the fact that Lord Caradon has chosen
our statement as the target of his reply is a matter
of great satisfaction and pride to us, for we are among
those who are against racism, imperialism and colonialism. We have been in the past, are now, and
always will be in the ranks of the anti-imperialists,
and no attacks, from whatever quarter, will deter us
from that course.

the United Kingdom can make short work of a rkgime
which it considers to be in a state of rebellion, and
if it wanted to it could do so in this case too; but
it lacks the will,
87. Lord Caradon did not like our remark that the
South African racists and imperialist monopolies have
a deadly hatred of Africans. Yet the fact is that those
monopolies carry on a brisk trade with the South African racist rCgime, which is, in the real sense of the
term, the African-hater number one. Those who help
the African-hating South African racists thereby share
in that hatred. Why should it be argued that this is
not so? Lord Caradon thinks it is not so, but we are
deeply convinced that it is: whoever helps a murderer
is an accomp!ice in murder, and whoever helps a racist
is an accomplice in racism. There can be no two opinions about that. But Lord Caradon has his own opinion;
let him keep it.

83. Lord Caradon said that he was not giving a full
reply, which is regrettable. I should have preferred
a full reply from him, but he has disregarded two basic
points in our statement. Thus he did not give a full
reply but, in summarizing,
misrepresented
our
position, We realize that he does not like our criticism
of United Kingdom policy. The truth hurts. At the
same time, however, we note that the representatives
of the African countries quoted our statements both
when the Rhodesian question was last discussed and
during the present debate. There are, accordingly, two
kinds of truth: imperialist, colonialist, racist truth, and
the truth of those who are fighting for freedom and
national independence.

88. Lord Caradon disregarded the reference in our
statement to the fact that the United Kingdom has
a “TreasorvAct”
applicable to rebels, and if the will
were there that Act could be used against the rebels
in Southern Rhodesia as well. Lord Caradon also
ignored our statement regarding investments in Southern Rhodesia, In our statement we noted the beginning
of a wave of consulate closings in Southern Rhodesia.
This is certainly a positive factor, but after all, what
else could be done? There force of world public
opinion, the force of African unity as reflected in the
appeal to the Security Council by about forty African
states calling for the matter to be examined by the
Council, obliged the European states and the United
States of America to close their consulates in Southern
Rhodesia. This is one positive result of the discussion
of the question in the Security Council; but it is not
enough.

84. In the matter of sanctions Lord Caradon has obviously misrepresented our statement. We said that in
the Sanctions Committee the most active member is
the representative of the Un.ited Kingdom: he makes
a great to-do, produces documents and cites instances
of the violation of sanctions. We must therefore take
note also of the positive side of the United Kingdom
representative’s work in the Sanctions Committee, yet
the political appraisal we made is correct: the purpose
of all this to-do, this playing to the gallery, so to speak,
is to divert attention from the real facts-and the facts
are that the United Kingdom still refuses to take effective measures against tlie illegal rebel rCgime in Southern Rhodesia. That amounts to supporting the rCgime.

89. The Soviet delegation.declared that this wave of
consulate closings should be followed by a wave of
withdrawals of investments from the economy of
Southern Rhodesia-and
those investments are substantial. According to the latest statistics-I
read them
only today in the United States press-the
United
States holds about $55 million worth of investments
in Southern Rhodesia. This is a considerable sum.
There are official statistics showing that the United
Kingdom
has investments worth f200 million in
Southern Rhodesia. I believe that the withdrawal of
such a sum from the economy of Southern Rhodesia
would shake the rkgime there to its foundations. But
it is not being done, and that too amounts to supporting
the rCgime, Lord Caradon. Why do you accuse US of
misrepresenting the facts? We always base our statements on concrete facts, and the facts are precisely
these. If the Western Powers, after closing their consulates, were to go further and withdraw their investments, that would be a real blow to the illegal rebel
rCgime. But it is not being done, and failure to do
so is tantamount to supporting the rCgime. This is what
we have been saying and we will continue to say it.
None of your wordy rhetoric about the “old” and the
“new” will help. The facts cannot be concealed; there
is no getting away from them.

85. I listened with great attention to the statement
of my distinguished friend Mr, Baroody, but I cannot
agree with him when he says that the United Kingdom
is so weak, so impotent, that it can do nothing about
the illegal rebel rCgime in Southern Rhodesia. That
is an incorrect premise and assessment of the situation.
I am deeply convinced that if the United Kingdom
had the will to do so it could put into effect all those
measures which you, Mr. Baroody, suggested in your
speech against that r&me.
But what would that
require? It would require, as an essential condition,
that the United Kingdom had the will to do so, but
there is no such will, no such desire. That is tantamount
to supporting the illegal rebel racist regime in Southern
Rhodesia. Those are the facts, that is the real situation.
86. The United Kingdom has the capability, it is not
all that powerless. The distinguished representative of
Burundi put some facts before us here showing how
10

90. In the circumstances I feel it is appropriate to
ask the United Kingdom representative bluntly: does
the United Kingdom intend to withdraw its f200 million
from the Southern Rhodesian economy or not? That
is the paint. Accuse us of misrepresenting the facts,
if you like, but the facts are these.

who is helping the South African racists? That too
is obvious. It is clear from the first official United
,Nations document, on United Kingdom and United
States investments in the Republic of South Africa.
93. I ask you, Lord Caradon, where is the Soviet
delegation misrepresenting the facts? Here are official
statisticsdocuments
issued by the United Nations.
What right have you to say that the Soviet delegation
is misrepresenting the facts? Kindly prove it. I am
proving my point with facts, documents, quotations
and figures. That is how the matter really stands.

91. Lord Caradon also chose to ignore the question
of the part played by South Africa and Portugal.
Everyone in the world knows, and all of us here know,
that Portugal and South Africa are the closest friends
and allies of the racists in Southern Rhodesia. It was
not you, Lord Caradon, nor was it I, who invented
the term “the -Unholy Triple Alliance”-the
unholy
alliance formedby Portugal, South Africa and Southern
Rhodesia. Are Portugal and South Africa helping
Southern Rhodesia? Yes. This even you cannot deny.
Are they allies of Southern Rhodesia? Yes. This to6<
YOU cannot deny. Do they trade with Southern
Rhodesia? Yes. No one can deny that, not even YOU,
Lord Caradon. And who is helping South Africa? Who
is not only maintaining but expanding its economic
links with that country? We have quoted statistics on
this. It is the Western countries, the United States
and the United Kingdom in particular. Here are some
official statistics, compiled by the Unit on Apartheid
of the United Nations Secretariat in a document entitled Foreign Investment in the Republic of South
&?ic~,~ in the section on capital investment by the
Western countries in the Republic of South Africa at
the end of 1966. The investments amount to an
astronomical
figure-$5,313
million. For such a relatively small country as South Africa investments totalling over $5,000 million represent a collosal sum. Any
of the countries whose representatives are here in this
room would be happy to have $5,000 million invested
in its economy. That would give its economy a tremendous boost, United Kingdom investments in the
Republic of South Africa amount to $3,313 million,
that is, over half of the total investments; the United
States accounts for $697 million. That is obviously
assistance to the South African racists-certainly
no
one \ 411deny it. The South African racists are helping
SOUhern Rhodesia,, Certainly no one will deny that,
either. Not only will no one deny it; it is recognized
in an official United Nations document. I have before
me the second report of the Committee established
in pursuance of Security Council resolution 253 (1968)
of 29 May 1968, referred to for the sake of brevity
as the Sanctions Committee, I refer to paragraph 45
of this report, which is dated 12 June 1969 [S/92.52]:
“On the basis of all the facts at its disposal, the
committee
wishes to state that the Governments of
South Africa and Portugal have not taken any
measures to implement the provisions of resolution
253 (1968), have continued to maintain
close
economic,
trade and other relations with the illegal
rkgime and to permit the free flow of goods from
Southern Rhodesia through the territories of South
Africa and the colony of Mozambique and their ports
and transport facilities.”

94. In an effort to conceal these facts, to get away
from them, Lord Caradon resorts to rhetoric. But that
will not take him very far.
95. I am not even talking about the colossal volunie
of trade between the United Kingdom and South
Africa, which has reached the sum of about $1,000
million and is growing every year. South Africa calmly
hands over merchandise from the Western countries
to Southern Rhodesia and supports the racists there.
There you have an illegal rebel rCgime, and that is
how you fight it!
96. As regards the substance of the present position
of the country represented by Lord Caradon, we shall
judge it when the vote is taken on the resolutions before
the Council.
97. The Afro-Asian delegations, the representatives
of the countries of Asia and Africa in the Security
Council, have submitted their draft resolution [S/9696
and Corr.1 and 21, to paragraphs 8 and 9 of which
I should like to draw attention. Paragraph 8 reads:
“Condemns the assistance given by the Governments of Portugal and South Africa and by other
imperialist
Powers , . .“--I
repeat, imperialist
Powers-in this text a spade is called a spade-“to
the illegal racist minority rCgime in defiance of
resolutions of the Security Council and demands
the immediate withdrawal of the troops of the South
African aggressors from the territory of Zimbabwe”.
This is based on the report of the Sanctions Committee,
to which I have already referred.
98.

Paragraph 9 reads:
“‘Decides that Member States and members of the
specialized agencies shall apply against the Republic
of South Africa and Portugal the measures set out
in resolution
253 ,(1968) and in the present
resolution”;

in other words, shall apply sanctions against the Republic of South Africa and Portugal. We shall see how
the ,representative of the United Kingdom votes on
these paragraphs and on this resolution. That will be
indicative; it will tell us whether the United Kingdom
is helping the Southern Rhodesian racists or whether
it seriously intends to help Africa and the Zimbabwe
people to win freedom from racist tyranny.

92. This is an indictment of those who are giving
the Southern Rhodesian racists direct assistance. And
’ United Nations publication, Sales No, E.68.II.K.8.

11

a text would depend on the decision of nations aware
oftheir international responsibilities. Without that contribution of goodwill and genuine co-operation, this
problem and, generally speaking, all those that affect
international peace and security will not find a solution
compatible with the interests ofjustice. Each and every
nation of the world bears a share of responsibility,
whose degree of weightiness varies, of course, but the
roots and theoretical derivation of that responsibility
are unquestionably identical.

99. There is only one conclusion to be drawn fmm
the discussion of this matter in the SeCUritY Council:
racism, imperialism and colonialism are in*the dock
before the United Nations and the whole world. Their
‘days are numbered. To change this inexorable and
irreversible march of history is not within the power
of anyone, not even a British Lord.
100. The
PRESIDENT
(interpl’elation
fro??I
,spanislz): The list of speakers for the present debate
has been exhausted. I shall therefore now speak as
the representative of COLOMBIA.

107. Should neither of the two draft resolutions meet
with the approval of the Security Council, I believe
that we should continue trying to arrive at some formula
which, as far as possible, would command unanimous
support.

101. Before taking up the problem that is before US
today, I should like to put before the members of the
Council a matter of concern which might be a subject
for future consideration.

108. Speaking now as PRESIDENT
of the Council,
I call on the representative of the United Kingdom,
who has asked to speak on a point of order.

102. In guiding the debate and in conducting the consultations I have found it somewhat difficult to divide
my mind and separate myself from my country’s
attitude on a matter in order to act with complete impartiality in my capacity as President of the Security
Council. That does not mean that I have not succeeded
in achieving that impartiality,
as I hope members will
have recognized. But I should like to put this matter
before members for them to think about, without, however, going so far as to suggest solutions now.

109. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I was anxious to speak to the Council on a matter of procedure
and I deliberately refrained from delaying the Council
by an endeavour to answer the Ambassador of the
Soviet Union. I shall not do so now, beyond assuring
him that from the date of the comprehensive compulsory sanctions imposed, no capital, no goods, no trade
have flowed from my country to the illegal regime or
to Rhodesia itself. Those are the facts which I would
ask him to remember.

103. Thefact that, because1 amPresident, I am called
upon to speak last, relieves me of the need to go into
many of the details that other delegations have
expounded in ample terms. But I should like clearly
to define Colombia’s position.

110. Turning to the question of procedure, I wish
to put a serious consideration before the Council. I
go back to the arguments that I have put forward for
the maximum endeavour to achieve agreement and COoperation so that we can take the most effective action
for the purposes which we share. In order to do so,
we should have regard to the principle, well-established
in this Council over many years, that before a vote
is taken all of us should be in a position to know the
full facts and all the factors which must be taken into
account before we proceed to the vote. I have some
status in this matter because I am the sponsor of one
of the draft resolutions, which I put forward to the
Council at the beginning
of our deliberations
[Sl9676/Rev.l].

104. The statements of the members of the Council
on the question before us have been characterized by
a common element which I cannot fail to emphasize,
nor could it go unnoticed. The Security Council has
unanimously expressed its emphatic repudiation of the
adventure upon which the Salisbury regime has
embarked and has condemned a situation which is at
odds with justice, which is unacceptable within the
system of nobler standards of behaviour, to which the
United Nations is primarily directed and, which is of
course, incompatible
with the principle of the selfdetermination of peoples.
105. For our own part, for reasons as old as our
country, colonialism and any tendency by a racist
minority to impose it.s rule will inevitably meet with
our most emphatic repudiation, That has been our position in the past, that is our criterion and our conviction
now and it shall continue to be our attitude in the
future.

111. We all know that we have worked together in
consultations over a period of several days, seeking
to find the maximum agreement among us. There are
therefore several considerations which we must take
into account. We have the United Kingdom
draft
resolution, never intended to be final or complete but
nevertheless intended to carry the maximum support
of all members. We have also the draft resolution put
forward by Afro-Asian members of this Council [S/9696
and Corr.1 and 21, which has been before us for some
little time, of which we have been aware. We also
heard a set of proposals put forward to US by the Ambassador of Finland when he spoke to US, and we paid
great attention to what he said. We understood that
in due course he would present to us a draft resolution
that would incorporate those proposals.

106. While the draft resolutions submitted for consideration in the Council contain certain obvious and
necessary features, they do not completely coincide
with the attitude of my delegation, which ‘would hope
to see a text which was directed towards the same
objectives but which at the same time would be likely
to command broad support; today, more than ever,
that is of great importance in the eyes of the world,
Needless to say, the results achieved by even such
12

112. All of us have given our minds to those three
propositions. Two of them are in the form of formal
draft resolutions submitted to us. The third is still not
before us as a formal presentation, but the proposals
which it was to include were very clearly explained
to us, All of LIS have been considering the whole matter
against the background of those three initiatives.

Asian text might change. I wish to emphasize that my
delegation has not been consulted about a paragraphby-paragraph vote on the text and has not had an opportunity of considering what its position would be if certain paragraphs were eliminated. All members of the
Council will recognize that such a move would create
an entirely new situation. Surely the state of affairs
in Southern Rhodesia is far too serious for us to act
without all the deliberation and reflection the problem
deserves. We would. not be doing ourselves justice if
we should take final decisions today on what would
be, in the circumstances I have mentioned, a substantially different draft resolution from the one originally
submitted and the one on which we have been reflecting. My own instructions, frankly, do not cover such
a contingency.

113. Speakmg, as I say, solely to a question of procedure, it is my strong view that we should not proceed
today to the vote on two only of those propositions,
but that we should allow some further time so that
the third can also be taken into full account. The fact
is that, speaking for the administering Power, Great
8ritain, which all of us agree must have the right to
be heard, at least, in this matter, we wish to work
with members of the Council to achieve the maximum
agreement. We have so undertaken from the beginning
of our proceedings. We confirm our view that that
should be the course to be followed. I therefore would
put it to the Council that it would be right to allow
ourselves another twenty-four hours so that we can
study these considerations in full before we come to
our conclusion. I would put it as high as this: that
if we are in favour of fair and full consideration, if
we are genuinely in favour of endeavouring to find
the fullest measure of agreement, then to refuse an
application for a delay of so short a time would be
against the traditions of this Council, against the interests of the majority of people in Rhodesia, and certainly
against the reputation that this Council has established
for itself over the years.

117. My delegation, therefore, would also wish at
least twenty-four hours to consider any substantial
modification or any possible modification of the propositions on which we will be asked to vote. I would
therefore very strongly and respectfully urge the
Council, as a courtesy to those of us who need new
instructions to meet this contingency and in accordance
with our customary practice in similar circumstances
to defer the vote until tomorrow’. I would particularly
ask the sponsors of the Afro-Asian draft to support
this reasonable request for a twenty-four hour delay.
from
118. The
PRESIDENT
(intelpretntion
Spanish): I should like to ask whether the request for
postponement is based on the premise that there would
be a paragraph-by-paragraph
vote on the Afro-Asian
draft, or whether it is for postponement in any event.

114. I therefore suggest for your consideration that
we might agree together-I
think we have heard at
this point all the speeches that are to be made in the
Collncil-that
we should allow ourselves a short period
for
further reflection and consultation
before we
attempt to come to any coticlusion. Speaking as the
sponsor of the draft resolution which has precedence,
I would ask that the vote should not be taken until,
shall we say, tomorrow afternoon at a meeting, if you
will agree, at 3 o’clock. I will, if necessary, put forward
a formal proposal to that effect but I should like to
consult other members of the Council on what seems
to me an unassailable proposition.

119. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): The position is perfectly clear as far as I am concerned. I believe
that if we vote today we vote without adequate opportunity to consider all the factors in the matter before
us. It would be preferable, I am sure, in the interests
of the Council and the subject we discuss that we should
give ourselves a little time for further consultation and
reflection, and indeed to obtain instructions in different
contingencies, before we proceed to a vote on a matter
of this consequence.
PRESIDENT
(intelp/,etutio/z
from
120. The
Spnnislz): I call on the representative of Sierra Leone
on a point of order.

115. The
PRESIDENT
(interpret&on
fiorn
Spnnish): The representative of the United States also
wishes to speak on a point of order, and I call on
him now,

121. Mr, NICOL (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, we
have listened with much interest to the debate this
afternoon and the past few days under your Presidency.
The decision on the point of order raised is yours to
make under rule 30 of the provisional rules of procedure.

116. Mr. YOST (United States of America): We have
just heard an eloquent plea that the vote on the two
draft resolutions before us should be postponed until
tomorrow. My delegation most earnestly supports that
I’equest. I believe all of us around the table entered
this chamber today in the expectation that we would
be voting on the two draft resolutions before us as
they stand. However, from informal discussions which,
I believe, have been taking place among some
members, it now unexpectedly appears that this may
not
entirely be the case, There seems to be some expectation that, with the deletion of certain paragraphs,
the attitude of some delegations towards the Afro-

122. We have also listened with sympathy to Lord
Caradon’s proposal. But, on behalf of the Afro-Asian
members which have presented the second draft
resolution, I would say that we do not feel able to
accept the proposal of an adjournment. Our positions
have been stated and are quite clear. We do not wish
to embarrass the representative
of the United
Kingdom, I repeat, but we would remind him that we
13

accepted under pressure that he should speak on
Friday, eleven days ago, when that was not convenient
for us. Similarly, we must ask him now to accept that
we wish this matter to be voted on this afternoon.

representative insists on postponing the vote. What
has happened? Why is he insisting on this?
129. Two draft resolutions are before the Council.
He speaks of some third draft resolution, but no third
draft has been formally submitted. He is asking for
twenty-four hours in which to study the third draft,
but no such third draft exists. When it is submitted
every one of us will have the right to ask for twenty-four
hours in which to study it and to obtain instructions.
That argument is therefore without foundation, We
do not need any twenty-four hours to vote on the two
drafts which we already have. Both of them were submitted some time ago. We have all studied them
carefully, every paragraph, every word, every full stop,
every comma. I am therefore somewhat surprised by
the statement of the United States representative, who
apparently-to
judge from what he said-has only
general instructions and does not know how to vote
on individual paragraphs. I do not see how this can
actually happen. If you have instructions on how to
vote on the whole, you also have instructions on how
to vote on separate parts of the text. Therefore that
argument is not very convincing either.

123. We have heard the representative of the United
States, But the draft resolutions have been in front
of us for several days and have been discussed paragraph by paragraph in consultations, and we feel, without any discourtesy-and
I speak on behalf of the five
which presented
the second draft
members
resolution-that
we ought to reach some decision on
the matter this afternoon.
124. The
PRESIDENT
(i~zterprefution
jkz
Spa&/z): I call on the representative of Burundi on
a point of order.
125. Mr. TERENCE (Burundi) (interpretation
fiorn
&e&z): In the same spirit as the Ambassador of Sierra
Leone I should like to say, on behalf of the Afro-Asian
delegations which on 11 March submitted the draft
resolution contained in document S/9696 and Corr.1
and 2, that we fully understand t-he feelings expressed
by the representatives of the United Kingdom and the
United States. We also know that this question of
Rhodesia has been before the Council for almost three
weeks. I should like to support the statement of the
representative of the United Kingdom, who said that
.the world must receive a’message and that we must
act in the interests of the Zimbabwe people. That
people is probably impatient and it wants to learn of
the results of the debate in the Security Council concerning their fate. Thus we should like to ask that
the vote be taken since such a measure would be fully
in keeping with the initial course on which the representative of the United Kingdom launched the debate when
he stated that his delegation wished to see a solution
adopted as quickly as possible. Therefore, we consider
that a new postponement would be tantamount
to
delaying the debate unduly and might give rise to complications which would prevent the President from
meeting the ardent wish we expressed to him a few
days ago that this series of meetings be concluded.

130. I do not know what other draft resolutions will
be submitted-none
of us know. There was some mention of a Finnish draft resolution; but tomorrow there
may be a Nicaraguan draft resolution, or perhaps a
Polish draft resolution, or perhaps a new draft resolution from Sierra Leone. There may be any number
of draft resolutions. Then we will have the right, under
the rules of procedure, to ask for twenty-four hours
in which to study the texts and obtain instructions,
But at the moment, considering that the two draft
resolutions before us were submitted some time ago,
quite a few days ago, we have had an opportunity
of studying them, of informing our Governments about
them, and of obtaining instructions. I can therefore
see no reason for postponing the vote on these two
draft resolutions today.
131. The
from
PRESIDENT
(interpwtation
Spanislz): I call on the representative of the United
Kingdom on a point of order.

126. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (trardntedfiom
Xussinfz): The Soviet delegation
has listened with great attention to the arguments’put
forward both by those who do not .wish the two draft
resolutions before the Council to be voted on today
and by those who insist on a vote being taken. We
think the arguments put forward by the representatives
of the African countries are more convincing,

132. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I do not
think it would be well to extend this discussion. I would
maintain that it is a clear division between those who
wish to work for agreement and those who are determined that there shall not be an agreement. I would
therefore formally wish to propose under rule 33, paragraph 3, of the provisional rules of procedure that the
Council should be adjourned until 3 o’clock tomorrow
afternoon.

127. Indeed we all remember how at the very beginning, at the 1530th meeting, Lord Caradon made impassioned appeals for haste: time was pressing, an illegal
rebel regime had been set up, and urgent measures
had to be taken against it.

133.

The

from
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
The Council has heard the proposal that this
meeting be adjourned. Under the rules that proposal
has precedence over any other motion.

Spanish):

128. AS we observed in our first statement at that
meeting, the African representatives were kind enough
to take Lord Caradon’s wishes into account and agreed
to call a meeting and hear what he had to say, NOW
he suddenly does an about-face, The United Kingdom

134. I call on the representative of Sierra Leone on
a point of order.
135. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): This is just to say,
on behalf of my colleagues again, that we should like
14

10 oppose

the adjournment. I do not think it is a matter
of agreement or disagreement. It is a matter of agreement and mure agreement or less agreement, because
there are certain proposals in both draft resolutions
on which everybody agrees. Some pe.ople feel that the
agreement should be extended in a certain direction,
while others feel it should remain in a limited direction.
We fail to SP bvhat an addition of twenty-four hours
would do tc .,:lnge the position.

141. The representative of the Soviet Union, for
example, has frequently done so, in my recollection.
Those requests have almost invariably been granted,
in the spirit of courtesy and mutual accommodation
which governs the business of this Council,
142. There are many differences of substance
between us and we try to resolve them as best we
can, over a period of time; but in order to do so, we
try to conduct our business in such a way as to give
rise to as little difference and as little dissatisfaction
and resentment as possible. Therefore, I must say that
I do find legitimate a request designed to give several
members of the Council an opportunity to reflect on
a new situation. This is not simply a question of the
text of the draft resolution, with which, of course, as
the representative of Sierra Leone points out, we have
been fully familiar for a long time. A new situation
was created by private consultations after the meeting
had begun-as far as we are aware-in which we were
not involved; and that has presented a new set of circumstances of great gravity and moment, on which
we certainly would have wished to have further instructions from our Government.

136. The
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
jk1~71
Spnnislz): I call on the representative of Burundi on
a point of order.
l

137. Mr, TERENCE
(Burundi) (irzterpretafion from
Freltclz): I hope you will bear with me. Following upon
the statement of the representative ctf the United
Kingdom, I wonder where the majority lies because
the point raised by the representative of Sierra Leone
is the reflection of the views of five delegations; supported by the representative of the Soviet Union. True,
the representative of the United Kingdom has raised
a motion that was seconded by a delegation; therefore
we would ask the President to rule in the light of the
facts that 1 have just mentioned.

143. Voting on a draft resolution of this magnitude,
importance and scope is not a matter to be undertaken
lightly. We had previously considered, and I explained
in my comments on the draft resolution, some of the
difficulties that confronted us; but, as we are all quite
aware, the exact composition and balance of the draft
resolution make a difference to some delegations: some
can vote for one paragraph and not for others, and
vice versa. Therefore, a fundamental change may OCCUI
in the course of paragraph-by-paragraph
voting.

The
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
Spn~isk): Actually these are no longer points of order
but this is a general debate. We shall therefore proceed
to a vote on the United Kingdom motion that the meeting be adjourned until tomorrow.
138.

112 .~CVOLII.: China, Finland, France, Nicaragua,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

144. Now we entirely agree with the statement that
the representative of the United Kingdom made earlier
in this meeting, in which he explained that it would
be impossible for his Government to undertake applying force in the special circumstances that exist in
Southern Rhodesia. We think that his explanation was
a convincing one and that it would not be in the interest
of the United Nations or the people of Southern
Rhodesia-and
I speak, of course, of the people. as
a whole-if any such action were undertaken; none
of us can fully foresee the repercussions and consequences of that action.

Agsrimt: Burundi, Nepal, Poland, Sierra Leone,
Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia.
Abslnirzirzg : Colombia,

Spain.

The sesult of the vote ~vas 6 in favour,
wifh 2 clbstentiorw .

7 against

The motion was not adopted, having failed to obtain
fhe flffimntive
vote of nine membess.
139. Mr. YOST (United States of America): I should
Iike, in ?hese rather extraordinary circumstances, to
make another suggestion. Since I wish to be sure that
we have time to consider it seriously with all the seriousness that I think these circumstances warrant, I
am going to ask for consecutive interpretation,
and
I announce that in advance,

145. As I mentioned in my remarks the other day
[1533rcl meeting], the United States also finds it
extremely difficult to join in a decision of this Council
that would sever postal, telegraphic and wireless communications with Southern Rhodesia. The United
States has not taken such extreme measures as rupture
of communications
even at the worst periods of its
relations with a number of countries. In fact, we maintain postal service even with North Korea and North
Viet-Nam. It does not seem to us that cutting off channels of communication
and information is an appropriate way of dealing with a problem or is likely to assist
in its solution.

140. I very deeply regret the decision of the Council.
It is a procedural one, of course, but I must say I
find it out of keeping with the normal spirit in which
we conduct our operations, I have had a great deal
of experience of this Council, and I can remember
any number of occasions when members, for reasons
that seemed good to them because they were confronting difficult decisions on important matters, have
requested postponements.

146. We did, of course, close our consulate-general
in Salisbury as a consequence of the recent action of
15

153. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): I wish to emphasize that
I waive my right to consecutive interpretation in order
not to delay unduly the deliberations of the Security
Council. All I want is merely to support the proposal
put forward by the representative of Sierra Leone.

the illegal rkgime there, and we did so with the feeling
that it was a necessary, appropriate and proper action.
Nevertheless, we did so with some hesitation, because
there are American citizens in Rhodesia, who need
access to consular and related services, who need to
be in communication with their relatives in this country
or with whom our Government might need to be in
communication,
and the prospect of cutting them off
totally
is one we would find very, very difficult, if
not impossible, to support.

1.54. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I did not
expect to wish to speak on this question, but having
served in this Council for some years I should like
to say that I have never before known a rejection of
a request for a short adjournment. First of all to reject
a request for time for reflection and instructions before
an important vote, and then to refuse even a short
delay, as proposed by the representative of the United
States, is something I have not heard of. I hesitate
to use an adjective to describe it, but it seems to me
to be an act of discourtesy and irresponsibility.

147. There are all sorts of ramifications to these two
paragraphs, as well as, of course, to the paragraphs
relating to the application of sanctions against the
Republic of South Africa and Portugal, to which Lord
Caradon also referred with, it seemed to us, eminent
good sense, It is hard to imagine that any such measures
could be effective without the comprehensive sort of
blockade which we find it difficult, as indeed does he,
to imagine the world community is prepared, at this
stage of its evolution, to support and carry out
effectively.

fl~Ol?l
155. The
PRESIDENT
(interpretntion
Spcrrrish): I call upon the representative of Syria on

a point of order.
1.56. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Mr. President, a motion
to suspend the meeting has been made and a motion
not to suspend the meeting has been made. Will the
President kindly rule which motion should be put to
the vote now?

148. Therefore, as I say, this draft resolution, which
we treat with the utmost seriousness, which we do
not wish to deal with in any way lightly or precipitately,
presents us with the most serious problems and
requires the most careful reflection.

from
157. The
PRESIDENT
(interpretatio/z
Spanislz): Let us read the rules. Rule 33 of the rules
of procedure states:
“The following motions shall have precedence in
the order named over all principal motions and draft
resolutions relative to the subject before the meeting:
“1. to suspend the meeting;”

149. Finally, since the majority of the Council, to
our deep regret, has been unwilling to grant the request
for a delay of twenty-four hours, we would appeal once
again that, as a matter of courtesy, there should be
a suspension of the meeting for half an hour in order
at least to give us that much time to reflect on the
new situation that has been created.
150.

Reading the rules of procedure, I believe that a motion
for the suspension of the meeting has precedence over
a motion for the continuation of the meeting, even
though it was made later. Therefore, since the representative of Syria has consulted me, I would say
that a motion for the suspension of the meeting takes
precedence. I shall, however, abide by the wishes of
the majority of the Council if they wish to hold consultations.

The

PRESIDENT
(interpr’etatiorz fro171
Spn17ish):
In accordance with the rules of procedure,
the representative of the United States has submitted
a proposal for a suspension of the meeting for half
an hour. I see that the representative of Sierra Leone
wishes to speak and I give him the floor,
I5 1. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): I think. I ought to
say that the Afro-Asian position is that we have debated
this question in one form or another for four years.
Last year the Afro-Asian Group accepted defeat graciously on this matter. We sympathize with the position
of the United States about communications
and its
other reservatibns and we cannot compel the United
Kingdom
to use force or to commit financial suicide.
We have no animosity towards the United Kingdom,
But we feel strongly-we,
the co-sponsors of the second draft resolution-that
we should not be held
indefinitely
to ransom by a few million Europeans in
southern Africa, and on that point I wish to propose
that we proceed immediately to a vote on the draft
resolutions.

158.

Mr.

ORTEG’A

URBINA

(Nicaragua)

(inter-

pretation from Spanish): I wish to state that in my

delegation’s opinion, in the case of such a short suspension as that requested by the representative of the
United States, out of courtesy and because we consider
that this will in no way affect, and might on the contrary
be beneficial to, the outcome of our deliberations,
my
delegation is in favour of the suspension of the meeting
for the requested half-hour period,
159. Mr. NKAMA (Zambia): To begin with, I should
like to say that, to assist the President in expediting
his work, my delegation did not want to speak. The
representative of the United Kingdom had appealed
to the Council to move forward with speed and
despatch in disposing of the item now before it. I am
sure that I am speaking on behalf of all my colleagues
when I say that we listened to that eloquent and, in

152. The
PRESIDENT
(iaterpretation
fro/n
Spanish): We shall continue discussion of the proposal
for a suspension of this meeting as requested by the
representative of the United States,
16

OUT view, sincere appeal of the representative

of the

165. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): So that I shall not
forget at the end of my statement to waive consecutive
interpretation, I think I had better do so at the beginning.

United Kingdom.
160. This afternoon, as a number of my colleagues
here-namely,
the representatives of Sierra Leone,
Burundi, the Soviet Union and Syria-have
said, the
tide has suddenly changed. The speed about which
we heard so much at the beginning of the discussions
of the Council has ceased to be necessary, has ceased
to characterize the interventions, the comments, the
remarks of the representative of the United Kingdom.

166. I do not think that we should allow expressions
uttered in moments of heat to colour this serious deliberation about a serious matter. It is true that an adjournment of half an hour was requested and that our group
felt that it could not consent to it. But I think, after
we have discussed these various matters, that we are
all mature, we are all courteous and we are all responsible, and I think that we have already given the United
States about twenty minutes of its requested half an
hour.

161. I do not want to be a victim of circumstances
or to be a victim of certain things which I shall not
name. Earlier the President was kind enough to inform
the Council that the debate on the issue now before
the Council had terminated. My delegation, and I am
sure the majority of the delegations in the Council,
welcomed that conclusion, welcomed the decision of
the President. Unfortunately,
a few moments ago the
representative of the United States made a long intervention and, unfortunately,
he was not even kind
enough to waive his right to consecutive interpretation.
I am not going to ask him why he did that; I suppose
he is entitled to do so, But I think that the President
will be in a position to answer my question. What my
delegation cannot understand is this. After the President has ruled that the debate has come to an end,
why should a representative be allowed to make a long
intervention and, as if to add fuel to the fire, not waive
his right to consecutive interpretation?
That is a very
serious thing. I think it is a breach of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Council,

167. Therefore, may I repeat that we should like the
Council to proceed to a vote now.
168. Mr. YOST (United States of America): I shall
not delay the meeting long. I appreciate the wise and
friendly remarks of the representative of Sierra Leone.
I should like to comment for just a moment on the
remarks of the Minister of State of Zambia. We are
all in a great hurry to proceed when it happens to
suit our convenience. But, on the other hand, we are
all ready to delay our proceedings for several days
ifthat suits our convenience. I wouldjust like to remind
him that I think the first meeting of the Council in
this series on this question was first asked for on 2
or 3 March, It was delayed first until the end of that
week in order to meet the convenience of our African
members. Then, after a brief meeting on that Friday,
it was delayed again until the following Tuesday in
the expectation that three African Foreign Ministers
would then have time to arrive. We were happy to
endeavour to meet their convenience by delaying in
that way. We are very happy that the Minister of State
of Zambia did indeed come.

162. As I say, my delegation did not want to speak.
It was not because we had nothing to say; we had
plenty to say, we had a million and one things to say
to the Council; but in order to expedite the work of
the Council and to assist the President in his task
-because we know that the task of President of the
Council is not an easy one-we chose silence. When
certain delegations here were accusing us of all sorts
of things, of ignorance, of immaturity,
because we
acted in good faith we ignored those accusations.
163. Now, last but not least, I should like to reject
categorically the irresponsible remarks of the representative of the United Kingdom that there are delegations
here which are being irresponsible. First, we want Lord
Caradon to know that we are not small boys. Secondly,
we want him to know that we are not representing
the United Kingdom colonies here. Thirdly, we want
him to know that we have come a long way in order
to represent the respectful and respected independent
Asian, African and other countries.
1.64, I hope that from now on Lord Caradon will stop
arrogating to himself the role of patriarch, the role
of brother-shall
I say, big brother?-of
Africa and
Asia; We are mature enough to take care of our
destinies and of our future. I support what has been
said by my colleagues from Sierra Leone, Burundi,
,Syria, the Soviet Union and tacitly supported, I am
sure, by many other delegations.

169. All during that period of a week or ten days
there seemed to be no terrible hurry as far as we could
gather, but now suddenly there seems to be such a
terrific haste to act that even a request for a further
half hour’s delay is not granted. I regret this but I
am quite prepared to proceed to the vote.
170. Mr. KUJLAGA (Poland): I shall add another half
minute to the twenty minutes or more of which the
Ambassador of Sierra Leone spoke a few moments
ago by saying that I am in favour of proceeding to
the vote on the draft resolutions immediately.
I do
not request-I
repeat: I do not request-consecutive
interpretation.
171. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi) (interprstadorz from
French): I shall not request consecutive interpretation.
h I wanted to say only two words concerning the last
statement of the representative of the United Kingdom.
It is true that from time to time it is necessary to change
the routine procedure. If the customary situation
seemed to him unprecedented, the world has also
observed with consternation an unprecedented situation in which so many. millions of inhabitants have
been sacrificed for 200,000 settlers. Moreover, it is
1’7

180. Mr. LIU (China): I wish to make a brief explanation of vote. It is hardly necessary to explain why
we shall vote for the draft resolution in document
S/9676/Rev. 1, It is the unanimous agreement of all the
members of the Council that the illegal Smith rCgime
must be isolated from the community of nations. This
may not by itself be sufficient to topple the rCgime,
but, as I said in my statement of 13 March [i533&
meeting], my delegation does not underestimate the
impact that such a course of action might have in
weakening that r6gime.

unprecedented
for the United Kingdom Government
to make an exception to a rule that it has always followed in the past, namely, to strangle a movement
and it has not done so in a case which is an affront
not 0111~to the Zimbabwe people, but also to mankind,
There is an even more serious matter, namely, the
situation created in Southern Rhodesia. I would therefore ask you, Mr. President, to proceed to the vote,
as requested by several delegations.
172. The
PRESIDENT
(interpreratiorz
fic>rn
Spnnislz): The Council will now vote on the proposal
of the representative of the United States for a suspension of the meeting for half an hour.

181. As for draft resolution S/9696 and Corr. 1 and
2, I assume, Mr. President, that you will put some
of the paragraphs to a separate vote. My delegation
is in general agreement with the purposes behind it
although we are not without reservations concerning
paragraphs 5, 8 and 9. All members of the Council,
including the representative of the United Kingdom,
are agreed that Britain, as the administering Power,
has a continuing
responsibility
over Southern
Rhodesia. In previous meetings of this Council my
delegation had occasion to express its doubts about
the wisdom of ruling out the possibility of the use of
force in the early stages of the Rhodesian crisis on
the part of the British Government. In the last analysis,
however, of whether force should or should not be
used to quell the rebellion, it devolves upon the
Government of the United Kingdom to make the final
decision, for, after all, it is the Government of the
United Kingdom that must bear the main brunt of any
military action.

111 J’%vo~~~‘: China, Finland, France, Nicaragua,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
Agnimt:
Burundi, Nepal, Poland, Sierra Leone,
Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia.
Ahstffini/zg:

Colombia,

Spain.

The result of the vote lvas 6 i/q fervour,
with 2 rrbstcrztiom,

7 against

PRESIDENT
(inferpretation
fi'OM1
173. The
Spanish): The representative of the United Kingdom
and the representative of Spain have asked to speak
on points of order. I call first on the representative
of the United Kingdom,

182. The fact that year after year no real progress
towards United Nations goals seems forthcoming cannot but give rise to frustration and impatience. Yet
the immediate failure of the United Nations to bring
racial justice and self-determination
to Southern
Rhodesia need not, in the view of my delegation,
detract from the long-term value of the measures
already put into effect. In fact, the recent decisions
of several Powers to close their consulates in Salisbury
can only be regarded as steps in the right direction
in reflecting the views of this Council by bringing
increased pressure on the Smith rkgime.

174. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. President, there may be some misunderstanding. I had some
time ago asked to speak briefly before the vote on
the second draft resolution. May I understand that I
shall be permitted to do so? Shall I do so now or shall
I do so at a later time?
175. The.
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fro171
Sparzish): I note that you have asked for the floor to
explain your vote before the vote on the second draft
resolution.
176.

I now call on the representative

183, In the light of these considerations, my delegation will abstain on paragraph 5 if it is put to the vote
separately.

of Spain.
184. Paragraphs 8 and 9 concern South Africa and
Portugal. My delegation understands very well the
reasons for them; but under existing circumstances,
we question the practicability of extending to those
countries the same sanctions which are directed against
the illegal rCgime in Salisbury, There is always the
danger that the United Nations may undertake tasks
beyond its present capability. We will therefore also
abstain on paragraphs 8 and 9 if they are put to a
vote separately.

177. Mr. DE PINIES
(Spain) (interpretation j?onz
Spnnish): My delegation would also like to make a
brir:f statement before we proceed to vote on the second
draft resolution.
Accordingly, I reserve my right to
intervene at that time.
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
378. The
Sparlislz): Under the first paragraph of rule 32 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council,
I shall first put to the vote the United Kingdom draft
resolution appearing in document S/9676/Rev. 1.

185. The
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
Spanish): I now put to the vote draft resolution
S/9676/Rev. 1,

179. The representative of China wishes to speak
before the voting in explanation of his vote.
18

chooses to engage in a dialogue with them-and any
such dialogue, in my view, simply encourages and hardens the rebel rCgime-we,
as an international
Organization, should not continually be asked to do
so.

181f~1~011r: China, France, Nicaragua, United King
dam of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America.
Agnimt

: None,

191. Ian Smith and his colleagues are men who won
their spurs in combat and who maintain an inflated
standard of living by holding down millions of Africans
by force. They are not familiar* with textbooks of political science and treatises on international law. Legalistic
resolutions mean little or nothing to them except when
it hurts them, as sanctions have done.

Abstnilli/lg:
Burundi,’ Colombia, Finland, Nepal,
Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, Zambia.
The restdt oj’rhe vote was 5 in favour,
with 10 abstentiom.

none against,

192. If we believed that sanctions would bring the
rCgime down, we would be more hopeful. The great
leakage through South Africa and the Portuguese-held
Territories of Mozambique and Angola has rendered
it hopeless. After some time, sanctions will be in danger
of being simply a source of irritation to trading nations
and communities that should by now be purchasing
from or supplying the needs of a market of 4.5 million
people, both black and white, under a non-racial-and
I repeat: non-racial-government
of Rhodesia.

The draft resolution was not adopted, having failed
10 obtcrirl the nfflrmative
vote of nine members +

186. The
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
$n/lish): I call on the representative of Sierra Leone,
who wishes to explain his vote.
187. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): On behalf of the
Afro-Asian group sponsoring the second draft resolution [S/9696 rind h-r.1
arzd 21, I wish to .begin by
saying that we reject utterly and emphatically the declaration of a republic by the rebel leader Ian Smith, and
we speak not only for our own delegations but also
for our Foreign Ministers who have come from the
Organization of African Unity.

193. The draft resolution presented by the United
Kingdom is contained in our own draft resolution,
where it is linked with more positive and forceful proposals.
194. The co-sponsors of our draft resolution, including my delegation, have had extensive consultations
on this draft resolution and have taken advice; we
would prefer to put it forward rather than to support
the shorter and admittedly incomplete draft resolution
of the United Kingdom, which would probably close
the door to or defer the taking of more active measures
on this matter.

188. Our abstention from voting on Ihe United Kingdom draft resolution l;S/9676/Rev.I]
was due to the
fact that we did not feel that it went far enough. Its
proposals have in fact been rendered superfluous by
the withdrawal of most of the foreign consulates from
Salisbury, and I wish again to express our gratitude
to those nations which have done that. Yet, though
superfluous by itself, the United Kingdom draft resolution may quite definitely have affected the situation,
and for that we again wish to express our appreciation.

PRESIDENT
(inferpr’etcction
j?onz
19.5. The
Spanish): I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
co-sponsored by Burundi, Nepal, Sierra Leone, Syria
and Zambia. This draft resolution appears in document
S/9696 and Corr.1 and 2. I should like to draw to the
attention of members of the Council that the fact that
a corrected version of paragraph 3 of the draft resolution appears in document S/9696/Corr.2 and of paragraph 7 in document S/9696/Corr. 1. Accordingly, we
shall vote on the draft resolulion as it stands.

189.

We know that this matter is one which means
much to the, representative
of the United Kingdom,
Lord Caradon. He has staked his career on it more
than once and we respect him personally for this and
will continue to do so. We refuse, however, to believe
that the United Kingdom cannot: do more. Even a show
of force before the April elections of the rebel regime
in Southern Rhodesia can still salvage the situation
and bring order and justice to millions of Africans and
thousands of thoughtful and liberal Europeans in that
Territory.
My delegation feels, with respect, that a
mixture of irresolution,
sentimentality and a genuine
desire to avoid bloodshed on the part of the United
Kingdom Government have left us in an impasse which
must now be solved.

196, I have had requests from the representatives of
Spain, the United Kingdom and the United States to
speak in explanation of vote before the voting.
197.

Mr. DE PINIES (Spain) (iderpretation
from
More than explaining its vote, my delegation
wishes to make a request of the co-sponsors of the
draft resolution on which we are about to vote, which
appears in document S/9696 and Corral and 2. We
request that under rule 32 of the rules of procedure
paragraphs 8 and 9 should be put to the vote separately.

Spanish):

190. A handful of ex-officers of the British armed
forces have staged a military putsch in Southern
Rhodesia+ Their mutiny and disloyalty should by now
have landed them in the Tower of London to await
trial or sentence. Instead, we are annually asked to
adopt draft resolutions in reply to their arrogant and
impertinent
statements, If Britain as a great Power

198. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): i: merely
wish to say that there are a number of provisions in
this draft resolution which my Government cannot sup19

port. Therefore, I would sav that if there are anv manbsals-indeed
-one has already been mahe*-f&1
paragraph-by-paragraph voting, my delegation will abstain on such paragraph-by-paragraph
votes since it is
not possible for us to support the draft resolution as
it stands as a whole.

as ours. We condemn the persistent refusal to use force
to bring an end to the rebellion. I have never heard
of a peaceful rebellion in my life. Every rebellion has
been carried out by force, and it seems to me from
my study of physics that force can only be answered
by force.

199. Mr. YOST (United States of America): Only the
most serious of considerations would cause us to take
the step of casting a negative vote on a draft resolution
of such importance. The United States has staunchly
supported the economic sanctions which have been
imposed on Rhodesia, and we were prepared to look
with favour on the suggestions put forward earlier in
the debate by the representative of Finland for taking
further action in common. We shall still continue, of
course, to explore all possibilities in this sense.

front
205. The
PRESIDENT
(interpretntiorz
Spanislz): the representative of Spain has called for
separate votes on paragraphs 8 and 9 of the draft resolution S/9696 and Corr. 1 and 2. Since I hear no objection,
I shall put these paragraphs to the vote separately.
We shall first vote on paragraph 8.

A vote was taken by shaw of hands.
In ~~IYOLII.: Burundi, Nepal, Poland, Sierra Leone,
Syria, Union of Soviet Republics, Zambia.

200. However, we are not able to support the draft
resolution which by implication calls upon the United
Kingdom to use force. We have repeatedly stated the
view that force is not the answer to this problem, and
for that reason we oppose a draft resolution condemning the United Kingdom for failure to use it.

Against:

None.

Abstaining:
China, Colombia,
Finland,
France,
Nicaragua, Spain, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America.

201. We closed our consulate in Southern Rhodesia,
thus leaving our citizens in that country with no direct
protection. We did so in the belief that it remained
possible for our citizens at least to be in contact with
their own country and with consulates elsewhere in
Africa. We cannot now agree to cut off not only their
communications
with the rest of the world but even
all means by which they might leave Southern
Rhodesia. Paragraph 6 would, in our view, amount
to barring American citizens in Rhodesia from contact
with the outside world, and this we cannot support.
Besides the grave effect this action would have on
United States citizens, many of whom are there for
the sole purpose of alleviating suffering among the
black majority of the population, we do not think that
such an action is in the interests of the oppressed majority in Rhodesia, nor indeed that it would have any
decisive effect on the illegal minority rCgime.

The sesult of the vote was 7 in favous, none against,
with 8 abstentions.
Paragraph
the Qi%mative

8 was not adopted, havingfailed
vote of nine members.

to obtabz

from
206.
The
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
Spanish): I shall now put paragraph 9 to the vote.

A vote lvas taken by show of hands.
In ~&oL~T: Burundi, Nepal, Poland, Sierra Leone,
Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia.
Against:

None.

Abstaining:
China, Colombia,
Finland,
France,
Nicaragua, Spain, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America.

202. It is with very great reluctance, therefore, that
we take this step. We have felt and continue to feel
that a little greater effort to find common ground might
have obviated this necessity. Let us not now abandon
the search for common ground, but resolve to try all
the harder to grapple together with the problem of
Rhodesia which so deeply concerns us all and which
sooner or later must and will be resolved in the interests
of the oppressed mziority,

The result of the vote was 7 in favour, rime against,
with 8 abstentions.
Parngraph 9 was not adopted, havingfailed
the affirmative vote of nine members.

to obtah

207.
The
j?O/ll
PRESIDENT
(interpretatiorz
Spanish): Having deleted these two paragraphs which
have been rejected, we shall now proceed to vote on
the draft resolution as a whole, as it appears in document S/9696 and Corr. I and 2.

203.
The
PRESIDENT
(irzterpretation
fio/?z
Spnnish): I call on the representative of Sierra Leone
in explanation of vote.

A vote was taken by show of ha&s.

204. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): On behalf of the
co-sponsors I wish to say that we agreed to the separate
voting on paragraphs 8 and 9 requested by the representative of Spain. The representative of the United States
has spoken on paragraph 5. We feel it to be perfectly
logical. We do not condemn the United Kingdom. We
note that there are many there who hold views as strong

In favour:
Burundi, China, Nepal, Poland, Sierra
Leone, Spain, Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia.
Against: United Kingdom of Great Britain
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
20

and

AbstrrirGng: Colombia,

Finland, France, Nicaragua.

217. It would decide to extend the application of Article 41 of the Charter to all diplomatic, consular, trade,
military and other relations-this,
of course with the
humanitarian exceptions provided for in paragraphs
3 (d) and 4 of resolution 253 (1968). It would further
decide that Member States should interrupt any existing means of transportation to and from Southern
Rhodesia that they may still maintain.

208. The
.I:ESIDENT
(irzterpr’etr~tiorz fi.W?l
Spn!?isl~): The representatives of Finland and the
United Kingdom have asked to speak it explanation
of vote, I call first on the representative of Finland.

2 18. It would call for the suspension of any Southern
Rhodesian membership or associate membership in the
specialized agencies, and for the expulsion of Southern
Rhodesia from any international or regional organizations so as to complete the isolation of the illegal rCgime
of Southern Rhodesia from the world community.

209. Mr. JAKOBSON
(Finland): Let me say first that
my delegation supported the request for postponement
ofthe vote not because my delegation was unprepared
to vote now, but because we believe that if the Security
Council is to act as aserious negotiating body we should
allow every opportunity for further consultations.

219. It would give the Committee established by
resolution 253 (1968) a more active and wider role.
220. Finally, it would urge Member States to make
a renewed effort to increase their assistance to Zambia,
which has the heaviest burden to bear as a result of
any further measures the Council might decide to take.

210.

Now, however, the vote has taken place and,
both drafts having failed to be adopted, we find ourselves in a situation which can serve the interests of
no one except Mr. Smith in Salisburv. It creates the
impression that the Security Council is hopelessly
divided on the issue of Southern Rhodesia and that
the policy of sanctions against the illegal rCgime is losing support,. Such an impression would in fact be misleading, for there is a basic unity of purpose in the
Council on this matter, as has been stated by many
members,

221. As I said before, we now wish to submit our
draft resolution formally, and we would hope that the
Security Council could agree to vote on it tomorrow.
222. Lord CARADON
(United Kingdom): I should
like to say very seriously that I greatly regret that the
Council should have proceeded to a snap vote this
evening; and again I would say that I believe that what
was done this evening was contrary to the best tradtions
of the Council. Indeed, having delayed for a fortnight,
it was strange that a refusal should be given to a request
for an adjournment of twenty-four hours, or even for
half an hour. Having swallowed the camel of two
weeks, members strained at the gnat of half an hour.
I believe that we have done harm to our traditions
today and I am sorry that we were forced into that
position.

211. We would hope, therefore, that the Council
would not conclude consideration of this question in
this state of indecision but would make an effort to
agree an a course of action which would intensify the
international pressures on the illegal r&ime in Southern
Rhodesia, while also restoring unity in the Council
itself.

212, Last Friday my delegation circulated informally
to members of the Council a draft resolution, in the
hope that it might provide, at the right time, the basis
for such an agreement on a course of action. I should
now iike to inform the Council that we would wish
to submit that draft resolution [s/9709) formally.

223. I should like to say, however, with regard to
the contribution made by the representative of Sierra
Leone speaking on behalf of’ the African and Asian
members of this Council, that I thank him, on behalf
of us all, for what he has said today. He never speaks
without raising the level of our debate, and I know
that he realizes that I would never speak without the
greatest respect for him and for those he represents;
but I think he would also agree that it is a sign of
respect when we speak straight to one another and
speak openly and without any false restriction. He
would prefer it so, and I would expect him to speak
to me in the same way.

213.

Since the text of the draft resolution has been
in the hands of all delegations on this Councilfor several
days, I do not think I have to describe it in detail,
and I shall only draw attention to some of its key positions.
214. Of course, the draft resolution would condemn
the illegal proclamation of a republic and decide that
Member States should refrain from recognizing the
illegal regime or maintaining representation in the Territory,

224, I would also say that I had greatly hoped that
I would never have to cast a veto on behalf of my
country on an African issue. I very deeply regret that
a deliberate decision was taken to force me into that
position. For those who decided to press the vote today
knew very well what they were doing. A deal was
done; a bargain was made. Why was it made? Was
it made in the cause of seeking an agreement and of
finding common ground on which we could advance

215. It would call upon Member States to ensure that
any acts performed by officials and/or institutions of
the illegal r&gime should not be accorded recognition.
216. It would call upon Member States to take more
effective measures to prevent any circumvention
of
existing sanctions,
21

No. Was it done in an effort to find more
effective action against the illegal rCgime? It was not.
On the contrary, it was done with the knowledge that
what was done today would lead to no result-not
to agreement but to deadlock. It was an act not of
constructive advance but of obstruction.

struggling continent, that emergent continent, that
determined continent, Africa, I want to thank all those
delegations that have supported us in the fight we have 1
waged around this table. There is no doubt that without
that support, coming from their heads and from their
hearts, we could not have spearheaded our debate and
brought our fight to the conclusion of which we are
all only too well aware. Those delegations, as we all
know, are those of Poland, Nepal, Syria, the Soviet
Union and Spain-and need I mention my own brothers
from Sierra Leone and Burundi?

together?

225. I might have wished to say more on this occasion
had it not been for the fact that we have just listened
to an intervention from the representative of Finland.
As we all know, the representative of Finland has
worked throughout to find a way of proceeding which
could carry the maximum support. There is still, therefore, the possibility that we can go forward together
to take effective action. That should be our hope, and
from the beginning I have said that we stand ready
to work with others to find the highest measure of
common agreement so that we can act together. Therefore I hope that we can disperse tonight with the determination
to seek without delay the maximum agreement and the earliest decision and the most effective
action, and I hope that we shalf be able to proceed
to do so on the basis that the representative of Finland
has put to us.

229. We all recall that a few moments ago the representative of the United States of America called on
the Council to work even harder to find a solution
to the crisis in Rhodesia. This is impossible, to say
the least, for it would appear that the positions of the
United Kingdom and the United States, and no doubt
those of their allies, are diametrically opposed to the
positions espoused by mankind as a whole-mankind
which makes a clarion call to the British to bring the
rebellion in Rhodesia to an end.
230. It would appear now that the people of Zimbabwe must clearly distinguish between their friends
and those who are not their friends-in
short, their
enemies. Unless the United Kingdom and the United
States are in a position to modify their attitudes, it
is clear that unanimity on matters of principle and substance as they pertain to the question of Zimbabwe
is not only impossible but out of the question.

226. Mr. NKAMA (Zambia): I am grateful for this
opportunity
of making a few closing remarks. I wish
to pay .a sincere tribute to all those delegations that
voted in favour of otir draft resolution. I refer Co the
Afro-Asian draft resolution, which, as has been seen,
comprises constructive elements which are not beyond
the capacity and the means of the United Kingdom,
which is the administering
Power in Rhodesia. We
praise those delegations that have supported us for
the unstinting assistance and advice they so readily
placed at our disposal during our very difficult moments
and hours. We are aware that they have really given
this support not to those of us who are sitting around
this table; it is axiomatic to say-and I have no doubt
I am expressing the sentiments and views of my colleagues-that
they have given this support to humanity
in general but expecially to the oppressed and longsuffering people of Zimbabwe and of the world.
227. Today, needless to say, we have exposed the
cynicism and hypocrisy of the administering
Power.
Since 1965-or is it since 1923, when the white minority
was placed in a commanding position in Rhodesia-the
United Kingdom has been masquerading as “the defender of the faith” in Rhodesia. Now for the first time
we have unmasked the true intentions and policies of
the United Kingdom with regard to the 5 milIion
oppressed black people. This afternoon we have witnessed the sad spectacle of the exercise on the part
of the United Kingdom and, I am sorry to say, on
the part of the United States of America of their rights
of veto. We want the world to know that henceforth
the United Kingdom has abdicated from its responsibility for the people of Rhodesia. All we can say is, shame
on the United Kingdom, a country whose representative, Lord Caradon, has claimed an association with
Africa and its people. Now we know the true colours
of the administering Power,
-8
228. Once again, on behalf of my colleagues who sent
me here, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of that
22

231. I should like to end on a familiar note which
I brought to the Council the other day when I said,
speaking on behalf of my delegation, that for the past
five years, since the unilateral declaration of independence, the United Kingdom has been appealing to and
calling on us to be patient, to be reasonable, to be
calm, and all sorts of things, I ask, as I did the other
day, is it not now our turn not only to ask but to
appeal to the United Kingdom and to Lord Caradon
to understand our position, to appreciate our appeal?
Is it not our turn to appeal to the administering Power
to be patient, to be calm, to be reasonable? And my
I extend this to the United States, which exercised
its veto this afternoon, as did the United Kingdom,
the administering
Power. On that note I end my
remarks.
232. Mr. TERENCE (Burundi) (irzfelpl’etatiofz J?OI??
F~erzclz): I should like to thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor at this juncture. However, my
delegation’s
statement is necessary in order to
introduce certain clarifications which, I would say,
must be aired in view of the words of the representative
of the United Kingdom in his last statement-that
is
to say, after he cast the veto. He had the audacity
to say-and I apologize for quoting in English:
“A deal was done, a bargain was made, in order
to find a common ground”.
233. I should like to state before the Council that
the patience of the Afro-Asian delegations has been
such that yesterday, in the presence of the President

of the Council, those delegations made this appeal to
him and, out of courtesy, contrary to what may have
been said earlier around this table, and to ensure the
maximum degree of understanding, we spoke to him
in his own language, although it is not our official language. I shall quote the words which I addressed to
him yesterday in the office of the President of the
Council, I said then-and
again I apologize for using
his own language, but I do so in order to avoid any
possible false interpretation and to use the same words
as I used yesterday:
“All the ideas expressed by the British draft
resolution are contained in our own draft resolution,
while the British proposed resolution does not move
towards our own, Let the United Kingdom join our
position in order to find an ideal solution, a common
meeting ground.“q

the solution would finally be. I said then that those
who were accused of a lack of realism were on the
contrary the more realistic, particularly in the present
case, and that the rebellion, as it was described by
the United Kingdom, was leading us towards a total
impasse.
236. We have heard words that apparently cannot
be brought into conformity with normal logic, which
cannot explain what solution the United Kingdom can
propose to us.
237. During these same negotiations, the United
Kingdom representative told us that for humanitarian
considerations, it was essential to avoid declaring a
interruption
of communications
with
complete
Rhodesia, that there were missionaries there, and other
citizens who were not to blame. We said; All right,
we agree that where humanitarian considerations, are
involved we cannot.demand that human beings should
be sacrificed. But when it is a case of choosing between
two evils, one always chooses the lesser. That was
exactly the reply that was given to Lord Caradon yesterday. Now, the lesser evil in this case is to impose,
even on these innocent citizens, whether they be white
or black, sacrifices which are essential if we are to
be able to find a final solution which, in the last analysis,
would be beneficial to all of the people of Rhodesia,
black and white communities alike. That is how we
reason in logic.

After these words I should like someone to tell me
where we have not accepted the necessary compromise. I added: “The United Kingdom is entitled
to bring improvements”.4
I am quoting myself literally.
The United Kingdom representative says that we have
refused any compromise and declined to negotiate. I
felt compelled
to introduce this clarification in the
Council and I should like to go on now to discuss
the vote that has just been taken.
234. It will be recalled that on Friday last, 13 March,
I said that the behaviour of the United Kingdom defied
all normal logic, but that it was part of the subtlety
of the political technique of the United Kingdom to
reconcile its behaviour with previous acts. Once again
it goes without saying that the United Kingdom’s
intentions could have been disguised from time to time owing
to the subterfuges
which are characteristic of the
Government
and representatives of that country, but
after its veto, they are clear. The veto displays with
unprecedented clarity the position of the United Kingdom and the nature of its determination
to find an
adequate solution to the problems arising in Zimbabwe.
True the representative of the United Kingdom has
stated that they cannot send an army out to Rhodesia,
that the United Kingdom has no troops in Rhodesia,
that
Rhodesia has been autonomous for fifty years.
Then we should ask the United Kingdom why it waited
fifty years instead of seizing every occasion that arose
to grant total independence to Rhodesia?

238, Obviously, we were given explanations which
exceeded the most elementary common sense. I ask:
what is the purpose? are the interests of 5 million inhabitants to be subordinated to the interests of a handful
of settlers? I am talking about the proteg& of the United
Kingdom. That is question that we put to the Security
Council and to the common sense judgement
of
everyone.
239. Before concluding, I should like to state-and
we have made this appeal previously--that
the United
Kingdom position perhaps does not in the short run
serve the interest of the settlers but in the long run
that position does a disservice to the interests of the
settlers. I should like to stress once again that when
in future this fatal confrontation occurs-one which
we would not wish to see come about but which will
of necessity come about, following upon the formal
refusal of the United Kingdom to apply adequate
remedies to the situation-we
will again call upon the
United Kingdom to refrain from any form of intervention to protect the Rhodesian settlers, when they will
be left on their own, face to face with the Zimbabwe
people, armed with all the means available to them,
either from within or outside the country. The United
Kingdom must today make a statement to us and give
us a solemn commitment
that it will not intervene if
tomorrow, the Zimbabwe people succeeds in reversing
the situation. We formally put this question and we
would like a reply to be given to it.

235. This is tantamount to saying what I said in my
statement on Friday [1533rd meeting], that the United
Kingdom has favoured a process designed to create
or to set up in southern Africa a nursery garden of
Hitler’s disciples. The United Kingdom’s position this
evening serves once again to confirm the predictions
that several delegations have repeatedly made, both
this year and in previous years. We all know how many
times the United Kingdom,
and in particular Lord
Caradon, has appealed to the realism of the African
delegations, to their wisdom, to their patience. On 23
June last [1&J&11 meeting], before this very Council,
I stated that we were asking the United Kingdom-which
has wisdom and political maturity-what

240. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, we
wish to thank you for the able and just way in which
you have conducted our debates this afternoon. On

’ Quoted in English by the speaker.

23

behalf of the delegations from Africa and our friends
and co-sponsors Nepal and Syria, we wish to thank
a]] those who have supported us this afternoon: Poland
and the Soviet Union, great fighters for freedom; Spain,
the first and historic decolonizer; and the Republic
of China, the inheritors of the wisdom of Confucius.
241. Although we have suffered a technical defeat,
we have gained a victory of conscience. Slowly and
certainly the floodgates are being forced open to the
torrential waves of freedom and justice for the black
man in Africa. We know that the representatives Of
the United Kingdom and the United States will not
wish to deny us that victory.

I
;

242. Mr. MAL,IK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (~~a~~~lar~dfiorn Aussinlz): I feel that I must make
two comments after the voting that has taken place.
The first one is a formal comment on procedure. In
their various statements and replies, the representatives of the United Kingdom and the United States
tried to create the impression that, during the voting
on the two draft resolutions before the Security
Council, there was some kind of departure from the
established traditions. Strong terms were used:
obstruction, filibuster, contrary to the best traditions,
unprecedented,
harm to our traditions. That is
absolutely at variance with the truth. It is the right
of every member of the Security Council to ask fol
a postponement of a vote when a proposal is made
to vote on a draft resolution submitted at that meeting.
In such a case every one of us has the right to request
and insist that we should each be given twenty-four
hours to study the draft resolution submitted, to bring
it to the attention of our Governments, to make appropriate proposals and to ask for instructions as to what
our position on the draft resolution should be.
243. But when a draft has been submitted a week
earlier and there has been ample time to study it
thoroughly, any attempt to insist on a postponement
of the vote on the pretext of the need to have twentyfour hours to study it amounts to obstructionism, to
sabotaging the vote. That is the only way to describe
such a position. Therefore, when the representative
of the United States says that there have been precedents, that there have been occasions during the
twenty-five-year history of the United Nations when
the Soviet delegation requested, demanded and insisted
on the postponement of the vote, that is not in
accordance with the facts. There has been no case
in the history of the United Nations in which we have
requested the postponement of a vote on a draft reso]ution which has been before LIS for seven days.

that, if a draft resolution is introduced at a given meeting and the sponsors insist on a Vote, every member
ofthe Security Council has the right to request, demand
and insist on a postponement of the vote, If, on the
other hand, the resolution has been before the Council
for some time, then there are no grounds for postponing
the vote. The majority of the members of the Council
acted correctly today in rejecting a motion of that kind.
The purpose of that motion was to prevent a vote.
Obviously, the Security Council, or at least the majority of its members, could not support that motion.
246. Lord Caradon’s comment that he had never been
in such a position is symptomatic.
True, YOU were
never in that position because throughout the history
of the United Nations you have been accustomed to
controlling and manipulating the voting machinery.
You did not have to use the veto then. Using your
automatic majority, you imposed your will on others
and forced it down their throats. But times have now
changed, and today you are in a position in which
you have been obliged, with the support of the United
States representative, to use the veto.
247. This I would call a really unprecedented case
in the twenty-five-year history of the existence of the
United Nations: the use of the veto on a question like
this by two representatives who are permanent members of the Security Council; thus a dark and sombre
page in the annals of the United Nations has been
written. Here we have two permanent members of the
Security Council voting, despite the principle of unanimity of the permanent members, against a draft
resolution, that is, using the veto in defence of a most
unjust cause-to protect two racist rkgimes in southern
Africa and the colonialist rCgime of Portugal. The?
whole world has been shown the true position and
the real intentions of those who voted against it.

244. There have been other precedents, when we
insisted on, and demanded, the postponement of avote
on a draft resolution introduced at the time of the discussion. That is our right, it is everyone’s right. There’fore, to refer to that kind of precedent and to make
it appear that we are today establishing the precedent
Of not respecting a request for the postponement of
a vote is without any foundation whatsoever,

248. I maintain that what has happened today demonstrates that two permanent members of the Securit!:
Council voted against a just draft resolution, designed
to protect human dignity, human rights and the national
freedom of the 5 million Zimbabwe people, which was
urged and demanded by the whole of Africa, as is cfeal
from the resolution adopted this month by the Council
of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at
Addis Ababa and from the wording, essence, and content of the draft resolution submitted by the African
representatives in the Security Council; two permanent
members of the Security Council voted against this
just draft resolution. What was their motive far taking
that stand, what was their purpose’? They sought
recourse to every possible device: filibustering.
obstructionism
and the unnecessary and totally
uncalled-for consecutive interpretation into all working
languages-which,
by the common consent of the
members of the Security Council, has long since been
abandoned; but they were in a difficult position and
were forced to stake everything. This is a very sorry
Page in the history of the United Nations, especially
on the eve of its twenty-fifth annivqsary.

245. In the practice of the Security Council we shall
all undoubtedly continue to take into account the fact

249. Furthermore, the Commission on Human Rights
is now in session. In that Commission, the representa-

tive of Israel, representing an aggressor country which
is violating the elementary human rights of the Arab
population in the occupied territories and disregarding
the Security Council’s decisions concerning the withdrawal of Israel armed forces from the Arab territories
occupied by them, is attempting to slander the Soviet
Union and other socialist countries. The United States
representative, on the pretext of protecting human
rights and dignity, is supporting the Israeli representative; and here in the Security Council the representative
of the United States and the representative of the
United Kingdom vote against human dignity, human
rights and the freedom of the 5 million people of Zimbabwe simply because they are Africans.
250. That is the true position. Therefore we cannot
ignore if and close our eyes to it. It can truly be said
that never before in the history of the United Nations
have two permanent members of the Security Council
found themselves in such splendid isolation on such
an important and serious matter.
251.

I waive consecutive

interpretation.

252. Mr. YOST (United States of America): I shall
be very brief. That seemed to me to be a most extraordinary statement from the representative of a country
which has exercised the veto over 100 times-the
last
time, if I am not mistaken, to prevent Council action
in regard to the invasion of a small country in central
Europe.
253. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (tmnslated
from Russian):
I can prove by
documentary evidence that the Soviet Union has used
the veto only for just purposes. I have frequently stated
that without the Soviet veto the imperialist Powers
would not have admitted to the United Nations a
number of socialist countries: Albania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania and Mongolia. Had it not been for our
veto, those countries would still be in the position of
another socialist country which the Western countries
have prevented from joining the United Nations-the
German Democratic Republic. That country has even
been deprived of the right to have an observer at the
United Nations because of the actions of the Western
Powers. It was only our veto which enabled these
States whose names I have mentioned to become Members of the IJnited Nations.
254. Mr. Yost, we have used the veto-1 myself have
done. so by raising this hand-about
fifty times in the
defence of just causes, of the interests of those whom
YOU oppressed and despised, those against whom YOU
were discriminating,
those whom you were refusing
to admit to the United Nations. The purpose of the
recent veto to which you referred was to prevent the
revenge-seekers and imperialists from entering a socialist country friendly to us, and, as I told your predecessor, Mr. Ball, to prevent the imperialist Powers
from sticking their noses into our socialist affairs. That
.

was why we used the veto; it was used forjust purposes.
A Socialist country was saved from the introduction
of revanchism, nazism, militarism and imperialism.
255, The
PRESIDENT
(interpretatiorz
fionz
Sparzish): As there are no further speakers, as President
I propose to make an announcement.

256. First, the President, foreseeing this conclusion,
took the liberty of bringing together yesterday some
of the sponsors of the two drafts that were submitted
earlier and of the draft which is being circulated today,
with a view to seeking some arrangement, some compromise, that would enable us to reach, if not unanimity, at least that near-unanimity which the President
considered necessary to give sufficient strength to a
Security Council resolution of this type on a problem
so difficult and so delicate as to compromise peace.
257. Unfortunately,
the meeting that was convened
yesterday in the President’s office came rather late,
for certain positions had already been taken which,
in view of the way the forces in the Council would
be aligned, it was felt necessary to put before today’s
meeting. Therefore, I ventured yesterday to ask the
sponsors to await the conclusions reached at today’s
meeting with a sporting attitude of mind. Unfortunately, the outcome of this meeting has been too
tragic to be taken in a sporting manner.
258. In any case, as President for the month of March,
I beg of the members of the Council, cordially but
insistently, that we be allowed to reflect on our responsibility and that we do everything possible to follow
the course indicated to us by the representative of Finland when he reminded us that this Council is a forum
for negotiation rather than a debating hall which might
echo the differences to be found throughout the world.
259. In that spirit of negotiation the Finnish draft has
been submitted [s/9709], and I respectfully request the
members of the Council to examine it with no preconceived notions and with an open mind, in order to
decide whether, at the meeting we have planned for
tomorrow at 3 -30 p.m., we could commence our discussion of that text. We must not forget today’s outcome,
of course, for, as the representative of Sierra Leone
very wisely stated, it reflects a technical and a moral
result, We have to balance those two aspects. Therefore, bearing in mind that, technically speaking, we
need a majority to be able to impose the opinion of
the United Nations on the illegitimate government of
Southern Rhodesia, let us make an effort to consider
a formula such as that proposed by.the representative
of Finland.
260. It is for this reason then that, as President, I
again request that in a spirit of cordiality we meet again
tomorrow at 3.30 p.m.
The rneeting rose at 8.Qq p.m.
i

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUlllCATlONS

United
Nations
publico~ionr
the world.
Consull
your
or Goncvo.

may &e obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookslores
ond distributors
lo: United
Nations,
Soles Seclion,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
Now York

UNIES

Les publications
des ‘Nations
Units
sent
en vents
dans les libroiries
et les agencer
d6positoirer
dv monda
entler.
Informez-vous
oupris
do votrs libroirio
ou adrersez.vour
b:
Nallonr
Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gonive.
KAK

nOJlY’lHTb

H3j4AHHR

COMO

CONSCGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Los pvblicodonrr
an lodar perler
Ventor, Nueva

Litho

in United

Nntions.

New

York

OPrAHHBAYHH

DE IA5

OSbEijHHEHHblX

NACIONES

HAWIA

UNIOAS

do las Nacioner
Unidas
er16n on vcnta en librerios
y cosos dirtribuidoror
dal mundo.
Consult8
a au librero o dirljass
o: Nocioner
Unidor,
Seccibn
York o Ginobro.

Price:

$lJ.S.

I .OO (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

de
