50

General Aaemhly-Ele..,entb S-1on

paragraphs (a), ( b) or ( e) of this annex, whichever is
applicable."
Add a new paragraph (f) to read :
"A staff member whose appointment is terminated for
reasons of health shall receive the termination indemnity
set out in this annex, to the extent that the amount of
the termination indemnity, when added to the annual amount
of the disability benefit payable to him under the Regulations
of the Joint Staff Pension Fund, does not exceed one year's
salary."

Regulation 9.4 and annex IV ( Repatriation grant and
service bene fit)
Replace the present text of regulation 9.4 by the following :
"The Secretary-General shall establish a scheme for the
r,ayment of repatriation grants or service benefits within
the maximum rates and under the conditions specified in
annex IV to the present regulations."
Renumber the repatriation grant provision as paragraph 1
of annex IV and replace the first sentence of that provision
by the following text :
"In principle, the repatriation grant shall be payable to
staff members whom the Organization is obligated to repatriate, except staff members on temporary appointments for
a fixed term entitled to a service benefit. N either repatriation grant nor service benefit shall be paid to a staff member
who is summarily dismissed."
Insert as paragraph 2 in annex IV a new provision entitled
"Service benefit", as follows :
"(a) If his letter of appointment so indicates, a staff
member who has served at least one year on a temporary
appointment for a fixed term shall receive upon separation a
service benefit at the rate of 4 per cent of salary during
service in his home country and at the rate of 8 per cent
of salary during service outside his home country, for each
year of service.
" ( b) Should such a staff member, without break in service, be granted a probationary or permanent appointment,
or complete live years of qualifying service on temporary
appointment for a fixed term, he shall !ose entitlement to
the service benefit.
"(c) Service for calculation of the service benefit shall
mean service subsequent to the entry of this provision in
the letter of appointment."

662nd plenary meeting,
27 February 1957.

B
The General Assembly,
Believing it desirable that, as far as practicable, there
should be a common system relating to salaries, allowances and benefits of the United Nations and of the
spc::ialized agencies and that, in particular, staff serving
the United Nations and the specialized agencies in the
same centres should be governed, as a general rule,
by similar standards of salary and related benefits,
1. Calls the attention of the specialized agencies to
resolution A above, which sets out decisions taken by
the General Assembly with regard to the staff of the
United Nations, and recommends to the specialized
agencies the adoption of similar provisions with respect
to their staffs;
2. Decides that, with effect from 1 January 1957,
the post adjustment for United Nations Headquarters
in New York shall be class 5 within the system proposed by the Salary Review Committee and adopted
by the General Assembly;
3. Recommends to the specialized agencies that,
for the purposes of post adjustment, and with effect
from 1 January 1957, Geneva be placed in class 1, and
that, provisionally, Rome be placed in class 2, Paris
in class 4, and Montreal in class 4;

4. Requests the Secretary-Geheral to apply, to the
members of the staff of the United Nations serving
in the headquarters area of a specialized agency which
bas adopted the post adjustment sy1tem recommended
by the Salary Review Committee and approved by
the General Assembly, the class of post adjustment set
by that agencYi for that area;
5. Commends the United Nations Staff Assessment
Plan to the attention of the specialized agencies, and
invites consideration of the advantages to be gained by
common adherence to this system.

662nd plenary meeting,
27 February 1957.
1096 (XI). Suhmission of revised budget estimates

The General Assembly,
B elieving it desirable to minimize the number of
requests for additional appropriations submitted after
the Secretary-General has circulated bis annual main
budget estimates,
Decides that, on an experimental basis in relation
to the estimates for the financial year 1958, requests for
a.dditional appropriations for 1958 after the main
budget estimates have been circulated to Member States
shall be limited to :
(a) Those for which approval is required as a matter
of urgency in the interests of peace and security;
( b) Those in respect of projects which the Secretary-General certifies to be of the highest urgency an<l
which could not have been foreseen at the time the
main budget estimates were circulated ;
( c) Those in respect of decisions of the Security
Council, the Economie and Social Council or the
Trusteeship Council, provided that such requests are
circulated to the Governments of Member States not
later than twenty-one days before the opening date of
the General Assembly session;
( d) Tho se in respect of <lecisions adopted by the
General Assembly, either without reference to a Main
Committee or on the recommendation of such a Committee.
662nd plenary meeting,
27 February 1957.
1097 (XI). Changes in geographical distribution
of the staff of the United Nations Secretariat

The General Assembly,
H a'Ving considered the report of the Secretary-General38 regarding changes in the geographical distribution of the staff of the United Nations Secretariat
submitted to the General Assembly at its eleventh
session,
Taking note of the admission of twenty new Members to the United Nations,
1. Recommends that, in future appointments to the
staff of the United Nations Secretariat, at ail levels,
appropriate preference be given to nationalities which
form a disproportionately small part of the Secretariat,
subject to the provisions of Article 101, paragraph 3,
of the Charter of the United Nations;
.. Ibid., agenda item 43, document A/C.S/689.
