Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Sharing the grave concern expressed by the High
Commissioner regarding the increasing need to protect
the basic rights of refugees,
Commending the increasing number of Governments
contributing to the High Commissioner's programmes
of assistance and noting in this connexion, the decision
of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme89 that the responsibility for providing
the financial and other resources required by his Office
should be shared by all members of the international
community,
Recognizing the need for further accessions to the
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees of
1951,40 the Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees·
of 196741 and other relevant instruments,

1. Expresses its deep satisfaction at the efficient
manner in which the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and his staff continue to accomplish
their humanitarian tasks;
2. Requests the High Commissioner to continue his
efforts, in co-operation with Governments, United
Nations bodies and voluntary agencies, to promote permanent and speedy solutions to the problems facing his
Office through voluntary repatriation and assistance in
rehabilitation, integration in countries of asylum or resettlement in other countries as needed;
3. Further requests the High Commissioner to intensify his efforts on behalf of refugees in Africa,

notably those returning to their countries following independence, and urges the fullest co-operation of all
concerned for this purpose;

4. Urges Governments to strengthen further their
support for the humanitarian aotivities of the High
Commissioner by:

93

manitarian assistance resulting from events in the IndoChinese peninsula, 43
Endorses that view of the Executive Committee of
the High Commissioner's Programme and ur~es the
international community further to strengthen its support of the efforts of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in this regard.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3456 (XXX). Elaboration of a draft Convention
on Territorial Asylum
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3272 (XXIX) of 10 December 197 4 relating to the elaboration of a draft
Convention on Territorial Asylum,
Noting that the Group of Experts on the Draft Convention on Territorial Asylum, constituted in accordance with paragraph 2 of the aforementioned resolution, has reviewed the text of the draft Convention and
has submitted its report thereon,44
Noting the view reiterated by the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme that a
conference of plenipotentiaries on territorial asylum
should be convened to consider the draft Convention
on Territorial Asylum,411
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to convene a conference of plenipotentiaries on
territorial asylum from 10 January to 4 February 1977
to consider and adopt a Convention on Territorial
Asylum;

in the field of international protection;

2. Decides that the cost for holding the conference
of plenipotentiaries on territorial asylum should be met
by voluntary contributions;

( b) Co-operating in the promotion of permanent
solutions to the problems faced by his Office;

3. Authorizes the High Commissioner to seek such
funds;
·

(c) Providing the necessary financial means to attain the objectives of his assistance programmes.

4. Requests the Secretary-General to refer the report of the Group of Experts on the Draft Convention
on Territorial Asylum to Member States for any observations and comments that they may wish to make
before the conference of plenipotentiaries.

(a) Facilitating the accomplishment of his tasks

2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3455 (XXX). Humanitarian asmtance to the
lndo-Chinese displaced persons
The General Assembly,
Noting the information provided by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees42 on the
assistance being given by his Office to the Indo-Chinese
displaced persons,
Noting further that the members of the Executive
Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme
unanimously recognized the need for continued huau Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. I2A. (A/10012/
Add.I), para. 129.
40 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545, p. 137.
41 Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791, p. 267.
.
42 See Official Records of the Gen~al Assembly, Thirtieth
$ession, Supplement No. 12A. (A/10012/Add.1), chap. IV; and
Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Third Committee, 2161st meeting,
paras. 1-10.

3518 (XXX). Expression of appreciation to the
Government and people of •exico
·
The General Assembly,
Considering the significance and positive results of
the World Conference of the International Women's
Year,46 held at Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July
1975, which is the first world conference sponsored by
the United Nations on women's issues,
411 Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 12.A. (A/10012/
Add.I), para. 121.
44 See A/10177 and Corr.I.
411 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. 12A. (A/10012/Add.1), para. 69.
48 See Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year (United Nations publication, · Sales No.
E.76.IV.1).

General Aseembly-Thirtieth Seuion

94

Expresses its deep appreciation to the Government
and people of Mexico for acting as host to the World
Conference of the International Women's Year.
·
2441 st P1enary meeting
15 December 1975
3519 (XXX). Women's participation in the
strengthening of international peace and security and in the struggle against colonialism,
racism, racial discrimination, foreign aggression and occupation and all forms of foreign
domination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3276 (XX·IX) of 10 December 1974,
Considering the report of the World Conference of
the International Women's Year, 47 held at Mexico City
from 19 June to 2 July 1975, in particular the Declaration of Mexico on the Equality of Women and
Their Contribution to Development and Peace, 1975,48
the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of
the Objectives of the International Women's Year49 and
the resolutions contained in the report of the Conference,50
· Appreciating that the Conference emphasized the
important role women must play in the strengthening
of international peace and security and in the expansion of co-operation among States, irrespective of their
social and economic systems, based on the principles
of peaceful coexistence in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations,
Endorsing the statement of the Conference that international co-operation and peace require the achievement of national liberation and independence, the preservation of sovereignty and territorial integrity, the
elimination of colonialism and neo-co1onialism, foreign
aggression and occupation, apartheid and racial discrim'ination in all its forms, as well as the recognition of
the dignity of peoples and their right to self-determination,
Noting with satisfaction the opinion expressed by
the Conference that peace requires that women as well
as men should reject any type of intervention in the
domestic affairs of States, openly or covertly carried
out by other States or by transnational corporations,
and that women as well as men should also promote
respect for the sovereign right of a State to establish its
own economic, social and political system without political and economic pressures or coercion of any type,
Taking into account the view of the Conference that
the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of Stares111
confirms, inter alia, the obligation of all States to promote the implementation of general and complete disarmament, to use the funds thus saved for economic and
social development and to provide part of these funds
for the needs of the developing countries,
Noting with satisfaction the positive changes which
have taken place during the last few years in international relations, such as the elimination of the dangerous sources of war in Viet-Nam and the results of the
''United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.1.
"Ibid., chap. I.
" Ibid., chap. TI. sect. A.
Gil Ibid., chap. IIT.
i1 Rei,o)ution 12111

fXXJX).

Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe,
and noting also the importance of deepening the process
of international detente and strengthening an international just peace based on full respect for the Charter
of the United Nations and the interests of all States,
large and small,
Emphasizing the grave concern that in some regions of the world colonialism, apartheid, racial discrimination and foreign aggression continue to exist
and territories are still occupied, which represents a
most serious infringement of the princii-es of the Charter of the United Nations and of human rights of both
.men and women, and of the peoples' right to selfdetermination,
1. Reaffirms the principles promulgated in the Declaration of Mexico on the Equality of Women and Their
Contribution to Development and Peace, 197 5;
2. Reaffirms that the strengthening of international
peace and security, co-operation among all States irrespective of their social and economic systems, based
on the principle of peacepil coexistence, and the elimination of the remaining vestiges of colonialism, neocolonialism, apartheid, all forms of racism and racial
discriminaition, alien domination and foreign aggression
and occupation are indispensable for the safeguarding
of the fundamental human rights of both men and
women;
3. Calls upon all Governments, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations, particularly women's organizations and women's groups, to intensify their
efforts to strengthen peace, to expand and deepen the
process of international detente and make it irreversible, to eliminate completely and definitely all forms of
colonialism and to put an end to the policy and practice of apartheid, all forms of racism, racial discrimination, aggression, occupation and foreign domination;
4. Urges all Governments to take effective measures towards bringing about general and complete disarmament and convening the World Disarmament Conference as soon as possible;
5. Expresses its solidarity with and its assistance
for women who contribute towards the struggle of the
peoples for their national liberation;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session a comprehensive report on the implementation of the present
resolution.
2441st plenary meeting
15 December 1975
3520 (XXX). World Conference of the
lntemational Wom&i's Year

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3010 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 in which it proclaimed the year 1975 International Women's Year,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions 1849 (LVI) and 1851 (LVI) of 16 May 1974 on
the convening of an international conference during the
International Women's Year as a focal point of the international observance of the Year,
Recallinf,f further its resolution~ 3276 (XXJX) nnd
3277 (XXIX) of 10 J>cn~mhcr 11'74 ll'i wrll 11s l(rn.
