A/64/PV.47

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

47

th plenary meeting
Monday, 16 November 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Viinanen
(Finland), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda items 48 (continued), 114, 120 and 121
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/64/176,
A/64/228 and A/64/350)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
The Acting President: In connection with agenda
item 48, members will recall that the Assembly
commemorated the fifteenth anniversary of the
International
Conference
on
Population
and
Development under the agenda item at its 17th to 19th
plenary meetings on 12 and 13 October 2009. Members
will also recall that the reports of the SecretaryGeneral issued as documents A/64/87 and A/64/263
have already been discussed at the 26th plenary
meeting of the Assembly on 27 October 2009. In
connection with agenda item 114, the Assembly
adopted resolution 64/1 at its 15th plenary meeting on
6 October 2009.

Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU).
There are many aspects to the implementation of
the Millennium Summit. I would like to focus today on
one important issue: climate change and its possible
security implications. The watershed report of the
Secretary-General on this topic, contained in document
A/64/350, could not be more timely. It marks the
beginning of a new field of work for the United
Nations.
Three considerations underpin the European
Union perspective: first, the impacts of climate change
are universal; secondly, left unchecked global warming
will sooner or later affect us all — rich or poor, North
or South; and thirdly, it is not a challenge only to some,
but of concern to us all. That implies that our response
must be global. Since climate change brings shared
challenges, we need to respond with a comprehensive
approach at all levels and with all policy tools at our
disposal. No country can tackle these issues in
isolation.
There is an urgent need for action. The security
risks posed by climate change are real. They are
already being felt. They are having an impact on
people’s lives. One key measure will be a common
push in the lead-up to Copenhagen and a bold
agreement there.
By redrawing the maps of water availability, food
security, disease prevalence, population distribution
and coastal zones, climate change will have serious
implications for the security and development of entire

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-60826 (E)

*0960826*

A/64/PV.47

regions. We need to build emergency preparedness
capacity for both the immediate and the longer terms,
as well as be prepared to address a number of
unprecedented and unpredictable challenges. The
Hyogo Framework for Action gives us an important
platform in building resilience of nations and
communities to disasters.
The poor and vulnerable are most at risk. One
third of Africans live in areas prone to drought. By
2020, an additional 75 to 250 million Africans are
likely to be at risk of water stress. Sea-level rise,
coastal flooding, changing rainfall patterns and drought
could displace as many as 200 million people in Africa
by 2050. Scientists draw the conclusion that climate
change threatens to exacerbate those trends and
undermine Governments’ ability to ensure security and
sustainable development.
For people of many small island developing
States, the link between climate change, development
and security is a question not only of regional stability,
but also of national survival. In response to sea-level
rise and salt water inundation, relocation strategies are
being formulated by some nations and opportunities
provided for citizens to migrate. The international
community will have to tackle the legal and political
implications of migration caused by climate-related
events and Stateless citizens within a not so distant
future.
In the Arctic region, the effects of climate change
are plainly visible with melting sea ice, the melting of
the Greenland icecap and thawing permafrost. Coastal
erosion has already made it necessary to relocate entire
communities. Fortunately, in that region international
cooperation structures that bring together the States
and the indigenous peoples involved are already in
place. Such cooperation fosters confidence and helps to
address transboundary issues, adapt to new conditions,
maintain stability and avoid conflict.
So how can we continue our efforts to address the
challenges before us? The European Union would like
to highlight five areas where action is needed.
First, we need a transformation of our economies
to mitigate climate change. We must take bold and
determined action to reduce our collective emissions of
greenhouse gases. It is necessary to limit global
temperature rise below 2 degrees. Developed countries
will have to take the lead with binding commitments,
and developing countries, especially the advanced

2

emerging economies, will also have to contribute with
intensified actions.
Secondly, we need to focus our efforts. The
Secretary-General’s landmark report proposes two
courses of action. One is to focus on problem areas
with high-impact and irreversible consequences; the
other is to accelerate the identification of threat
minimizers. It is a question of creating positive spirals
of change and making systematic use of available
tools. A focused research effort will help to
continuously improve our understanding of the drivers
of climate change and the options we have to reduce its
impact.
Thirdly, we need to identify and strengthen the
interconnections between climate change and security,
between climate change and development, and between
adaptation and mitigation. Adaptation is about forms of
development in which the capacity to manage risk
determines progress. There are synergies between
adaptation measures and emission reductions that
should be explored. Investment in mitigation and
adaptation should go hand in hand with efforts to
address and respond to the international security threat
posed by climate change. International cooperation
should be enhanced in the areas of early warning,
conflict management and peacebuilding in the context
of global warming. These actions should all be viewed
as part of a preventive security policy.
Fourthly, adaptation to climate change is a
challenge for every country. Special attention must be
paid to the most vulnerable groups and the poor. It is
crucial to strengthen the ability of individuals, societies
and ecosystems to deal with this challenge. Adaptation
in the agricultural sector will be decisive for food
security and the livelihoods of poor people. A growing
body of scientific work also shows the importance of
applying a gender perspective to adaptation. The
promotion of good governance, human rights and
gender equality are threat minimizers. They are
desirable in their own right but can also help lower the
risk of climate-related insecurity. Regional and
multinational adaptation activities can have trustcreating and peacebuilding effects.
Last but not least, because the agenda is so allencompassing, a multilateral response is warranted.
The United Nations has the capacity like no other
organization to address this issue in all its dimensions
and must take the lead. The report of the Secretary-

09-60826

A/64/PV.47

General is the first of its kind and has the potential to
serve as a vital point of departure for the United
Nations. While the way forward outlined by the
Secretary-General is a good basis for further work, the
EU would have appreciated more specific
recommendations. The role of the United Nations in
terms of responsibilities, capacities and resources
should be made even more explicit. The European
Union would hope that the Secretary-General can make
use of some of our proposals on how the United
Nations system could address emerging challenges.
It is important that we continue to build
knowledge and discuss solutions jointly at the global
level. In March 2008, the highest decision-making
body of the EU, the European Council, considered the
impact of climate change on international security, how
it affects Europe’s own security and how the European
Union should respond to it. This assessment was
followed up with more specific recommendations for
action. As a consequence, we have enhanced our
conflict prevention and crisis management, but we
need to improve analysis and early warning
capabilities. The European Union cannot do this alone.
We must now step up our efforts, in particular with the
United Nations.
Climate change and its security implications are
an item that should be kept regularly on the agenda of
the General Assembly, underpinned by regular reports
of the Secretary-General. The European Union also
supports consideration by the Security Council on this
issue on a regular basis, if necessary.
The first and most urgent step on the road to
security in the face of climate change is a global,
ambitious
and
comprehensive
agreement
in
Copenhagen. It is the European Union’s profound
belief that there is no alternative to a successful
outcome of the meeting in Copenhagen. An ambitious
and binding deal is in the interests and is the
responsibility of all nations.
Mr. Beck (Palau): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Pacific small island developing States
(SIDS) represented at the United Nations, namely, Fiji,
Papua New Guinea, the Republic of the Marshall
Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru,
Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Tonga, Vanuatu and
my own country, Palau.
The Pacific small island developing States
welcome the report of the Secretary-General contained

09-60826

in document A/64/350, entitled “Climate change and its
possible security implications”, and we would like to
sincerely thank the Department of Economic and
Social Affairs (DESA) and the Division for Sustainable
Development for their lead role in preparing such a
comprehensive and substantive report in such a short
period of time. We have a small and distinct window
for action and we appreciate the urgency with which
the Secretary-General has approached this matter.
From the report, it is clear that the security
implications of climate change are not theoretical but
real. We note in particular the identification in the
report of emerging climate change-related threats
which merit “the focused attention … of the
international community” (A/64/350, p. 2). These
threats are ones which, in the words of the report, are
“those that appear highly likely, are large in magnitude,
may unfold relatively swiftly, and are unprecedented in
nature” (ibid.). These threats include loss of territory,
statelessness and increased numbers of displaced
persons.
All of these threats have occurred or will
imminently occur in the Pacific. It is the reality and
immediacy of these threats that initially motivated the
Pacific small island developing States to sponsor
resolution 63/281 containing the request for the
Secretary-General’s report. It is this reality that makes
it increasingly critical that all relevant organs of the
United Nations, including the Security Council, take up
this issue.
The report first outlines the threat to human wellbeing in the fields of agriculture, water, health, coastal
areas, human settlements and infrastructure. Indeed,
these threats are already being felt in the Pacific SIDS
and have been comprehensively covered in our
submission, as well as addressed in the national
submissions of our members, which are available on
the DESA website.
Next, the report goes on to describe the adverse
impacts of climate change on economic development.
We have covered these aspects in our submissions and
wish to reiterate here that improvement and
degeneration in security and development are mutually
reinforcing. The Pacific SIDS are pleased that the
international community has started to look at climate
change in a holistic manner. We are no longer
debating — nor should we continue to debate —
whether development or security is more important. I

3

A/64/PV.47

think we all now agree that they exist side by side and
that development is not possible without security.
In this respect, chapter V of the report, entitled
“Threats from uncoordinated coping”, breaks new
ground. It pulls the various elements together and
demonstrates how the adverse effects of climate
change, both standing by themselves and in
conjunction with other effects, present a clear threat to
security. It is of particular concern to us that
“in the case of small island developing States, the
adverse impacts of climate change are already
increasing the rate of domestic migration and
relocation, with people from rural areas and
outlying islands moving to urban centres as they
lose their livelihoods and lands owing to natural
disasters and sea-level rise. This migration is
placing enormous strains on food, housing,
education, health, and water supplies, as recipient
communities struggle to accommodate the number
of people migrating” (A/64/350, para. 57).
The report further points to the estimates of the
International Organization for Migration, which
forecast as between 50 million and 350 million the
number of persons who may have to migrate owing to
climate change and environmental degradation by
2050.
The report further points to the uncertainties of
the international legal framework for responding to
displacement caused by the impacts of climate change.
At the same time, and this is not theoretical, the
adverse impacts of climate change have already caused
internal displacement in the Federated States of
Micronesia, Papua New Guinea, Tuvalu and Solomon
Islands. In some Pacific SIDS, internal relocation is
simply not feasible because of geographical
constraints. Displacement to a neighbouring or third
country might be the only option if climate change
continues at the current or increased rate without
significant and urgent mitigation by the international
community.
Yet, while international law is not clear,
according to an analysis by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, some
people forced to migrate by the effects of climate
change might be protected by the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees, whereas others
might not be protected. There is little appetite for
expanding the refugee Convention to explicitly cover

4

those displaced by climate change, given the fear that
this risks lowering the protection currently afforded all
refugees. The discussion on what needs to be done to
fill this legal vacuum has already begun and such
discussions should be well timed.
However, under no circumstances can efforts to
protect climate-displaced people be used as an excuse
for inaction on mitigation and adaptation. We must
focus our efforts first and foremost on preventing such
forced migration and providing people of the Pacific
with the necessary resources to protect the integrity of
their island homes, their unique cultural identity and
their ability to provide for their means of subsistence.
Leaving ancestral homelands and, in the most tragic
scenario, leaving the entire country behind is a
devastating and unacceptable prospect for our people.
I will now turn to chapter VI, which in many
ways is the most remarkable chapter in the report. It is
entitled “Threat of loss of territory and statelessness”.
The report shows an alarming but correct example
when it states:
“In the case of some small island developing
States, sea-level rise presents perhaps the ultimate
security threat, jeopardizing the very existence of
small low-lying countries such as the Maldives,
where 80 per cent of land is less than one metre
above sea level and could therefore disappear
over the next 30 years.” (ibid., para. 71)
We are talking about the survival of nations, peoples
and unique cultures, all of which are threatened by the
adverse impacts of climate change.
In addition, international law has never had to
contend with the disappearance of a country. There are
complex political issues regarding the most appropriate
means to address the rights of affected populations,
partial and complete loss of sovereign territory and the
effects on territorial waters and exclusive economic
zones. The implications for affected people in terms of
human rights, as well as the economic losses for the
countries concerned and the issue of sovereignty, are
all matters of first impression as well as extraordinary
international importance.
The final chapter in the report tries to point a way
forward on preventing and responding to the emerging
threats. Mitigation and adaptation are two important
elements, both of which are dealt with under the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate

09-60826

A/64/PV.47

Change process. We are now just days away from the
Copenhagen Conference, and the Pacific SIDS, as
members of the Alliance of Small Island States, expect
that all leaders will explicitly ensure our survival,
security and territorial integrity by making firm
international commitments through legally binding
instruments to be adopted at Copenhagen.
The political options on climate change have now
been clearly outlined in negotiation texts. The choice
before leaders at Copenhagen will be whether or not
the global community has sufficient political will to
ensure our security through legal instruments with
serious, specific action on emissions by all nations. If
we fail, we will fail ourselves and future generations
by delaying the decisions that need to be made now.
Flimsy moral sentiments expressed at Copenhagen will
be no substitute for legally binding treaties and will do
little to ensure the security of the most vulnerable
among our membership.
We look to Copenhagen for an agreement that
will, among other things, use the avoidance of adverse
climate change impacts on small island developing
States as one of the key benchmarks for assessing its
appropriateness, consistent with the precautionary
principle and the principle of prevention. Such an
agreement must include a package of mitigation
activities now, up to and beyond 2012 that provides for
the long-term stabilization of atmospheric greenhouse
gas concentrations at well below 350 parts per million
carbon dioxide-equivalent levels; limits global average
surface temperature increases to well below 1.5
degrees centigrade above pre-industrial levels; and
provides for global greenhouse gas emissions to peak
by 2015 and decline thereafter.
As I have stated before, the report of the
Secretary-General greatly enriches the debate on
climate change. It points out where the development
aspects and the security implications overlap, as well
as where they stand apart. In fact, the General
Assembly, by adopting the historic resolution 63/281,
has taken the same view. The report makes it clear that
gaps remain in how the international system responds
to the security implications of climate change. It is now
time to update the tools used to address those
implications.
The linkage between climate change and security
needs to be a permanent focus of deliberations in the
United Nations. We reiterate our call for the inclusion

09-60826

of “security and climate change” as an annual agenda
item in the United Nations and for formal recognition
of the link between security and climate change. We
are already actively engaged in the General Assembly,
in the Economic and Social Council and at the
Framework Convention. It is time that the Security
Council complement the discussion by looking at the
appropriate aspects which fall under its own mandate.
I now add the following remarks in my national
capacity for the Republic of Palau. The SecretaryGeneral’s excellent report, as we have said, envisions
that international peace and security will likely be
affected by statelessness. This chilling conclusion
means that, for the first time in the history of the
world, we are contemplating the loss of Member
States. Up to now, the membership of this body has
only grown with time. How will we feel when that
trend is reversed? The international community must
address itself to this reality with the mechanisms which
are available to it.
We submit that only the Security Council has the
extraordinary powers to deal with threats like this. No,
we do not expect the Council to turn back the rising
seas; but rather, we challenge the Council to creatively
use its powers under Chapter VII of the Charter to
develop enforceable emissions targets and to give teeth
to what is now, apparently, an ineffectual voluntary
process.
Mrs. Kolontai (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Secretary-General’s many reports on implementing the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) clearly attest
to the fact that the impact of the complex multifaceted
crisis threatens the achievement by 2015 of the
internationally agreed development goals.
The danger of a reduction in official development
assistance, the absence of flexible global financial
mechanisms, and the unpredictability of resources
provided to recipient countries during the crisis have
led to a drastic decrease of the effectiveness of
development measures taken by the Governments of
developing and middle-income countries. In that
context, we believe it necessary to continue and expand
assistance to developing and middle-income countries
because it is precisely those countries that can become
a driving force for future economic and social progress.
Belarus recognizes its responsibility to the
international community in terms of development and
makes
significant
contributions
towards
the

5

A/64/PV.47

achievement of the MDGs. The Republic of Belarus
has made significant progress at home in a range of
areas thanks to the targeted State support of health
care, education, agriculture, energy and other sectors of
the economy. Furthermore, we believe that an impetus
to development efforts could be provided by the United
Nations system and other international structures in
creating mechanisms to improve access to new
technologies and new and renewable sources of
energies for developing countries and those with
economies in transition.

General Assembly revitalization. First, we need to
strengthen the practice of holding General Assembly
thematic debates on topical issues on the international
agenda, follow up on their development in open-ended
working groups, and adopt relevant resolutions.
Secondly, we need to increase public awareness of the
work of the General Assembly, including through the
most up-to-date media outlets and new technology.
Thirdly, we need to implement the provisions of all
previous resolutions on revitalizing the work of the
General Assembly.

In the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document
(resolution 60/1), Member States expressed serious
concern about the negative impact of transnational
organized crime, one of the manifestations of which is
the traffic in persons. World leaders also recognized
that such traffic still poses a serious threat to
humankind and requires a concerted international
response. A few days ago, the Third Committee
adopted by consensus a draft resolution on improving
the coordination of efforts against the traffic in persons
that will enhance Member States’ efforts to bring a
swift end to that contemporary form of slavery.

In the kaleidoscope of United Nations reform,
most attention is paid to Security Council reform. In
that regard, we call on Member States to accelerate the
search for a compromise solution to expanding the
Council’s composition and improving the effectiveness
of its work.

As a consequence of decisions taken at the 2005
Summit, today we are closer than ever to drafting a
comprehensive United Nations plan of action to
combat the traffic in persons that will become an
effective mechanism to pool the efforts of the
international community to eradicate that social ill. The
draft resolution strengthens that idea, underlining the
importance of having transparent and open
consultations on the comprehensive plan of action and
bearing in mind the needs of all interested parties and
the opinions of all Member States.
For the first time in recent years, the work of the
Open-ended Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly led
to the adoption of a substantive resolution at the sixtythird session. The Belarus delegation commends the
excellent outcome of the negotiations and their
co-chairs, Norway and Ecuador. We also note the
flexibility and good will of the delegations of the
Non-Aligned Movement, the European Union and the
permanent members of the Security Council, which had
a direct and positive influence on the outcome of the
negotiation process.
Belarus believes that three key elements are
fundamental to the future success of the process of

6

Belarus pays particular attention to the United
Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic
Radiation. We are convinced that expanding the
membership of the Committee will help both to
strengthen its scientific capacity and to increase its
authority. We are particularly concerned by the lack of
decisiveness on Committee membership and its
potential negative impact on the quality of the
Committee’s work. In that regard, Belarus welcomes
the General Assembly’s intention to consider bringing
new members onto the Committee by the end of the
sixty-fourth session. We note the timeliness of the
Secretariat’s proposal on providing financial resources
necessary to the Committee’s work, and call upon
delegations to support those proposals in the
framework of the draft budget discussions in the Fifth
Committee.
Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The United Nations has a crucial role to play in the
follow-up of its major conferences and summits. That
role is of particular relevance given the current
international
context
characterized
by
the
interconnection of multiple crises, among which we
underscore the serious financial and economic crisis,
one of the most serious obstacles to the development of
the nations of the South.
In the current state of affairs, it is clear that the
authority of this world forum derives, among other
things, from the fact that its representative nature and
legitimacy cannot be replaced by exclusive clubs of
countries seeking to manipulate the international

09-60826

A/64/PV.47

decision-making process in economic and financial
matters. Today more than ever, the voices of all
countries, especially the smallest and poorest, must be
duly heeded and addressed. That is why Cuba supports
the holding of a high-level plenary meeting of the
General Assembly next year as a follow-up to the
commitments made 10 years ago in the Millennium
Declaration and, in particular, those that address
development.
The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) that
we agreed at that time, together with other goals that
are no less important in the area of development and
that have been established in the outcome documents
of the major summits and conferences that preceded
that historic event, must be the centre of our analysis in
2010. That occasion should not only reaffirm
documents and reiterate agreed language; it should also
allow for an in-depth analysis of the root causes of the
persistence of poverty and underdevelopment. It should
also serve as an opportunity to propose concrete
measures and viable alternative for eradicating poverty.
2010 should also see a review of the
commitments made regarding sustainable development
of the small island developing States. Cuba is one such
State and will participate actively in that process,
which should focus on an objective analysis of the
targets agreed upon at the historic conferences of
Barbados and Mauritius.
Cuba reaffirms the importance of redoubling
efforts to achieve gender equality and the
empowerment of women. The 2010 assessment of
progress made towards achieving the MDGs will be a
key moment for consideration of those topics.
Prior to that meeting, we will have several
opportunities to carry out an in-depth analysis of the
measures necessary to overcome the remaining
obstacles and the new challenges to the achievement of
the MDGs. Those opportunities include the 15-year
review of the implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and of the results
of the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly, to be carried out during the fifty-fourth
session of the Commission on the Status of Women, in
March of 2010. There will also be the annual
ministerial review of the Economic and Social Council,
dedicated to implementing the internationally agreed
goals and commitments in regard to gender equality
and the empowerment of women.

09-60826

Climate change has recently captured the
attention of the entire world, as the Copenhagen
summit draws closer. What is worrisome, however, is
although there is full awareness of the serious danger
that climate change represents for humanity, the
negotiations leading up to Copenhagen have not been
able to make as much progress as we had hoped and as
was needed.
We have been denouncing the cause of that
stagnation for quite some time, and that is the lack of
firm political will on the part of the developed
countries when it comes to committing to reducing
their emissions to a level that is proportional to their
historical and current responsibilities and in keeping
with the parameters suggested by scientific
evaluations. Those countries are also reluctant to
contribute the resources and technologies necessary to
enable developing countries to tackle the phenomenon
of climate change.
Unfortunately, everything seems to point to the
fact that the Copenhagen conference will not attain the
results that the majority hoped for. It seems that once
again the adoption of the concrete and binding
commitments that we are calling for will be postponed.
How long will we have to wait while the future of all
of all humanity is in danger?
The manner in which we confront climate change
today will have a direct effect on the development
prospects for a great portion of humanity. The
achievement of a fair and balanced agreement on
climate change is still possible if we approach the
process of negotiations with a new political attitude.
The battle against climate change can and must be
won. Let us not wait until it is too late.
Mr. Gutiérrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): On
24 October we commemorated the sixty-fourth
anniversary of the entry into force of the Charter of the
United Nations. During that 64 years Peru has actively
participated in the work of the Organization with the
same conviction: that multilateralism is the most
propitious road for building a better world. Thus we
welcome with great satisfaction the new momentum
that States are giving multilateralism as an area for
political dialogue and cooperation with which the
challenges of the twenty-first century can be tackled.
One of the most meaningful achievements of the
United Nations in that context was the Millennium
Summit, which in 2000 adopted the Millennium

7

A/64/PV.47

Declaration (resolution 55/2). That document has a
special historical value that recognizes the collective
responsibility of Governments to work for equality and
equity and to ensure that the benefits of globalization
will be shared equally. The Summit established eight
goals to be met by 2015, which brought together the
commitments undertaken by the United Nations during
the last decade of the twentieth century.
Since the start the State of Peru has taken those
eight goals — seven of which have established
timetables — on board as the guiding axis of its social
policy in fighting poverty and promoting inclusion.
Today we are beginning to see the results of that, as
was confirmed on 15 October 2009 by the United
Nations Development Programme in its 2008 report on
the implementation of the Millennium Development
Goals.
The report confirms the progress made by Peru in
reducing poverty levels from 54.4 per cent in 1991 to
36 per cent in 2008 and in reducing the level of
extreme poverty from 23 per cent to 12.6 per cent over
the same period. Thus the goal of reducing by half the
number of individuals whose incomes are below the
extreme poverty line is about to be achieved in Peru.
In the area of education, we have almost achieved
universal primary education in Peru. The illiteracy rate
has been reduced from 18.1 per cent in 1991 to 6 per
cent in the year 2008.
In the area of basic services, the homes with
potable water increased from 49 per cent in 1991 to an
estimated 80 per cent in 2009. Meanwhile, the homes
with electricity increased from 46 per cent to 80 per
cent during the same period.
With regard to health, overall malnutrition has
gone from 10 per cent in 2004 to 5 per cent in 2008.
Chronic child malnutrition has dropped from 25.4 per
cent to 21.9 per cent during the same period. Mortality
for children less than five years of age has also been
reduced by 68 per cent, which means that we will
comply with this goal eight years before the deadline.
It is important to underscore, however, that there
are many illnesses that were not explicitly included in
the Millennium Development Goals but that seriously
affect countries such as Peru. They include
non-transmittable diseases such as heart disease,
stroke, cancer, hypertension, chronic respiratory
illnesses and diabetes. We must also highlight the

8

deaths and injuries that result from traffic accidents.
All of this confirms that there is an urgent need to
evaluate the advisability of promoting the Millennium
Development Goals Plus, which have as their principal
axis the fight against non-transmittable diseases and
injuries.
My Government is committed to continue to
allocate the greatest possible resources to fighting not
just the consequences of underdevelopment but its
complex causes. In the framework of the current
economic and financial crisis, it is urgent that we
reaffirm the commitments taken on in the Millennium
Goals, as the various areas they address are essential to
improving the well-being of developing countries.
In that context, we wish to reiterate our concern
about the alarming sums that are allocated around the
world to acquiring weapons, amounts that increases
steadily every year in the midst of one of the most
serious global economic recessions. The increase in
military expenditures has a direct impact on our
countries’ capacity to fight hunger and poverty and
attain the Millennium Development Goals. Therefore
we believe that it is essential to strengthen the direct
link between disarmament and development.
The crisis also causes problems in terms of
mobilizing resources for global initiatives to fight
climate change. Peru is among the countries that are
particularly vulnerable to climate change without being
among its principal producers. The great efforts that
my country must undertake in allocating resources to
adaptation will reduce our capacity to address the other
needs of our population and, consequently, to continue
working effectively towards the attainment of the
Millennium Development Goals, especially the fight
against poverty.
With that in mind, the Copenhagen conference in
December should face the challenge of financing
measures to adapt to climate change and of mitigating
its effects. Peru has presented specific proposals in that
area that we hope can be considered at the conference.
We also wish to note that the illicit production of coca
leaves is one of the greatest factors in the depredation
of nature. The felling and burning of forests in order to
increase illegal farming causes soil erosion and has led
to the deforestation of more than 2.5 million hectares
of the Amazon forest, making this phenomenon one of
the principal contributors to global warming.

09-60826

A/64/PV.47

We have stated in the General Assembly that it is
urgent that we make the fight against drug trafficking a
centrepiece of the international agenda and of the
cooperation agenda of developed countries, under the
principle of shared but differentiated responsibility.
We have taken note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on climate change and its possible security
implications (A/64/350). It contains elements that we
will study with the necessary care.
In this crisis scenario it is necessary to revitalize
the United Nations system for development. We must
take advantage of the unique role that the Organization
plays as an inclusive forum for promoting a better
understanding of the social and economic effects of the
crisis and formulating appropriate responses for
overcoming the challenges that we now face.
Along these lines, we are looking to the highlevel meeting that the General Assembly has decided to
hold in 2010, at the beginning of its sixty-fifth session,
with heads of State and Government participating, at
which there will be a review of the progress towards
achieving the Millennium Development Goals and in
which we will be participating with great interest at the
highest possible level.
Mr. Maurer (Switzerland): I would like to touch
on two issues under agenda item 114, first on armed
violence and development, and then on the high-level
event of September 2010.
I shall first speak as chair of the Core Group
leading the implementation of the Geneva Declaration
on Armed Violence and Development. The Core Group
is comprised of Brazil, Colombia, Finland, Guatemala,
Indonesia, Kenya, Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway,
the Philippines, Spain, Thailand, the United Kingdom
and Switzerland.
The Core Group welcomes the recommendations
made in the report of the Secretary-General under
review (A/64/228). The report was published pursuant
to resolution 63/23, which was adopted by consensus
during the sixty-third session of the General Assembly.
I take this opportunity to congratulate the SecretaryGeneral on this substantive work.
The Core Group is very pleased with the report’s
detailed analysis of the relationship between armed
violence and development and its discussion on the
human, social and economic costs related to armed
violence. The report acknowledges that armed violence

09-60826

constitutes not only a humanitarian challenge but also
an obstacle to development and, ultimately, to the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
We believe that the report contains solid elements
that will help advance the agenda on armed violence
and development. In particular, it highlights the main
challenges ahead while providing the international
community with a set of concrete and targeted
measures. The report also highlights the importance of
strengthening national and local capacities with a view
to preventing and reducing armed violence. In addition,
it values the essential contribution made by multilateral
and bilateral agencies in supporting the efforts of
Governments to combat armed violence.
Following on recommendation (h) in the report,
which invites Member States to build a greater
awareness of the negative impact of armed violence on
development, the Core Group would like to initiate an
open and transparent process with a view to
formulating the core elements of a possible resolution
during the current session. This open-ended process
intends to allow a broad and inclusive debate on the
substance of the report and on the recommendations it
makes, as well as on the ways and means to foster
greater international action. This approach will be
particularly important in view of the high-level plenary
meeting of the sixty-fifth session of the General
Assembly in September 2010.
Our open-ended process will come with a series
of events on several aspects covered in the report in
order to make Member States aware of the importance
of reducing armed violence as a means of enabling
development and ultimately the attainment of the
Millennium Development Goals. This series of events
starts at 1.15 p.m. today with a side event to be held in
Conference Room 4. Furthermore, the Core Group
believes that enhancing development would be one of
the key contributing factors to the prevention and
reduction of armed violence. It is our hope that
Member States will make full use of this forum to
explore the ways and means to ensure people-centred
development and hence to reduce the motive to resort
to armed violence.
To conclude, on behalf of the Core Group, I
would like to encourage all Member States to
participate actively in the discussions to come. I hereby
encourage those Member States that have not yet done

9

A/64/PV.47

so to subscribe to the Geneva Declaration and its
principles.
(spoke in French)
On behalf of Switzerland, I would now like to
speak about the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly that will take place next year.
Ten years after the Millennium Declaration and
five years after the 2005 Summit — two events that
provided important blueprints for addressing key
challenges and strengthening the ability of the United
Nations to deliver on its mandates — leaders will again
convene in September 2010 at the opening of the sixtyfifth session of the General Assembly.
Since those two historic events, the international
context has changed, presenting new challenges and
opportunities. The recent food, economic and financial
crisis as well as global climate change have highlighted
new aspects of insecurity, vulnerability and poverty.
These global challenges have also strongly emphasized
the characteristic interdependence of our world, where
today issues that concern us are more strongly
interlinked than ever and cannot be dealt with in
isolation.
Development is no exception. For our leaders to
be in a position to take stock next year of the current
challenges directly affecting development and to
discuss specific action to address them, they will have
to take into account the multiple correlations between,
for example, between climate change and development,
between peace and security and development, or
between the global economy and development. In our
view, that holistic approach is critical to enabling the
2010 summit to reflect the broad context in which
development challenges are embedded.
Since the year 2000, the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) have been shown to be a
powerful vector for political action, and these timebound targets, inter alia, will continue to inspire our
common efforts for development. In 2008, in the
framework of the High-level Event on the MDGs in
2008, our leaders reviewed at length the progress
made, took stock of remaining gaps in the global effort
to achieve the established goals and identified concrete
action needed on a global scale to meet them. The 2010
summit should therefore build on that meeting, as well
as on others, and avoid reiterating debates and the
conclusions already reached in 2008.

10

Next fall, our leaders should also assess the status
of the global partnership for development called for by
the Millennium Declaration. For a true and effective
partnership, we need stronger international institutions.
In this regard, we cannot overemphasize the central
role of the United Nations or the need for reforms
essential to make the United Nations a more efficient,
effective and coherent platform for carrying out the
international effort for peace, security and
development.
The growing interdependence of nations and the
increasing interconnection of global threats are a
challenge to all countries, all institutions and the global
governance system as a whole. We are convinced that
the 2010 summit is an opportunity to demonstrate that
the United Nations is capable of taking on those
complex issues. It is also a key moment to reaffirm that
the United Nations remains the only universal and
legitimate platform for dealing with and collecting in
one forum the challenges whose interconnections are
evident on a planetary scale, affecting development and
the global context in which we all live.
Ms. Ross (United States of America): The United
States welcomes the important report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the United Nations
Comprehensive Strategy on Assistance and Support to
Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by United
Nations Staff and Related Personnel (A/64/176). We
are gratified to note that the United Nations system is
taking action to institutionalize implementation of this
important pillar of the Organization’s response to
sexual exploitation and abuse by United Nations staff
and related personnel. The victims of such abuse are
beginning to receive the assistance they need to
address the very real needs arising out of these
reprehensible acts.
We appreciate the frankness on how the Strategy
is being implemented in practice by humanitarian and
peacekeeping missions that are operating in often
difficult circumstances. We welcome the recognition
that, while such misconduct is the exception, as it
should be, it is committed by all categories of
personnel and that therefore measures to prevent and
address sexual exploitation and abuse must be taken
throughout the United Nations system and should
include clear standards of conduct for contractors and
other partners.

09-60826

A/64/PV.47

We note that the report indicates varying levels of
coordination among United Nations agencies at the
country level on implementing measures to assist
victims of sexual exploitation and abuse. The work
already being done to use existing legal, medical and
other community programmes is very useful.
We would also like to call attention to other
practical
steps
being
taken
to
strengthen
implementation of the Strategy. For example, the report
notes that the United Nations Development Group has
approved revised job descriptions for managers that
include responsibility for coordinating implementation
of the Strategy. That is exactly the kind of measure that
ensures that busy leaders see this as a priority. Another
such example is the inclusion of clauses in contracts
that would establish for such contractors appropriate
standards of conduct. The United States believes that
there is a clear need for continuing reporting on the
implementation of this Strategy. In this regard, we look
forward to exploring what additional measures might
be needed to strengthen and institutionalize application
of the Strategy.
We wish to express both our appreciation of the
work that has already been done and our recognition of
the enormous challenges ahead. The United States
reiterates its support for the Secretary-General’s zerotolerance policy and calls on all Member States to
strengthen their resolve to change the culture of
impunity that allows such reprehensible acts to take
place.
Turning to the issue of climate change and its
possible security implications, the United States was
pleased to join the list of sponsors of General
Assembly resolution 63/281, on climate change and its
possible security implications, of June 2009 and to
support its original proponents, namely the Pacific
small island developing States. We also welcomed the
opportunity to provide views on the security
implications of climate change, as requested in the
resolution.
We were encouraged by the Assembly’s ability to
achieve broad consensus on a resolution concerning the
urgent issue of climate change, particularly in the
crucial remaining weeks leading to the fifteenth
Conference of Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change in
Copenhagen. The Secretary-General’s thoughtful report

09-60826

on the security implications of climate change
(A/64/350) provides a valuable resource for Parties.
When President Obama addressed the General
Assembly in September, he underscored the
seriousness of the challenges we face. At that time he
said, “we must recognize that in the twenty-first
century there will be no peace unless we take
responsibility for the preservation of our planet” (see
A/64/PV.3).
The danger posed by climate change cannot be
denied. Our responsibility to meet it must not be
deferred. If we continue down our current course,
every member of this Assembly will see irreversible
changes within their borders. Our efforts to end
conflicts will be eclipsed by wars over refugees and
resources. Development will be devastated by drought
and famine. Land that human beings have lived on for
millennia will disappear. Future generations will look
back and wonder why we refused to act, why we failed
to pass on an environment that was worthy of our
inheritance.
The United States has made advancing the
climate change agenda one of our top priorities at the
United Nations. Today’s discussion reinforces our
collective recognition that global climate change
requires an urgent response and the widest possible
cooperation by all countries. The United States
reaffirms its commitment to leadership in this critical
global endeavour.
Mr. Normandin (Canada): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
Canada, Australia and New Zealand welcome the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the United Nations Comprehensive Strategy on
Assistance and Support to Victims of Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse by United Nations Staff and
Related Personnel (A/64/176).
Since the Strategy’s adoption two years ago,
progress on its implementation has been slow.
However, significant inroads have been made towards
ensuring that in the future, provision of assistance and
support to victims will be possible. The report
identifies a number of key actions and initiatives that
have been undertaken since adoption, such as the best
practice series of the Task Force on Protection from
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse. The report also
describes the challenges facing the Strategy’s

11

A/64/PV.47

implementation, which include the lack of communitybased reporting and complaints mechanisms to deal
with such cases. With an issue as sensitive and
personal as sexual exploitation and abuse, it is easy to
understand that victims may find it difficult to come
forward and report on what they have endured; the
issue of under-reporting is all too familiar in these
circumstances.
Canada, Australia and New Zealand believe it is
essential that the United Nations system continue its
work to implement the Strategy, and that this work be
undertaken in a comprehensive, system-wide manner.
In-country mechanisms to facilitate access for
victims to needed services will not be established, and
overall protection from sexual exploitation and abuse
will not be achieved, without the whole United Nations
system — humanitarian, development and peacekeeping
personnel — being on board and working together.
It is crucial that work on this Strategy continue so
that victims are offered the assistance they need and
deserve. Canada, Australia and New Zealand strongly
endorse continued implementation of the Strategy and
support the next steps outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
Speaking now in my national capacity, let me
briefly address the Secretary-General’s report on
climate change and its possible security implications
(A/64/350), also under agenda item 114.
Canada once again wishes to congratulate the
Pacific small island developing States for their
leadership in bringing the issue of security and climate
change to the forefront of our work at the United
Nations. The existential threat facing the Pacific small
islands, in particular, gives this important issue a very
real, urgent and human dimension.
The global challenge of climate change requires a
global response. Internationally, Canada is working
towards an ambitious post-2012 global climate change
agreement at the fifteenth session of the Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change in Copenhagen in early
December.
Canada welcomed the adoption of resolution
63/281, on climate change and its possible security
implications, in June 2009, and we welcome the calls
for relevant United Nations bodies to intensify their

12

efforts in considering the possible security implications
of climate change.
(spoke in French)
The Secretary-General’s comprehensive report
will facilitate the exchange among Member States of
diverse views on this important issue and will help put
our work in context.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the Pacific
small island developing States for their leadership on
this issue.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): In
2007, the President of the General Assembly asked me
to coordinate the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group
tasked with drafting a strategy on assistance and
support to victims of sexual exploitation and abuse by
united nations staff and related personnel. Accordingly,
today, Costa Rica wishes to refer specifically to that
topic.
We welcome the measures that have been adopted
and the progress that has been reported in the
Secretary-General’s report on implementation of the
United Nations Comprehensive Strategy on Assistance
and Support to Victims of Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse by United Nations Staff and Related Personnel
(A/64/176). When the Open-ended Working Group’s
work came to an end, I said that it marked a great step
forward in meeting the needs of victims, which should
be a great source of satisfaction to the United Nations
and to all of us who had participated in drafting the
Strategy.
While the nature and scope of the subject seemed
to raise difficult obstacles to overcome, agreement was
possible thanks to the commitment of all States
Members of the Organization to help the victims. It
was particularly important to separate the assistance
strategy from the policy of zero tolerance, focusing
solely on the human dimension of assistance and
support for victims.
Despite the progress that has already been made,
much remains to be done to attain a truly broad focus
for assistance for victims based on the principles of
comprehensive protection, solidarity and responsibility.
The report tells us that the victims of those abuses are
now beginning to receive basic assistance and support
in a timely manner, in keeping with their specific
needs.

09-60826

A/64/PV.47

Through structures of the United Nations system,
medical, legal, psychological and social support is
already being provided, along with urgent support in
the areas of housing, food and clothing. The Strategy is
an integral part of the measures adopted by the United
Nations system to prevent and address sexual abuse
and exploitation by United Nations staff and associated
personnel.
Here, we view favourably the progress being
made in the implementation of the Strategy by
humanitarian,
development
and
peacekeeping
personnel. We support that comprehensive approach
and we look forward to its consolidation throughout
the system. We warmly welcome the measures and
instruments that are being implemented to enhance the
Strategy’s implementation, through the Task Force cochaired by the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Field Support, and we call for their
strengthening.
In conclusion, Costa Rica recognizes the work
that has been done and draws attention to the
remaining challenges. Once again, we call on all
United Nations personnel to conduct themselves at the
highest level of ethical standards.
Mr. Midekssa (Ethiopia): My delegation is
grateful for this opportunity to make some remarks on
agenda item 114, “Follow-up to the outcome of the
Millennium Summit”. My delegation would also like to
express its appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his report under that agenda item, entitled “Climate
change and its possible security implications”
(A/64/350).

In short, threats can be reduced through
sustainable development, including legitimate and
effective governance and institutions, as well as
peaceful dispute resolution. In addition, it has now
become apparent that a significant slowdown of growth
caused by climate change could pose a serious security
threat to developing countries, by worsening poverty
and desperation. Economic growth should therefore be
fostered so as to strengthen resilience, maintain
political
stability
and
promote
international
cooperation in addressing the various challenges of
underprivileged populations. This fact is clearly
reflected in the discussion in the Secretary-General’s
report of the five channels through which climate
change could affect security, in which the channel
showing the relationship between development and
peace is empirically substantiated. Maintaining global
peace and stability requires keeping the momentum of
development going.
It is in light of this evidence that the emphasis on
preventing the adverse effects of climate change should
be consistent with the efforts of the United Nations to
move from a tradition of reaction to one of prevention
and with its emphasis on sustainable development as a
crucial contributor to conflict prevention. Advancing
sustainable development, building resilience to
physical and economic shocks, and strengthening
institutions are vital to confronting the impact of
climate change and promoting peace and security.

As is reflected in the Secretary-General’s report,
many Member States, in their submissions, recognize
that the possible security implications of climate
change need to be examined in the context of preexisting social, economic and environmental threats,
which are key factors in the security of individuals,
communities and States. Those assessments are all
captured and adequately reflected in the Millennium
Declaration (resolution 55/2).

The impact of climate change on human wellbeing can be illustrated in various ways. For instance,
according to the fourth assessment report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, cereal
productivity is expected to decrease in Africa and
southern Asia due to climate change. In some African
countries, yields from rain-fed agriculture could be
reduced by up to 50 per cent by 2020; food security is
likely to suffer and the risk of hunger to increase.
Africa is also often seen as a continent where climate
change could potentially intensify or trigger conflict.
Among the reasons given are the continent’s reliance
on climate-dependent sectors, recent ethnic and
political conflict, and fragile States.

The persistence of poverty, hunger and disease,
the rapid growth of informal urban settlements,
inadequate infrastructure and the growing scarcity of
land, water and other resources are challenges that
must be effectively addressed to ease the security
implications of climate change.

Speaking of Africa, we firmly believe that in
order to mitigate the impact of climate change on
human well-being, the international community should
take serious measures to control greenhouse-gas
emissions. It is for this reason that we all expect a
climate change deal to be sealed in Copenhagen.

09-60826

13

A/64/PV.47

Africa, for its part, will for the first time in history
field a single negotiating team, chaired by Mr. Meles
Zenawi, Prime Minister of the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia, empowered to negotiate on
behalf of all the States members of the African Union.
We believe more important than the challenges will be
the opportunities opened up by this decision. More
than 50 countries, more than one fourth of the States
Members of the United Nations, will speak with one
voice. That should make the negotiations much more
manageable than would have been the case in the
absence of such a decision. Africa’s interests and
position will not be muffled, as has usually been the
case, and the problems we discuss here today will
definitely surface at the highest level in Copenhagen.
My delegation has also learned from the report
that climate change has the potential to affect
international relations among countries through
possible conflicts of interest over the use of
transboundary water or other resources that may
become increasingly scarce as a result of climate
change. But we believe that, by fostering cooperation
among States and with the concrete support of the
international community, such concerns can be
effectively remedied.
My delegation also believes that the strategy of
adaptation requires empowering people, building their
resilience, securing their livelihoods, and putting in
place or strengthening the physical infrastructure
needed to protect against extreme weather events, as
well as the institutions and systems needed to cope
with the consequences of such events. The
international community must therefore provide
stronger support for climate-change adaptation in
developing countries, including through investments in
capacity-building at all levels.
Finally, any failure to effectively implement the
Millennium
Development
Goals
and
other
internationally agreed development goals will
undoubtedly have even worse effects than shattering
economies; it could rekindle dormant conflicts and
provoke new ones, thereby precipitating poor countries
into total disaster. It is therefore imperative for the
international community to redouble its efforts to
guarantee the sustainable and equitable development of
all countries, notably by ensuring that developed
countries meet their international commitments in
development assistance. This is all the more imperative
in the midst of the current global economic difficulties,

14

which have threatened to set back recent development
progress in many developing countries.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand thanks
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on
the possible security implications of climate change
(A/64/350), which results from a specific request in
resolution 63/281 — a historic resolution that New
Zealand was proud to co-sponsor, along with 100 other
Member States.
This report comes at a time when the Asia-Pacific
region has been severely hit by natural disasters, with
devastating results for many communities, families and
livelihoods. These recent tragedies have illustrated the
challenges faced by small island developing States in
particular, given their small size and specific
vulnerabilities, in responding to natural disasters,
whether climatic or otherwise. Along with other
development partners, New Zealand continues to
provide support to Pacific island countries in
addressing those challenges.
New Zealand made detailed submissions in
respect to the Secretary-General’s report, which was
based on the views of Member States and relevant
regional and international organizations. We therefore
do not intend to comment in detail on this occasion, but
there are some key points that should be highlighted.
We are pleased to see the reference to the
Copenhagen summit and look forward to engaging in
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change process. In particular, we support the report’s
call for a Copenhagen outcome that is “science-based,
comprehensive, balanced and equitable and fair”
(A/64/350, para. 26).
New Zealand’s immediate climate change
objective is to achieve effective and comprehensive
global mitigation action to reduce emissions and to
implement effective adaptation measures. Our aim in
this context is to build confident, resilient and viable
communities and to lessen the impact of climate
change as a risk multiplier, as identified both in New
Zealand’s submission and the Secretary-General’s
report.
For those reasons, we are particularly interested
in chapter IX, “The way forward”. The report
recommends action by the international community,
including taking bold steps on climate change and
providing stronger support for climate change

09-60826

A/64/PV.47

adaptation in developing countries. It will be important
that this adaptation be prioritized to the most
vulnerable, including those in the Pacific.
The report recognizes that such security threats
can be effectively managed through sustainable
development measures, but that requires ongoing and
relevant research. New Zealand is committed to
working with its Pacific partners to achieve this
through a number of bilateral, regional and multilateral
initiatives. Above all, the report makes clear that the
nature and full extent of the security implications of
climate change are still largely untested, so it is
important that the way forward be guided by robust
empirical evidence, and we agree with that view.
It has been said that the iconic image of climate
change has been the polar bear on a melting ice floe,
but in human terms the more compelling image should
be the citizen of an island State that could over time
become devoid of agriculture, diminished in
infrastructure, reduced in population and, ultimately,
uninhabitable. Whole populations would be on the
move and already vulnerable communities would be
further threatened. Security and other issues would
abound. These issues must be addressed before it is too
late. And that is the challenge for all of us — for the
United Nations and all of its Member States.

First is the vulnerability of populations to climate
change-related threats to their food, water, health and
territorial security and the entire livelihood of human
societies, especially those that are ill equipped to
effectively invest in the implementation of national
adaptation and mitigation activities. Second are threats
to reverse current development processes. Third are
national capacities to address climate change-related
migration and displacement of populations, and
conflicts over shared resources such as water sources.
Fourthly, the report confirms the threat of statelessness
among SIDS and implications for human rights,
security and sovereignty. Fifthly, there is concern that
international conflict could emerge over shared or
undemarcated international resources.
The report also identifies possible threat
minimizers to lower climate change-related insecurity.
On this issue, we reiterate our call for a mitigation and
adaptation package that provides for the long-term
stabilization
of
atmospheric
greenhouse-gas
concentrations.

Solomon Islands associate this statement with the
statement delivered by Mr. Stuart Beck, Permanent
Representative of Palau, on behalf of the Pacific small
island developing States (SIDS). My delegation would
like to contribute to the debate in our national capacity.

In this connection, we wish to take a piece from
the Declaration of the Alliance of Small Island States
agreed to by all SIDS at the September summit, and
that is to adopt a package of mitigation activities
beyond 2012 that, first, provides long-term
stabilization
of
atmospheric
greenhouse-gas
concentrations well below 350 parts per million carbon
dioxide-equivalent levels; secondly, ensures that the
global average surface temperature increases are
limited to well below 1.5 degrees Celsius above
pre-industrial levels; thirdly, provides for global
greenhouse-gas emissions to peak by 2015 and to
decline thereafter; fourthly, reduces global greenhousegas emissions by more than 85 per cent below 1990
levels by 2050; and fifthly, calls on countries listed in
Annex I to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change to reduce their collective
greenhouse-gas emissions by more than 45 per cent
below 1990 levels by 2020 and by more than 95 per
cent below 1990 levels by 2050, given their historical
responsibility.

It is clear from the report that there are security
implications related to climate change that require the
collective cooperation of the international community
in addressing identified new and emerging climaterelated challenges. The report identifies five elements
that have climate change-related security implications
on vulnerable populations globally.

With respect to threat minimizers, democratic
good governance and strong local and national
institutions are needed, as stated in the report.
However, every effort must be made to improve the
economic and trade conditions of these countries to
enable them to effectively invest in the sustainable
functioning of such institutions in order to address and

Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): At the outset allow
me, on behalf of my delegation, to thank the President
for convening this meeting. My delegation also would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on climate change and its
possible security implications, contained in document
A/64/350. My delegation welcomes the report and
acknowledges the manner in which some of the new
and emerging security threats associated with climate
change are being addressed.

09-60826

15

A/64/PV.47

contain climate change threats through mitigation and
adaptation programmes at the national level.
As to international cooperation, it is vitally
important to ensure that international commitments
under the Barbados Programme of Action and the
Mauritius Strategy, including the Millennium
Development Goals, are fulfilled to provide an
enabling process for the vulnerable countries to address
the severe security implications of climate change. The
lack of commitment has pushed SIDS to submit
resolutions recognizing the human dimension of
climate change, which, as our Charter affirms, is
people-centred as far as sustainable development is
concerned.
The same can be said of current climate change
negotiations. At this defining moment, when leadership
is required, it is not available. My delegation registers
its deep concerns over public statements from some
quarters that we should lower our collective
expectation of achieving a legally binding agreement in
Copenhagen. We remain positive that a legally binding
agreement is possible in Copenhagen, but it requires
political will to present ambitious targets and adequate
resources. We know there is sufficient technology
available to stabilize our climate. As my delegation
stated in Barcelona, the victims of the lack of action
will come from the countries of the southern
hemisphere, the vulnerable countries, the SIDS and the
least developed countries, and not from the Annex I
countries.
We therefore call for action and we call for action
now. We keep saying this; we keep having summits on
climate change; and yet we have not lived up to what
we have said. We make this plea on behalf of those who
are living on the edge of climate change and would like
to say that those on the front line will continue to suffer
on a daily basis as we continue to postpone action that
is required and is now demanded of us.
Allow me to close by once again thanking the
Secretary-General for his report. We also call on the
Security Council to put this matter on its agenda.
Again, I thank all who are present and have
participated in and supported this process for their
support in discussing this important subject.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Australia was
proud to co-sponsor resolution 63/281 on the link
between climate change and security, and we are
pleased that the Secretary-General's report (A/64/350)

16

is being considered today. It is a small but important
step forward in addressing this serious global
challenge.
We are now all deeply aware that climate change
has the potential to exacerbate situations that are
already fragile and to increase pressures on areas that
are already vulnerable. This report, like the debate that
preceded it, for which we have to remember to thank
the Pacific small island developing States, contributes
significantly to improving our awareness of the
potential implications.
Australia sees effective global and national
efforts to mitigate against and adapt to climate change
as the best way to minimize the impacts of climate
change and, in turn, any security-related consequences.
We welcome the report's emphasis on prevention as the
best remedy.
Australia is playing its full and fair part in
helping to shape a global climate change solution.
Some States will be better placed than others to cope
with the impacts of climate change. Low-lying island
States, as we have been reminded today, are
particularly vulnerable. The threats posed by sea-level
rise and increases in extreme weather events will have
a particular impact on Australia's Pacific and Indian
Ocean island neighbours. As I said when the resolution
was adopted, these States have done the least to cause
climate change, but will be the first to feel its effects.
As the report details, these impacts will likely
threaten food and water security and vital
infrastructure and community facilities, and be felt in
their economies through reduced income from
agricultural, tourism and fisheries.
Building resilience to climate impacts is therefore
vital to securing livelihoods and helping people have
the choice to remain in their homes, where that is
possible. That is why Australia is contributing to
adaptation and mitigation activities. We have
committed some $150 million under the International
Climate Change Adaptation Initiative to meet highpriority adaptation needs. We are also contributing to
the Least Developed Countries Fund under the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to
support the identification and implementation of urgent
adaptation activities.
The international community must remain alert to
the possible direct and indirect security implications of

09-60826

A/64/PV.47

climate change. As we here in the General Assembly
should remember, we are the authentic voice of the
international community. In adopting resolution 63/281
and in receiving this report, we have begun to live up
to that obligation.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 57/32 of 19 November 2002, I now call on
the Permanent Observer of the Inter-Parliamentary
Union.
Mrs. Filip (Inter-Parliamentary Union): I am
pleased to address the General Assembly at this joint
debate on the strengthening of the United Nations
system and the follow-up to the Millennium Summit. I
am honoured to deliver this statement on behalf of the
President of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU),
Theo-Ben Gurirab, Speaker of the National Assembly
of Namibia and former President of the General
Assembly.
Over the past several years, the IPU and the
United Nations have been building a strategic
partnership in the pursuit of world peace, development,
democracy and human rights. Looking back, I think we
can agree that important progress has been made, as the
Assembly itself has confirmed through successive
resolutions.
Two years ago, in the fall of 2007, the General
Assembly received an IPU policy paper on the nature
of the relationship between the United Nations and the
world’s parliaments. Essentially, we view this as a
partnership that needs to be firmly rooted in the
activities that parliaments carry out at home. The
partnership includes action by parliaments in the light
of their legislative and budgetary functions, as well as
work by parliaments to contribute to and monitor
international negotiations and debates at the United
Nations and to ensure national compliance with
international norms and the rule of law. It also involves
scrutinizing the activities of the United Nations and
contributing to its deliberations.
The IPU is convinced that members of parliament
can play an important part in building national
ownership and political support for international
action. In the view of the IPU, which is shared by
many United Nations Member States, the United
Nations stands to gain considerably by making sure
that parliaments and their members have a full and
undistorted understanding of what is done here at the
United Nations.

09-60826

This is the purpose of the Annual Parliamentary
Hearing at the United Nations, which the Assembly has
endorsed as a joint United Nations-IPU event and the
outcome report of which is circulated to parliaments
and United Nations Member States. This year's Hearing
takes place later this week. It will focus on the
international response to the global economic crisis. It
will bring together legislators from around the world to
interact with the Assembly and the broader United
Nations community, and we encourage permanent
missions to actively participate.
Like the President of the Assembly and Member
States, we are also working hard to implement the
recommendations of resolution 63/24, which was
adopted by consensus exactly one year ago. I would
like to refer very briefly to just a few of its elements.
First, the General Assembly invited the
Peacebuilding Commission to work with the IPU in
engaging national parliaments in the countries under
consideration by the Commission in efforts to promote
democratic governance, national dialogue and
reconciliation. To that end, we have expanded
programmes in Burundi and Sierra Leone in support of
an inclusive political process. More recently, we have
begun
consultations
with
the
Peacebuilding
Commission on the type of capacity-building support
that could be provided to the Parliament of the Central
African Republic.
Secondly, the IPU has been working closely with
the Development Cooperation Forum of the Economic
and Social Council to provide a robust parliamentary
contribution to the Forum and the broader development
cooperation agenda. We have begun a series of case
studies in Africa on how parliaments relate to the aid
effectiveness agenda, and we are substantively
involved in the preparations for the second Forum
session next year.
Thirdly, that resolution encouraged the IPU to
strengthen its contribution to the Human Rights
Council, particularly as it relates to the Universal
Periodic Review of the fulfilment of human rights
obligations and commitments by Member States. A
recent IPU meeting on the Universal Periodic Review
revealed enormous interest among parliaments in this
process, in particular in terms of debating the draft
national report in parliament before it becomes final
and receiving the outcome of the Universal Periodic

17

A/64/PV.47

Review for further consideration. IPU will seek to
follow up on these recommendations.
Through these and other efforts in support of
United Nations activities, we are trying to help bridge
the gap between national commitments and national
response, and we hope that the IPU and its member
parliaments can hereby make a meaningful
contribution to the strengthening of the United Nations.
Before I conclude, I would like to say a brief
word on the work ahead. Today and tomorrow, the IPU
President is chairing a meeting of the Preparatory
Committee for the 2010 World Conference of Speakers
of Parliaments. We have a full agenda before us and, as
was the case during the previous parliamentary
summits in 2000 and 2005, a significant part of the
speakers' reflections will focus on the parliamentary
dimension of the work of the United Nations. We will
be exploring options to further consolidate the
institutional relationship between the United Nations
system and the IPU.
We cannot do this alone. It will require
substantive consultations at various levels among the
parliamentary leaders themselves, in capitals between
the legislative and executive branches of Government,
and here at United Nations Headquarters with
permanent representatives and United Nations officials.
We look forward to working closely with all members
as we undertake this exciting journey. In this process
we should all keep in mind that we share the common
objective of strengthening the United Nations as the
cornerstone of multilateral cooperation, consolidating
the rule of law in international relations and delivering
on the legitimate aspirations of our peoples to peace,
freedom and prosperity.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on these items. The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda items 48, 114, 120 and 121.
Agenda item 43
Return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin
Note by the Secretary-General (A/64/303)
Draft resolution (A/64/L.17)
The Acting President: In connection with agenda
item 43, the Assembly has before it a note by the

18

Secretary-General transmitting the report of the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, circulated in
document A/64/303.
I give the floor to the Permanent Representative
of Greece to introduce draft resolution A/64/L.17
Mr. Mitsialis (Greece): It is with great honour
and pleasure that I present to the General Assembly,
under agenda item 43, a draft resolution on the return
or restitution of cultural property to the countries of
origin, contained in document A/64/L.17.
In recent years, the international community has
become increasingly sensitive to this issue and has
demonstrated its willingness to facilitate the return or
restitution of cultural property illicitly removed from
its countries of origin. Such removal, especially when
it results from illicit trade, is against all the principles
that culture stands for.
Culture is the soul of a nation. The illicit removal
or destruction of cultural property deprives peoples of
their history and tradition. Restitution is the only
means to reverse the damage and reinstate a sense of
dignity. It is therefore of paramount importance that
States Members of the United Nations continue to
cooperate actively, both bilaterally and in international
forums, in a spirit of mutual understanding and
dialogue with a view to resolving any outstanding
issues in this respect. Such cooperation also constitutes
the most appropriate way to address the adverse effects
of major political and other upheavals, including armed
conflict, that have provided fertile ground for the loss,
destruction, removal or illicit movement of cultural
property.
In the draft resolution I have the honour to
present today, we have tried to reflect the latest steps
and activities that have been undertaken by the
international community, especially in the framework
of UNESCO, which has a unique responsibility as the
sole agency with a mandate to safeguard and promote
the world’s cultural resources at all levels. Equally
important in this respect is the effective work and the
relevant
recommendations
of
the
UNESCO
Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the
Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin
or its Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation.
We are confident that the international
community will continue to cooperate towards

09-60826

A/64/PV.47

increased mobilization and action in order to promote
heritage values and to safeguard, return and restitute
cultural property to the countries of origin. Public
awareness is once more a crucial part of this
endeavour, which also involves Governments, civil
society, academic and artistic leadership, and, of
course, all of us who share a common cultural
heritage — the heritage of humankind.
In this context, I should like to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General as well to the
Director-General of UNESCO for the tireless, constant
and meaningful support they have provided on this
issue.
Action on the draft resolution will be taken at a
later stage. In the meantime, we will consult closely
with all interested delegations. We look forward to the
adoption of the draft resolution by consensus, as in
previous years, and with the widest possible
sponsorship.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the report submitted
by the Secretary-General in document A/64/303 under
agenda item 43, “Return or restitution of cultural
property to the countries of origin”, and supports draft
resolution A/64/L.17, submitted by the delegation of
Greece under this agenda item.
Symbolic of the identity of a nation or people,
cultural property represents a valuable asset of human
civilization. The illicit appropriation of and traffic in
cultural property are a sacrilege against history and
civilization. While enjoying broad consensus within
the international community, the protection of cultural
heritage and the promotion of the restitution of cultural
property to the countries of origin are also inalienable
and fundamental cultural rights of the people of
countries of origin, as well as cultural responsibilities
incumbent on all Governments.
In recent years, the issue of returning cultural
property has received increasing attention from a
growing number of countries. China supports countries
of origin in seeking the return of cultural property of
spiritual and cultural value, and supports the General
Assembly’s resolutions on the return or restitution of
cultural property to the countries of origin, and
resolution 2008/23 of the Economic and Social
Council, entitled “Protection against trafficking in
cultural property”. We reiterate the need for the
international community to prevent and combat all

09-60826

aspects of trafficking in cultural property, including the
transfer, through auction or other means, of cultural
property that was illegally removed from its countries
of origin.
Strengthening international cooperation is an
effective way to prevent and combat trafficking in
cultural property. States should comply in good faith
with international legal frameworks and principles
relating to this issue, cooperate actively with relevant
United Nations bodies and international organizations
in joint efforts to combat the smuggling of and
trafficking in cultural property, and enhance bilateral
and multilateral cooperation in promoting the return of
cultural property.
China commends the efforts made in this regard
by UNESCO, an important global body engaged in the
protection of cultural resources. We support
UNESCO’s expansion of its advocacy activities to
raise public awareness; to bring to the attention of
Governments, civil society, academic institutions,
museums and art market operators the harm resulting
from such traffic in and transfer of cultural property
illegally taken abroad; and to advance bilateral and
multilateral cooperation in the interest of the return of
cultural property.
The Chinese Government attaches great
importance to the protection of cultural heritage. We
have put in place a legal and regulatory system with
the Cultural Relics Protection Law at its core. Positive
results have been achieved in areas of inventory
archiving, security and safeguard-building, market
management and publicity campaigning. China is now
party to the Convention Concerning the Protection of
the World Cultural and Natural Heritage; the
Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and
Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of
Ownership of Cultural Property; the Convention on
Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural Objects; and the
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in
the Event of Armed Conflict. China took an active part
in the drafting of UNESCO's Declaration of Principles
Relating to cultural objects displaced in connection
with the Second World War. It has signed bilateral
agreements with many countries on the prevention of
the illicit appropriation, excavation and entry and exit
of cultural objects, and has, on multiple occasions via
international cooperation, successfully sought and
retrieved such objects that had been illegally
transported overseas.

19

A/64/PV.47

For an extended period beginning in the midnineteenth century, the western Powers, in a succession
of wars of aggression against China, plundered and
looted countless Chinese cultural relics, including
numerous cultural treasures from Yuan Ming Yuan
Summer Palace. Those relics should be returned to
China.
China insists on its right to seek the return of
cultural relics that have been illegally taken abroad. It
opposes auctions of cultural relics illegally taken from
China, including treasures from the Yuan Ming Yuan
Summer Palace. We believe that such auctions run
counter to the underlying spirit of the relevant
international treaties and United Nations resolutions.
They also represent serious infringements of China’s
cultural rights and interests.
China will continue to actively participate in
UNESCO activities aimed at promoting the return of
cultural property to its countries of origin. We shall
also seek appropriate solutions in that regard, thereby
making our due contribution to the protection of
international cultural heritage.
Mr. Chávez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Cultural
heritage is the inheritance of physical and non-physical
property that our ancestors have bequeathed to us in
the course of history. That cultural property makes it
possible for us to forge an identity in order to know
who we are and where we came from, as well as to
develop as individuals in our societies. States therefore
have the right and obligation to protect their cultural
heritage.
Protection cannot be done in an isolated way, as
only a portion of cultural heritage is in State hands.
That is why we need the cooperation of other
stakeholders, such as museums, artistic institutions, art
dealers and society as a whole. All of them must work
together to prevent the loss, destruction, removal, theft,
ransacking and illicit trafficking in, or improper
acquisition of, cultural property, including any damage
or act of vandalism.
That task, arduous in and of itself, is made even
more difficult when it comes to cultural heritage that is
not under the jurisdiction of the State of origin.
Unfortunately, that situation penalizes countries with
fewer resources. It is therefore necessary to develop
international mechanisms that promote cooperation and
support the efforts made by States to protect their
cultural heritage. The best way to do that is to return

20

illegally gained cultural property to the country of
origin. The international community has at its disposal
significant norms in this area. It should ensure that
they are applied.
For its part, Peru has ratified the main
international legal instruments, including the
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in
the Event of Armed Conflict and its two protocols, the
Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and
Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of
Ownership of Cultural Property and the International
Institute for the Unification of Private Law’s
Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural
Objects. We have also enacted various bilateral
agreements in this connection. We call on States that
have not yet done so to adhere to or ratify the various
international instruments to which I have referred.
The existence of an international legal framework
is essential, but it is not enough. Effectively protecting
cultural heritage requires that States fully comply with
their international commitments in this field. It also
requires technical, financial and judicial cooperation to
facilitate return and restitution procedures for cultural
property. It is equally necessary for there to be
cooperation between the stakeholders involved. It must
be underscored that it is they who provide information
to the relevant authorities about the property in their
possession. In many cases, it is also they who
voluntarily return property that came into their
possession after having been illegally acquired. That
practice of voluntary return should be acknowledged
and encouraged.
We are pleased that significant efforts are being
made with regard to returning cultural heritage, as
indicated in the report of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) on the measures that have been taken to
return such property to their countries of origin (see
A/64/303). That document, for which we are grateful,
is a comprehensive report on the efforts that are being
made in this area. I should like to make special
mention of the UNESCO database of national cultural
heritage laws, which is a very valuable tool for
learning about how States regulate and implement
internal procedures. It is therefore essential that States
that have not yet done so submit information about
their cultural heritage laws as soon as possible. States
that have already done so should now implement those
laws.

09-60826

A/64/PV.47

However, the report also identifies areas where
reinforcement is necessary. In that connection, it is
urgent to implement the recommendations made by the
UNESCO Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting
the Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of
Origin or its Restitution in Case of Illicit
Appropriation. Those recommendations were adopted
in November 2008, with the active participation of my
country. The goals should be to substantially increase
the return or restitution of cultural property.
Another area in which strengthening is required is
the fight against impunity for those who traffic in
cultural property. We should put in place mechanisms
for the investigation, control, detention and prosecution
of persons associated with the illicit trafficking in
cultural property. Their links to other types of
organized crime are increasingly close and troubling.
In order to put an end to such illegal activity, we must
severely punish all those who are guilty of it.
Regional cooperation mechanisms can, and
should, play a leading role in the return and restitution
of cultural property to the country of origin. We are
grateful for the efforts made by the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and the
Andean Community, along with the Peruvian
Government, to organize a capacity-building workshop
on the illicit trade in cultural property. We urge other
States and regional bodies to emulate that positive
experience. In that regard, I would like to express our
readiness to cooperate in sharing our experiences.
Peru is continuing its efforts to recover cultural
property that was illicitly taken from our territory or
which has not been returned in a timely manner.
Thanks to the assistance and cooperation of various
countries, we have been successful in recovering pieces
that have incalculable cultural value. Peru is
cooperating with other States with equal determination.
This year, we were pleased to return to the Iraqi
authorities and people three cuneiform clay tablets
dating to between the third and first centuries before
Christ, which were seized in my country from
international traffickers.
By reclaiming its own cultural property and
returning seized cultural property to its legitimate
owners Peru is not merely meeting its obligations, it is
acting in that way because it believes that this is about
a moral obligation. The return and restitution of
cultural property does not just entail legal,

09-60826

archaeological and political aspects. It is also, above
all, a matter of ethics. The ethical and moral
component is especially relevant when it comes to
cultural property exported for the purposes of display,
restoration or study that has not been returned to the
country of origin in a timely manner. We must not
condone such situations. Property must be returned
immediately to its legitimate owners.
A concrete example in that regard is the efforts
being made by Peru to recover the large number of
items extracted from Machu Picchu, one the seven
wonders of the modern world, that are still housed in
the Peabody Museum at Yale University in the United
States. We regret that the dialogue to ensure the return
of that property has not borne fruit and that it has been
necessary to have recourse to the legal route. We
believe that justice will determine that we are right.
Nevertheless, that does not alter our belief that, before
resorting to legal mechanisms, States should redouble
their efforts to resolve disputes pertaining to the return
and restitution of cultural property by friendly means
using negotiation or other complementary methods.
We are certain that we have right on our side. We
shall continue to work tirelessly to ensure that our
cultural property returns to where it belongs.
Mr. Kuma (Ethiopia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to express its profound
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his note
transmitting the comprehensive report on the agenda
item under consideration (A/64/303). My delegation
also commends the increased role played by the United
Nations
Educational,
Scientific
and
Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) in combating illegal
trafficking in cultural property. We also commend the
Intergovernmental Committee for promoting the return
of cultural property to its countries of origin.
The issue of the return or restitution of cultural
property to the countries of origin is an area in which
international relations are put to the test. Because of
their invaluable aesthetic significance and the pivotal
role they play in preserving and recording the talents
and endurance of humanity, my delegation attaches
particular importance to this agenda item. The return of
displaced cultural property is a fundamental means of
restoring and reconstructing a people’s heritage and
identity. It also creates dialogue among civilizations in
an atmosphere of mutual respect. And it also has to do
with the inalienable attribute of sovereignty of every

21

A/64/PV.47

people by which they should have access to and be able
to enjoy the irreplaceable symbols of their heritage.
There is strong sentiment today that neither the
existence
of
universal
museums
nor
their
multiplication in different sites in the future can
substitute for the bond that exists between a cultural
object and the societies of yesterday, today and
tomorrow.
Although Ethiopia has enjoyed a long history of
independence, we have suffered from the repeated
looting and systematic smuggling of our cultural
heritage, dating from early periods to the religious
wars of the sixteenth century. The looting of an infinite
variety of artefacts and innumerable manuscripts has
resulted in an immense depletion of Ethiopia’s cultural
heritage.
In recent years, a new wind of optimism has
appeared on the horizon. After many years of
negotiation, Italy has returned the Axum Obelisk to
Ethiopia. Given the beginning of a new chapter in our
relations with Italy, we would like to take this
opportunity once again to thank the Government and
people of Italy for that magnanimous act. We believe
that others will also now start the process of returning
the remaining objects, which include manuscripts,
works of art and religious and cultural artefacts.
In this era of globalization, it is important for
nations to be able to preserve their historical and
cultural identity, while at the same time working
together and cooperating to overcome global
challenges. Cultural property serves as a link between
past, present and future. There is no disagreement that
cultural property is a basic element of civilization and
national heritage. As various United Nations and
African Union resolutions have underlined, many
countries of origin attach great importance to the return
of cultural property. In certain cases, cultural heritage
constitutes the repository of fundamental spiritual and
cultural values. The cultural wealth of Ethiopia
symbolizes its national pride and its unity in diversity.
In conclusion, Ethiopia strongly believes that
cooperation with regard to returning cultural property
should be a matter of ethics. Fundamental moral
principles and the return of property are directly linked
to being human. Cooperation, partnership and good
will should be strengthened. The role of organizations
engaged in that process should be enhanced by
providing the necessary means, resources and

22

infrastructure. We reiterate that requests for the full
return or restitution of cultural property should be
respected and complied with as an act of justice and a
moral obligation.
Mr. Saripudin (Indonesia): Indonesia attaches
great importance to the issue of the return or restitution
of cultural property to the countries of origin. As a
country with many archaeological artefacts dating from
prehistoric times, Indonesia has taken many measures
to preserve its valuable national heritage. Among them
is the enactment of Law No. 5 of 1992, regarding the
conservation of cultural objects. The Government of
Indonesia plans to revise that law so as to incorporate
not only the physical and material aspects of culture,
such as objects and heritage sites, but also
non-physical aspects, such as customs and art.
Indonesia acknowledges the 2005 launching of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) database of national cultural
heritage laws, which serves as a reference tool and
compendium of good practices. We also acknowledge
the UNESCO-World Customs Organization Model
Export Certificate for Cultural Objects as a tool to
combat illicit trafficking in cultural property. We also
commend the efforts of UNESCO to promote the
relevant international standard-setting instruments and
to take steps to raise public awareness of the relevant
restitution and illicit-trafficking issues. In addition, we
commend the work of its Intergovernmental Committee
for Promoting the Return of Cultural Property to its
Countries of Origin or its Restitution in Case of Illicit
Appropriation. We also believe that it is important for
States to continue to do their utmost to prevent the
illicit appropriation of cultural objects.
Indonesia underlines the fact that draft resolution
A/64/L.17 basically concerns the recovery of cultural
property that was stolen or obtained in an illicit
manner. However, my delegation notes that many legal
difficulties are often encountered at the international
level when attempting to recover stolen or illicitly
exported cultural property to which the 1972 UNESCO
Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and
Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of
Ownership of Cultural Property and the 1995
International Institute for the Unification of Private
Law (UNIDROIT) Convention on Stolen or Illegally
Exported Cultural Objects do not apply.

09-60826

A/64/PV.47

Indonesia would like to underline the criminal
dimension of this issue. As we know, it is the nature of
stolen cultural objects to be sent across international
borders illegally. Obviously, the international
dimension is attractive to sophisticated operators,
whose destinations of choice are those nations where
they feel they can evade law enforcement or may be
able to exploit perceived loopholes in the regulations.
Indonesia therefore believes that, in order to prevent
and further deter those sophisticated criminals from
trafficking cultural property in an illicit manner and to
avoid creating safe havens for them, States need to
cooperate to address the legal difficulties that are not
covered by the UNESCO and UNIDROIT Conventions.
Indonesia believes that cooperation among States is
possible through mutual legal assistance in criminal
matters and extradition, as they are closely and mutually
linked. Moreover, mutual legal assistance and extradition
are instrumental in ensuring effective criminal
proceedings against the perpetrators of such crimes.
Lastly, in addition to cooperation among States, it
is important for all members of the international
community to continue to cooperate within the
framework of the United Nations and UNESCO in
order to achieve increased mobilization and action to
promote heritage values and to ensure the return of
cultural property to the countries of origin, or
restitution for it.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item. At the request of the
sponsor, action on draft resolution A/64/L.17 will be
taken at a later date to be announced.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 43.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Follow-up to the commemoration of the
two-hundredth anniversary of the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade
Draft resolution (A/64/L.10)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held the debate on this agenda item at its
34th plenary meeting, on 2 November 2009.
I now give the floor to the Permanent
Representative of Jamaica to introduce a revision to
draft resolution A/64/L.10.

09-60826

Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): I have the honour to inform
the General Assembly that, since the introduction, on
2 November 2009, of the draft resolution entitled
“Permanent memorial to and remembrance of the
victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade”,
which is contained in document A/64/L.10, the
following countries have become co-sponsors of the
draft resolution: Bangladesh, Belgium, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Iceland,
Liechtenstein, Mexico, Micronesia, San Marino, Serbia
and Syria. I should also like to remind the General
Assembly that, when the draft resolution was
introduced, on 2 November, 37 countries joined as
additional sponsors, namely, Albania, Armenia,
Austria, Belarus, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Ecuador, Estonia, France, Georgia,
Greece, Hungary, India, Israel, Japan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Malta, Monaco, Pakistan, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, the Russian
Federation, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, the United States of
America and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
That brings the total to 147 sponsors.
As a result of informal consultations with
Member States, agreement has been reached to revise
the draft resolution to include an additional
subparagraph in paragraph 13, which would read as
follows:
“Also requests the United Nations Office
for Partnerships, through the Secretary-General,
to submit a comprehensive report to the General
Assembly at the sixty-fifth session on the status
of the Permanent Memorial Trust Fund, and in
particular, on contributions received and its
utilization.”
As fate would have it, today is coincidentally
recognized by the United Nations system as the
International Day for Tolerance. It is fitting that we are
here to adopt a draft resolution that addresses the
lingering consequences of the transatlantic slave trade,
which continue to impact the descendants of the
victims until today.
The placement of a permanent memorial at the
United Nations will be an appropriate symbol of what
the United Nations represents, namely, the promotion
and preservation of the dignity and worth of all human
beings. Those principles are central to the United
Nations Charter. They are also principles that the

23

A/64/PV.47

international community will stay focused on today in
commemoration of tolerance, which brings to mind the
theme we have maintained for our initiative, namely
“Acknowledging the tragedy and considering the
legacy, lest we forget”.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/64/L.10, entitled
“Permanent memorial to and remembrance of the
victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade”, as
orally revised.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation’s sincere appreciation to all those who
constructively engaged in the informal consultations to
finalize this draft resolution. I am therefore confident
that this draft resolution, like similar ones in the past,
will be adopted by consensus, in particular in view of
the strong support by Member States. We are indeed
grateful for the sponsorship of 147 Member States.

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/64/L.10 as orally
revised?

Finally, let me express particular appreciation to
the Member States from Africa and the Caribbean
Community, which continue to play a primary role in
advancing the permanent memorial initiative.

24

Draft resolution A/64/L.10, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 64/15).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 116?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

09-60826
