Reeolutione adopted on the report& of the Fourth Committee

possible, the need to provide travel funds to prospective
students;
5. Invites once again the Administering Members
concerned to take all necessary measures to ensure that
all scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States are utilized by the inhabitants of the NonSelf~Governing Territories and to render effective
assistance to those persons who have applied for or have
been granted scholarships or fellowships, particularly
with regard to facilitating their travel formalities;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its eighteenth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution;
7. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
1198th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.
1850 (XVII). Racial discrimination in Non-Self.
Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1698 (XVI) of 19 December 1%1, whereby, inter alia, it urged the Administering
Members to include, among the measures that would
contribute to the imnlementation of the Declaration on
the granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples, steps to ensure :
(a) The immediate rescinding or revocation of all
laws and regulations which tend to encourage or sanction, directly or indirectly, discriminatory policies and
practil:es based on racial considerations,
( b) The adoption of legislative measures making
racial discrimination and segregation punishable by law,
( c) The discouragement of such practices based on
racial considerations by all other means possible, including administrative measures,
(d) The immediate extension to all inhabitants of the
full exercise of basic political rights, in particular the
right to vote, and the establishment of equality among the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 1698 (XVI) 12 and
the report of the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Goveming Territories, 8
Noting with deep concern that racidl discrimination
in law and in practice, which is utterly repugnant to
humanity, has not been eradicated in Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Reiterating its view that racial discrimination and
segregation in Non-Self-Governing Territories can be
eradicated fully and with the greatest speed by the faithful implementation of the Declaration on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples,
l. Solemnly reaffirms its resolute condemnation of
the policy and practice of racial discrimination in ='JonSelf-Governing Territories;
12 Ibid., document A/5249 and Add.l.

43

2. Urges the Administering Members to give immediate effect to the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples in the Territories under their administration so that an end will be
put to racial discrimination in all forms and in all fields ;
3. Decides to refer the report of the Secretary-General on racial discrimination in Non-Self-Governing
Territories and the summary records of the discussion
on that report to the attention of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.
1198th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.
1858 (XVII). Report of the Trusteeship Council
The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the Trusteeship Council
covering the period from 20 July 1961 to 20 July 1962, 13
l. Takes note of the report of the Trusteeship
Council;
2. Calls upon the Administering Authorities to take
account of the recommendations and observations contained in the report of the Trusteeship Council and bear
in mind those expressed by delegations during the debate
on the report at the seventeenth session of the General
Assembly.
1200th plenary meeting,
20 December 1962.
1859 (XVII). Dissemination of information on
the United Nations and the International
Trusteeship System in the Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1644 (XVI) of 6 K ovember
1961, in which it requested the Secretary-General to take
steps, in consultation with the Administering Authority
concerned, to establish without any further delay in
New Guinea in 1962 a United Nations information
centre in which responsible positions would be occupied
by indigenous inhabitants of the Trust Territory, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventeenth session,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral14 prepared in accordance with resolution 1644
(XVI),
Takes note with satisfaction of the establishment at
Port Moresby, Territory of Papua and Kew Guinea, in
April 1962, of a United Nations Information Centre and
also of the training of qualified indigenous inhabitants
for positions of responsibility in that Centre.
1200th plenary meeting.
20 December 196:.
13 Ibid., Sei•.:ntcenth Session, Suf,plcment Xo. ·/

(A/52041.
Seventeenth Session, Annexes, agell(b items U, 58
and 59, document :\/5231.
14 Ibid.,
