General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

92

null and void, constitute a flagrant violation of international law and the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and have
no legal effect;
4. Calls upon Member States not to recognize such
legislative and administrative measures and actions;
5. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to desist
from enacting such legislation.

92nd plenary meeting
I I December 1980
F

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, 18
Recalling Security Council resolutions 468 ( I 980) of
8 May I980 and 469 ( 1980) of 20 May 1980,
Deeply shocked by the most recent atrocities committed by Israel, the occupying Power, against educational institutions in the occupied Palestinian territories,
Taking cognizance of the recent repeated expulsion by
Israel, the occupying Power, of the Mayors of Hebron
and Halhul,
Condemning the rejection of Israel to accept and carry
out the above-mentioned decisions of the Security
Council,
I. Reaffirms the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of I 2 August I 949, to the Palestinian and
other Arab territories occupied by Israel, including
Jerusalem;
2. Condemns Israeli policies and practices against
Palestinian students and faculty in schools, universities
and other educational institutions in the occupied
Palestinian territories, especially the policy of opening
fire on defenceless students, causing many casualties;
3. Condemns the systematic Israeli campaign of
repression against universities in the occupied Palestinian territories, restricting and impeding academic
activities of Palestinian universities by subjecting
selection of courses, textbooks and educational programmes, admission of students and appointment of
faculty members to the control and supervision of the
military occupation authorities, in clear contravention
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War;
4. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, comply with the provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War and rescind all actions and measures
agalnst all educational institutions and ensure the
freedom of these institutions;
5. Requests the Security Council to convene urgently
in order to take the necessary measures, in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, to ensure that the Government of Israel, the
occupying Power, rescinds the illegal measures taken
against the Palestinian mayors and the Sharia Judge
Tamimi, and to facilitate their immediate return so that
they can resume the functions for which they were
elected.
92nd plenary meeting
I I December 1980

35 / 123.

Question of the Malagasy islands of Glorieuses. Juan de Nova, Europa and Bassas da
India

The General Assembly.
Having considered the item entitled "Question of the
Malagasy islands of Glorieuses, Juan de Nova, Europa
and Bassas da India", together with the report of the
Secretary-General on the subject, 21
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, in rarticular the provisions concerning the preservation o the
national unity and the territorial integrity of a country
at the time of its attainment of independence,
Recalling further the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, contained in its resolution 2625
(XXV) of 24 October ·l 970, and also the relevant provisions of the Charter concerning the peaceful settlement
of disputes,
Bearing in mind the various decisions taken by the
Organization of African Unity and by the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries on the question of the Malagasy
islands of Glorieuses, Juan de Nova, Europa and Bassas
da India,
Noting with regret that the negotiations envisaged in
its resolution 34/91 of 12 December 1979 have not been
initiated,
Taking into account the resolutions on co-operation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity.
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the question of the Malagasy islands of Glorieuses,
Juan de Nova, Europa and Bassas da India;

2.

Takes note also of resolution CM /Res.784

(XXXV) on the same question, adopted by the Council

of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its
thirty-fifth ordinary session, held at Freetown from 18
to 28 June 1980; 22
3. Reaffirms its resolution 34/91 of 12 December
1979;
4. Invites the Government of France to initiate with
the Government of Madagascar, as a matter of urgency, the negotiations provided for in resolution 34 /91,
with a view to settling the question in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to monitor the
implementation of the present resolution and to report
t~ereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth sess10n;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Question of the
Malagasy islands of Glorieuses, Juan de Nova, Europa
and Bassas da India".

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980
--

_,, A/35/480.
-'' See A/J5/46J and Corr. I. annex I.
