VI.

34/162.

Resolutions adopted on the reporfs of the Tbird Committee

Preparations for the World Conference of the
United Nations Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/189 of 29 January 1979,
conceming substantive and organizational arrangements
for the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Recalling also its resolution 33/185 of 29 January
1979, in which it adopted the subtheme "Employment,
Health and Education",
Convinced of the need to ensure the most effective
preparation of the Conference, its success and the effectiveness of follow-up activities,
Noting that regional preparatory meetings have taken
place in Paris, New Delhi and Caracas and that two
more are scheduled to take place at Lusaka and
Damascus,
Having considered the report of the Preparatory Committee for the World Conference of the United Nations
Decade for Women on its second session, 94
Having also considered the detailed proposals for the
Conference contained in the note by the SecretaryGeneral, 95
1. Approves the recommendations contained in the
report of the Preparatory Committee for the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women concerning the activities related to the preparation of the
Conference;96
·
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary budgetary appropriations specified in his note
in respect of the areas listed below:
(a) To ensure the participation in the Conference of
one representative of each of the least developed
countries;
(b) To ensure the satisfactory preparation of the
documentation for the Conference;
(e) To allow adequate preparation for the presentation of the report of the Conference to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session;
(d) In relation to measures proposed by the Department of Public lnformation of the Secretariat, to
strengthen the relevant activities planned for the period
prior to and during the Conference;
(e) To make the appropriate arrangements to ensure the success of the preparatory seminars and meetings for the Conference;
(f) To provide the secretariat of the Conference with
the appropriate staff, including staff to carry out information activities after the Conference, and with the resources necessary for the travel of the Secretary-General
of the Conference;
(g) To hold a third session of the Preparatory Committee in 1980;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to seek extrabudgetary funds to ensure the participation in the
Conference of one representative from each of the island
and land-locked developing countries;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to endeavour to find extrabudgetary funds to provide for the information activities proposed for the period after the
Conference;
A/CONF.94/PC/12.
A/34/657 and Add.1.
96 See also sect. X.B.1, decision 34/434.

H
95

183

5. Takes note of the provisional rules of procedure
formulated by the Preparatory Committee at its second
session;97
6. Notes with appreciation the statement of the representative of Denmark concerning steps which the
Government of Denmark, in line with General Assembly
resolution 33/189, has taken regarding the practica! organization of the work of the Conference;98
7. Strongly urges Member States to ensure their
adequate preparation for the Conference, including the
presentation of studies of development projects and programmes which have been successful in improving the
condition of women and in promoting their participation
in economic and social development, as required by
Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/32 of 5
May 1978;
8. Calls upon Member States, the competent organs
of the United Nations and the specialized agencies to
take all necessary measures, including the use of their
infonnation resources, to mobilize public opinion in support of the Conference and its objectives.
105th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34/163.

Policies and programmes relating to youth

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31 / 130 of 16 December
1976 on the role of youth, 31/131 of 16 December 1976
on the United Nations Volunteers programme and 33/6
of 3 November 1978, conceming communication with
youth and youth organizations, as well as Economjc and
Social Council resolution 1979 /27 of 9 May 1979 on
co-ordination and information in the field of youth,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on channels of communication with youth and youth
organizations99 and his note on the work of the
Interagency Task Force on Youth Policies and
Programmes, 100
Convinced of the need to improve the efforts of the
United Nations with regard to the participation of youth
in achieving the objectives of the Charter of the United
Nations, especially those conceming economic and social progress and development,
Equally convinced of the valuable contribution that
youth can make in promoting co-operation among States
and the implementation of the new international economic order based on equity and justice,
Recognizing the need for wider and more effective
use of all appropriate channels that would allow young
people to participate in a concrete and effective manner
in national development and in the activities of the
United Nations at the national, regional, interregional
and international levels,
A/so recognizing that, for the successful implementation of the International Youth Year, greatly extended
and improved communication with young people and
youth organizations representative of all regions of the
world will be important,
97
98

A/CONF.94/PC/12, chap. 11, sect. A.
O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Third Committee, 53rd meeting, paras. 27-30; and ibid.,
Third Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.
99 A/34/199.
100 A/34/653.

•

184

General Assembly-Tblrty-fourth Sesslon

1. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution, together with its annex containing
draft additional guidelines for the improvement of the
channels of communication between the United Nations
and youth and youth organizations, to all Member
States, regional commissions and regional and intemational youth organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council for their comments and
suggestions;
2. Invites Member States to communicate the substance of the present resolution and its annex to national
youth organizations and asks for their comments and
suggestions;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessa~ _action to ob~ain from ~ember States, regional com~1ss1~ns and reg1_onal and mtemational youth organizahons m consultattve status with the Economic and Social
Council their comments on the aforementioned draft
additional guidelines and to submit a report in this regard to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session;
. 4. . Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
1ts th1rty-fifth session the ítem entitled "Policies and
programmes relating to youth".
105 th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
ANNEX
Draft additional guJdelines for the improvement of the channels
of communication between the United Nations and youth
and youth organizations
A. NATIONAL
l._ Attention should be given to the expansion of advisory

serv1ces on youth activities provided by the United Nations to
Govemments at their request.
2. Bearing in mind the proposals contained in the note by
the Secretary-General on the role of youth in the promotion
and protection of human rights, 1 º1 attention should also be
given, in _consultation with Governments, to the promotion of
the. esta_bhshmen~ of n~tional liaison and focal points on youth,
takmg m!o cons1deratton the networks of national correspondents wh1ch have been set up to facilitate communication between countries and with the United Nations in allied fields
of social development.
B. REGIONAL
The regional commissions should review their relationships with regional non-governmental organizations in order to
facilitate co-operation with regard to youth activities between
these organizations, especially those active with young people,
and the regional commissions.
4.. The r~gional commissions should be requested to pay
spec1al. attentton to the question of the active participation of
youth m the process of development and to consider the need
to co-operate closely with the international programmes of the
Intemational Labour Organisation and the United Nations Development Programme for the provision of services for and by
youth with regard to employment.
5. In the context of paragraph 4 above, the Executive Secretaries of the regional commissions, within their mandates, should
consider the promotion and co-ordination within their respective regions of ali activities regarding the integration and participation of youth in development.
6. The regional commissions should consider the possibility
of organizing regional workshops on questions relating to youth.
C. INTERNATIONAL
7. The Administrative Committee on Co-ordination should
continue to make arrangements for the promotion and co-ordination of the activities in the field of youth and the integration
3.

101 E/CN.5/528 and Corr.1.

of those activities into the over-all programmes on social and
economic development.
8. Governments and non-governmental organizations with
youth programmes should be encouraged to contribute material
for publication in the Youth lnformation Bulletin, which is
issued quarterly in three languages, and also to identify channels through which copies of the Bulletin can be circulated in
order to reach the maximum number of young people.
9. The practice of providing intemships for youth should
be expanded to give young people from ali regions of the world
the opportunity of serving the United Nations for short periods
of time and thereby learning of its activities at first hand. Those
internships should not be confined to United Nations Headquarters.
10.
The Joint United Nations Inforrnation Committee
should be invited to consider the views of youth organizations
representative of all regions of the world on the production and
circulation of United Nations publications of interest to youth.
11. The Secretary-General should maintain under review
the existing channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations, in the light of the
comments received from Governments.

34/167.

Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punlshment

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution
3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Recalling its resolutions 32/62 of 8 December 1977,
in which it requested the Commission on Human Rights
to draw up a draft convention on torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in the
light of the principies embodied in the Declaration,
32/63 of 8 December 1977, in which it requested the
Secretary-General to draw up and circulate among
Member States a questionnaire soliciting information
conceming steps they had taken, including legislative
and administrative measures, to put into practice the
principies of the Declaration, and 32/64 of 8 December
1977, in which it called upon Member States to reinforce their support of the Declaration by making
unilateral declarations against torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the significant
progress made in the drafting of a convention on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment during the thirty-fifth session of the
Commission on Human Rights, as reflected in the progress report of the Commission; 102
2. W elcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/35 of 10 May 1979, by wbicb the Council
authorized an open-ended working group of the Commission on Human Rights to meet for a period of one
week prior to the thirty-sixth session of the Commission
to complete the work on a draft convention;
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights, at
its thirty-sixth session, to continue to give high priority
to the question of completing the draft convention on
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
1 2
º See O/Jicial Records of the Economic anti Social Council,
1979, Supplement No. 6 (E/ 1979/36), chap. VIII, sect. A.
