S/PRST/2011/17

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 August 2011
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6603rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 August 2011, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “United Nations
peacekeeping operations”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its primary responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security.
“The Security Council affirms that respect for the basic principles of
peacekeeping including consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of
force except in self-defence and the defence of a mandate authorized by the
Security Council is essential to the success of peacekeeping operations.
“The Security Council stresses the role of the United Nations
peacekeepers in supporting efforts to promote political processes and peaceful
settlements of disputes. The Security Council underlines the need for precise,
full and effective implementation of mandates and its intention to continue to
review and monitor such implementation on a regular basis. The Security
Council recognizes the role of regional organizations in peacekeeping in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter.
“The Security Council recognizes the importance of providing
peacekeeping operations with clear, credible and achievable mandates. It also
recognizes the need for an adequate provision, management and efficient and
effective use of operational and logistical resources for peacekeeping
operations, in congruence with approved mandates and based on a realistic
assessment of the situation. The Security Council also requests that the
Secretary General include a realistic assessment of how available capabilities
and logistic planning affect implementation of the various mandate elements in
briefings regarding specific peacekeeping operations.
“The Security Council welcomes efforts by Member States to respond
more quickly to requests for the provision of personnel to take part in United
Nations peacekeeping operations and underlines the importance of swift force
generation in the early stages of mandate formulation.
“The Security Council believes that United Nations peacekeeping is a
unique global partnership that draws together the contribution and
commitment of the entire UN system. The Security Council stresses the need
11-48244 (E) 260811

*1148244*

S/PRST/2011/17

to improve the communication between the Security Council, the Troop
Contributing Countries and Police Contributing Countries and the Secretariat,
and other stakeholders in accordance with Resolution 1353 to foster a spirit of
partnership, cooperation, confidence and mutual trust and to ensure that the
Security Council has the benefit of the views of those serving in the field when
making its decisions about peacekeeping mandates. The Security Council also
underlines the importance of an improved system of consultations amongst
these actors, in order to promote a common understanding of the situation on
the ground, of the mission’s mandate and of its implementation. The Council
welcomes practical suggestions to improve this relationship and underscores
the useful role of its Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations.
“The Security Council reaffirms the recommendations made in its
resolutions 1327 (2000) and 1353 (2001) and in the statements of its President
dated 3 May 1994 (S/PRST/1994/22), 4 November 1994 (S/PRST/1994/62),
28 March 1996 (S/PRST/1996/13), 31 January 2001 (S/PRST/2001/3), 17 May
2004 (S/PRST 2004/16) and 5 August 2009 (S/PRST/2009/24) and the note by
its President of 14 January 2002 (S/2002/56) and confirms its intentions to
strengthen further efforts to implement fully these recommendations.
“The Security Council recalls, in particular, the statement of its President
dated 4 November 1994 (S/PRST/1994/62), and its Resolution 1353 (2001)
and the decision contained therein to circulate an informal paper setting out
the agenda, including issues to be covered and drawing attention to the
relevant background documentation to Troop Contributing Countries and
Police Contributing Countries when they are invited to attend meetings with
the Council or the Secretary General. The Council requests that the Secretariat
circulate to Troop Contributing Countries and Police Contributing Countries
by the 15th of each month notice and invitation of the Council’s upcoming
TCC/PCC meetings that are anticipated to take place during the following
month on individual peacekeeping mission mandates. This routine notification
mechanism shall not constrain the Council from convening additional special,
emergency or short-notice TCC/PCC meetings as circumstances may make
appropriate.
“The Security Council recognizes the need to improve its access to
military advice, including from Troop Contributing Countries, and intends to
pursue its work on mechanisms to that effect. The Council will continue to
review the role of the Military Staff Committee. The Security Council
recognizes the benefit of maintaining regular contact with mission senior
leadership including through an annual briefing by Heads of Military
Components. The Council would welcome similar briefings by Heads of Police
Components in order to improve understanding of operational challenges.
“The Council expresses its commitment to continuing to improve its
consideration and reflection of early peacebuilding tasks in the mandates and
composition of peacekeeping operations. In this context, the Council notes
with appreciation the contribution that peacekeepers and peacekeeping
missions make to early peacebuilding and recognizes the need to integrate
mission expertise and experience into the development of peacebuilding
strategies.

2

11-48244

S/PRST/2011/17

“The Council also recognizes the important work conducted by Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee of the
General Assembly.
“The Council commits to making progress on the issue of more
meaningful engagement with Troop Contributing Countries and Police
Contributing Countries and to reviewing progress in 2012.”

11-48244

3
