United Nations

A/RES/62/125

General Assembly

Distr.: General
24 January 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 42

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2007
0B

[on the report of the Third Committee (A/62/431)]

62/125. Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons
in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Organization of African Unity Convention governing the specific
aspects of refugee problems in Africa of 1969 1 and the African Charter on Human
and Peoples’ Rights, 2
F0F

F

F1F

Reaffirming that the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, 3
together with the 1967 Protocol thereto, 4 as complemented by the Organization of
African Unity Convention of 1969, remains the foundation of the international
refugee protection regime in Africa,
F2F

F3F

F

F

Recognizing the particular vulnerability of women and children among
refugees and other persons of concern, including exposure to discrimination and
sexual and physical abuse,
Recognizing also that refugees, internally displaced persons and, in particular,
women and children are at an increased risk of exposure to HIV/AIDS, malaria and
other infectious diseases,
Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General 5 and the United
1.
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; 6
F4F

F

F5F

2.
Notes the need for African States to address resolutely root causes of all
forms of forced displacement in Africa and to foster peace, stability and prosperity
throughout the African continent so as to forestall refugee flows;
Notes with great concern that, despite all of the efforts made so far by the
3.
United Nations, the African Union and others, the situation of refugees and
displaced persons in Africa remains precarious, and calls upon States and other
_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1001, No. 14691.
Ibid., vol. 1520, No. 26363.
3
Ibid., vol. 189, No. 2545.
4
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
5
A/62/316.
6
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/62/12).
2

07-47127

A/RES/62/125

parties to armed conflict to observe scrupulously the letter and spirit of international
humanitarian law, bearing in mind that armed conflict is one of the principal causes
of forced displacement in Africa;
Welcomes decision EX.CL/Dec.319 (X) on the situation of refugees,
4.
returnees and displaced persons in Africa adopted by the Executive Council of the
African Union at its tenth ordinary session, held in Addis Ababa on 25 and
26 January 2007; 7
F6F

5.
Expresses its appreciation for the leadership shown by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and commends the Office for its
ongoing efforts, with the support of the international community, to assist African
countries of asylum and to respond to the protection and assistance needs of
refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa;
Notes the initiatives taken by the African Union and the African
6.
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, in particular the role of its Special
Rapporteur on Refugees, Asylum Seekers, Migrants and Internally Displaced
Persons in Africa;
Also notes that the conclusion on children at risk, adopted by the
7.
Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees at its fifty-eighth session, held at Geneva from 1 to 5 October 2007, 8 is
aimed at enhancing the assistance and protection provided by the Office of the High
Commissioner to children, as defined under article 1 of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, 9 who are asylum-seekers, stateless, refugees, internally
displaced or returnees;
F7F

F8F

F

F

8.
Encourages the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights and
the African Committee of Experts on the Rights and Welfare of the Child to
incorporate in their work the Executive Committee conclusion on children at risk;
Affirms that children, because of their age, social status and physical and
9.
mental development, are often more vulnerable than adults in situations of forced
displacement, recognizes that forced displacement, return to post-conflict situations,
integration in new societies, protracted situations of displacement and statelessness
can increase the vulnerability of children generally, takes into account the particular
vulnerability of refugee children to being forcibly exposed to the risks of physical
and psychological injury, exploitation and death in connection with armed conflict,
and acknowledges that wider environmental factors and individual risk factors,
particularly when combined, can put children in situations of heightened risk;
10. Recognizes that no solution to displacement can be durable unless it is
sustainable, and therefore encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to
support the sustainability of return and reintegration;
11. Also recognizes the importance of early registration and effective
registration systems and censuses as a tool of protection and as a means to the
quantification and assessment of needs for the provision and distribution of
humanitarian assistance and to implement appropriate durable solutions;

_______________
7

See African Union, document EX.CL/Dec.315–347 (X).
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/62/12/Add.1),
chap. III, sect. A.
9
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
8

2

A/RES/62/125

12. Recalls the conclusion on registration of refugees and asylum-seekers
adopted by the Executive Committee at its fifty-second session, 10 notes the many
forms of harassment faced by refugees and asylum-seekers who remain without any
form of documentation attesting to their status, recalls the responsibility of States to
register refugees on their territories, and, as appropriate, the responsibility of the
Office of the High Commissioner or mandated international bodies to do so,
reiterates in this context the central role that early and effective registration and
documentation can play, guided by protection considerations, in enhancing
protection and supporting efforts to find durable solutions, and calls upon the
Office, as appropriate, to help States to conduct this procedure should they be
unable to register refugees on their territory;
F9F

F

13. Calls upon the international community, including States and the Office
of the High Commissioner and other relevant United Nations organizations, within
their respective mandates, to take concrete action to meet the protection and
assistance needs of refugees, returnees and displaced persons and to contribute
generously to projects and programmes aimed at alleviating their plight and
facilitating durable solutions for refugees and displaced persons;
14. Reaffirms the importance of timely and adequate assistance and
protection for refugees, returnees and displaced persons, also reaffirms that
assistance and protection are mutually reinforcing and that inadequate material
assistance and food shortages undermine protection, notes the importance of a
rights- and community-based approach in engaging constructively with individual
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and their communities so as to achieve
fair and equitable access to food and other forms of material assistance, and
expresses concern in regard to situations in which minimum standards of assistance
are not met, including those in which adequate needs assessments have yet to be
undertaken;
15. Also reaffirms that respect by States for their protection responsibilities
towards refugees is strengthened by international solidarity involving all members
of the international community and that the refugee protection regime is enhanced
through committed international cooperation in a spirit of solidarity and burden- and
responsibility-sharing among all States;
16. Further reaffirms that host States have the primary responsibility to
ensure the civilian and humanitarian character of asylum, calls upon States, in
cooperation with international organizations, within their mandates, to take all
necessary measures to ensure respect for the principles of refugee protection and, in
particular, to ensure that the civilian and humanitarian nature of refugee camps is
not compromised by the presence or the activities of armed elements or used for
purposes that are incompatible with their civilian character, and encourages the
High Commissioner to continue efforts, in consultation with States and other
relevant actors, to ensure the civilian and humanitarian character of camps;
17. Condemns all acts that pose a threat to the personal security and wellbeing of refugees and asylum-seekers, such as refoulement, unlawful expulsion and
physical attacks, calls upon States of refuge, in cooperation with international
organizations, where appropriate, to take all necessary measures to ensure respect
for the principles of refugee protection, including the humane treatment of asylum_______________
10

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/56/12/Add.1),
chap. III, sect. B.

3

A/RES/62/125

seekers, notes with interest that the High Commissioner has continued to take steps
to encourage the development of measures to better ensure the civilian and
humanitarian character of asylum, and encourages the High Commissioner to
continue those efforts, in consultation with States and other relevant actors;
18. Deplores the continuing violence and insecurity which constitute an
ongoing threat to the safety and security of staff members of the Office of the
High Commissioner and other humanitarian organizations and an obstacle to the
effective fulfilment of the mandate of the Office and the ability of its
implementing partners and other humanitarian personnel to discharge their
respective humanitarian functions, urges States, parties to conflict and all other
relevant actors to take all necessary measures to protect activities related to
humanitarian assistance, prevent attacks on and kidnapping of national and
international humanitarian workers and ensure the safety and security of the
personnel and property of the Office and that of all humanitarian organizations
discharging functions mandated by the Office, and calls upon States to investigate
fully any crime committed against humanitarian personnel and bring to justice the
persons responsible for such crimes;
19. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner, the African Union,
subregional organizations and all African States, in conjunction with agencies of the
United Nations system, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and
the international community, to strengthen and revitalize existing partnerships and
forge new ones in support of the protection system for refugees, asylum-seekers and
internally displaced persons;
20. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner, the international
community and other concerned entities to intensify their support to African
Governments through appropriate capacity-building activities, including training of
relevant officers, disseminating information about refugee instruments and
principles, providing financial, technical and advisory services to accelerate the
enactment or amendment and implementation of legislation relating to refugees,
strengthening emergency response and enhancing capacities for the coordination of
humanitarian activities, in particular those Governments that have received large
numbers of refugees and asylum-seekers;
21. Reaffirms the right of return and the principle of voluntary repatriation,
appeals to countries of origin and countries of asylum to create conditions that are
conducive to voluntary repatriation, and recognizes that, while voluntary
repatriation remains the pre-eminent solution, local integration and third-country
resettlement, where appropriate and feasible, are also viable options for dealing with
the situation of African refugees who, owing to prevailing circumstances in their
respective countries of origin, are unable to return home;
22. Also reaffirms that voluntary repatriation should not necessarily be
conditioned on the accomplishment of political solutions in the country of origin in
order not to impede the exercise of the refugees’ right to return, recognizes that the
voluntary repatriation and reintegration process is normally guided by the
conditions in the country of origin, in particular that voluntary repatriation can be
accomplished in conditions of safety and dignity, and urges the High Commissioner
to promote sustainable return through the development of durable and lasting
solutions, particularly in protracted refugee situations;
23. Calls upon the international donor community to provide financial and
material assistance that allows for the implementation of community-based
4

A/RES/62/125

development programmes that benefit both refugees and host communities, as
appropriate, in agreement with host countries and consistent with humanitarian
objectives;
24. Appeals to the international community to respond positively, in the
spirit of solidarity and burden- and responsibility-sharing, to the third-country
resettlement needs of African refugees, notes in this regard the importance of using
resettlement strategically, as part of situation-specific comprehensive responses to
refugee situations, and to this end encourages interested States, the Office of the
High Commissioner and other relevant partners to make full use of the Multilateral
Framework of Understandings on Resettlement, 11 where appropriate;
F10F

F

25. Calls upon the international donor community to provide material and
financial assistance for the implementation of programmes intended for the
rehabilitation of the environment and infrastructure affected by refugees in countries
of asylum;
26. Urges the international community, in the spirit of international solidarity
and burden-sharing, to continue to fund generously the refugee programmes of the
Office of the High Commissioner and, taking into account the substantially
increased needs of programmes in Africa, inter alia, as a result of repatriation
possibilities, to ensure that Africa receives a fair and equitable share of the
resources designated for refugees;
27. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner and interested States to
identify protracted refugee situations which might lend themselves to resolution
through the development of specific, multilateral, comprehensive and practical
approaches to resolving such refugee situations, including improvement of
international burden- and responsibility-sharing and realization of durable solutions,
within a multilateral context;
28. Expresses grave concern about the plight of internally displaced persons
in Africa, notes the efforts of African States in strengthening the regional
mechanisms for protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons, calls
upon States to take concrete action to pre-empt internal displacement and to meet
the protection and assistance needs of internally displaced persons, recalls in that
regard the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, 12 takes note of the current
activities of the Office of the High Commissioner related to protection of and
assistance to internally displaced persons, including in the context of inter-agency
arrangements in this field, emphasizes that such activities should be consistent with
relevant General Assembly resolutions and should not undermine the refugee
mandate of the Office and the institution of asylum, and encourages the High
Commissioner to continue his dialogue with States on the role of his Office in this
regard;
F11F

F

29. Invites the Representative of the Secretary-General on the human rights
of internally displaced persons to continue his ongoing dialogue with Member States
and the intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned, in
accordance with his mandate, and to include information thereon in his reports to
the Human Rights Council and the General Assembly;

_______________
11
12

Available from www.unhcr.org.
E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.

5

A/RES/62/125

30. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on
assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa to the General
Assembly at its sixty-third session, taking fully into account the efforts expended by
countries of asylum, under the item entitled “Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced
persons and humanitarian questions”.
76th plenary meeting
18 December 2007

6
