40

General Auembly-Twenty-eighth Session

1. Takes note of the report of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Institute for Training and Rese,arch;:i
2. Notes with satisfaction the increasing effectiveness of the Institute in the discharge of its responsibilities;
3. Expresses the hope that the Institute will have
·
greater and wider financial support.

2164th plenary meeting
9 November 1973
3081 (XXVIII). United Nations University

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2951 (XXVII) of 11 December 1972, by which it decided to establish the United
Nations University under certain objectives and principles,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1829 (LV) of 18 October 1973,
Having taken into account the resolution, comments
and observations of the Executive Board of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on the draft Charter proposed by the Founding
Committee of the United Nations Uoiversity, 4
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General,5
l. Adopts the Charter of the United Nations University contained in the second addendum to the report
of the Secretary-General 6 and invites the University
Council to consider the comments and observations
made in the General Assembly on the above-mentioned
Charter, in consultation with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and the Director-General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, and to submit its report to the General
Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council,
with a view to enabling the Assembly at its thirtieth
session to consider amendments to the Charter, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedures provided
for in the Charter;
2. Decides that the University Centre of the United
Nations University shall be located in the Tokyo metropolitan area in Japan;
3. Recommends that the University Council, in considering the location of research and training centres
and programmes of the University, as well as its associated institutions, take fully into account offers of
facilities and other types of contribution and, in particular, the views expressed by the General Assembly
concerning the need for support of research and training activities in the developing countries or for their
benefit;
4. Recommends further that the University Council
s.hould consider, as one of its priority tasks, the relationship between the University and the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research, including possible
areas of co-operation in research and training;
5. Endorses section 5 of the remarks of the Founding Committee of the United Nations University appended to the report of the Secretary-General ;7
3 Ibid.,

Twenty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/9014).

4 See A/9149/Add.1.
t1 A/9149 and Add.I and

e A/9149/ Add.2.
f Sec

2.

A/Sll49, &DJlCX I, appendix II.

6. Authorizes the Secretary-General, pen'ding the assumption of office by the Rector, to take all necessary
mea~ures to implement the provisions of the Charter
of the University. in consultation with the Direct?rGeneral of the United Nations Educational, Se1ent1fic
and Cultural Organization, including the wnvening of
such sessions of the University Council as may he fL'
quired, and decides that the expenses involved in the
implementation shall be met from funds, pn:sent and
prospective, of the University;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue efforts for raising the funds required for the dynamic
development of the University from Governments. and
from non-governmental sources, including foundat1om.
universities and individuals.

2192nd plenary meeting
6 December 1973

:l082 (XXVIII). Charter of Economi<· Uil,!hl~
and Duties of States

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, in its resolution 45 (III)
of 18 May I 972. 8 decided to establish a Working Group
of governmental representatives to draw up a draft
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States.
Recalling its resolution 3037 (XXVII) of 19 December 1972, by which it decided to enlarge the composition of the Working Group on the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States,
Reaffirming its conviction of the urgent need to establish or improve norms of universal application for the
development of international economic relations on a
just and equitable basis,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Working Group on the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States 9 and of the comments made thereon
as reflected in the report of the Trade and Development
Board on its thirteenth session; 10
2. Decides, in the light of the progress achieved,
to extend the mandate of the Working Group as estab·
Iished by resolution 45 (III) of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development;
3. Further decides that the Working Group shall
hold two sessions in 1974, each of three weeks' duration, as recommend-:d by the Trade and Development
Board in its decision 98 (XIII) of 8 September I 973; 11
4. Urges the Working· Group to complete, as the
first step in the codification and development of the
matter, the elaboration of a final draft Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, to be considered
and approved by the General Assembly at its twentyninth session;
5. Requests the Trade and Development Board to
examine at its fourteenth session, as a matter of priority, the report of the Working Group and to transmit
8 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, RerNt mid
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.Il.D.4).
annex I.A.
9 TD/B/AC.12/1
and Corr.I and TD/B/AC.12/2 and
Add.I.
10 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty·
eighth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/9015/Rev.1), part
three, chap. III.
11 Ibid., part three, annex I.
