S/PV.7306

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7306th meeting

Tuesday, 11 November 2014, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Quinlan .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Cai Weiming
Mr. Bertoux
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Maes
Mr. Laro
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Ms. Mulvein
Ms. Jones

Agenda
The situation in Libya

14-61852 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1461852*

S/PV.7306

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 11 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Libya to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedures, I invite Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now welcome and give the floor to Prosecutor
Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: I welcome this opportunity to once
again engage with the Council as I present my Office’s
eighth report on Libya.
At the outset, I note with regret that, as we are
gathered here today, the security situation in Libya
is worsening. Political instability is growing and,
unfortunately, an environment is developing that
clearly cannot be conducive to closing the impunity gap
in Libya. This of course is an issue of concern for me
and my Office.
Since my most recent report to the Council
on Libya, in May of this year (see S/PV.7173), the
situation in the country has deteriorated. Despite the
June 2014 elections, Libya is currently split, with two
Governments vying for legitimacy. A more worrisome
aspect of the deteriorating situation is the ongoing
spate of assassinations in Benghazi and the threats to
media workers, human rights defenders and women
in particular, and to prosecutors, judges and lawyers.
There are indeed indications that crimes that fall within
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court are
being committed.
Those troubling developments are clear signs that
Libya is moving down the wrong path in its transition
to what was hoped would be a peaceful country that
respects and pays homage to justice, accountability and
the rule of law.
Over the years, the Council has expressed its
grave concern at the worsening security situation
2/17

11/11/2014

and the political divisions that threaten to undermine
the aspirations of the Libyan people. The Council
has reiterated its support to the people of Libya and
encouraged their continued and firm commitment to
the establishment of a stable and prosperous State based
on national reconciliation, justice, respect for human
rights and the rule of law. Unfortunately, the Council’s
calls for political dialogue and refraining from violence
and actions that challenge the stability of the State have
gone unheeded.
The international community could be more
proactive in exploring solutions in order to tangibly
help restore stability and strengthen accountability for
Rome Statute crimes in Libya. For its part, the Libyan
Government is encouraged to be more specific in
seeking such assistance. I can only reiterate my previous
calls to key partners of the Government of Libya to
provide it with the necessary support and to restore
security and cultivate accountability for international
crimes in the country.
To be more responsive in providing such critical
assistance, the possibility of forming an international
contact group on justice issues through which material,
legal and other support could be provided to Libya
ought to be explored. Such a forum should help to focus
attention on specific problems facing Libyan authorities
and assist supportive States in coordinating their own
efforts with those of the International Criminal Court
and Libya.
For our part, let me assure you, Mr. President,
that my Office will do all it can to support that kind of
coordination as a form of cooperation that will lead to
our own investigative and prosecutorial work becoming
more efficient and having more of an impact, and which
will reinforce the signal to the Libyan authorities that
they are not alone in facing the current challenges.
I cannot stress enough the deleterious impact that
the unstable political and security situation in Libya
has had and continues to have on my investigations.
While my Office remains steadfast in its commitment
to continue to pursue its mandate in Libya, the security
situation has significantly hampered our ability to
effectively investigate in the country. I urge the
Libyan authorities to expend all efforts, including
by coordinating closely with the United Nations and
my Office, to ensure that the necessary conditions
are in place as soon as possible so as to facilitate our
investigations in Libya.

14-61852

11/11/2014

The situation in Libya

Moreover, contact with the Libyan Government
has been largely confined to our liaison with the focal
point. Given the prevailing circumstances in Libya,
it has been difficult for the focal point to facilitate
effective contacts and secure much-needed assistance
from the relevant national authorities to facilitate my
Office’s investigative efforts. As a result, progress with
regard to the implementation of the memorandum of
understanding between my Office and the Government
of Libya has been slow.
Notwithstanding those challenges, we are
attempting to forge ahead. Recently, the focal point of the
Government of Libya arranged a key meeting outside of
the country between members of my investigation team
and Libyan national investigators. That constructive
meeting provided an avenue for valuable exchanges of
information and ensured plans for follow-up meetings.
The meeting laid the groundwork for coordination in the
investigation and prosecution of individuals of concern
to both my Office and the Libyan authorities. My
investigation team, I must acknowledge, was impressed
with the commitment and professionalism displayed by
the Libyan national investigators, who are undertaking
their work in difficult circumstances. I look forward to
building on that fruitful meeting and to working with
the Libyan authorities to address the most urgent cases
and to take further steps toward closing the impunity
gap in Libya.
An unfortunate reality, however, remains: the
combined effect of instability and lack of resources has
severely undermined my Office’s investigative efforts
in Libya. This means that we have been obliged to scale
down resources for investigations in the country, in
effect limiting our ability to investigate, among others,
new instances of mass crimes allegedly committed by
the rebel forces. My Office will have to prioritize its
work and divert the limited resources at its disposal as
it strives to complete its investigations to be trial-ready
in other cases where the judicial process has already
been triggered.
As I have stated in another context, including at the
recent open debate in the Council on 23 October (see
S/PV.7285), the continuing disparity between resources
and expectations risks systematic underperformance
that will harm not only the Court and its mandate, but
also the credibility of the Council. This is particularly
pertinent for situations that have been referred to
the International Criminal Court by the Council. I
encourage the Council to take this fact into consideration

S/PV.7306

in the light of the urgent need to revitalize the Libya
investigation.
My Office is committed to ensuring that justice
and accountability are respected and advanced in
Libya. To that end, I would be remiss if I did not
benefit from the audience before the Council today
to stress that the continued failure of the Government
of Libya to surrender Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to
the custody of the International Criminal Court is a
matter of great concern to my Office and the Court.
In the past, the Council has expressed its displeasure
at that failure to discharge a clear legal obligation.
Libya must demonstrate its commitment to justice
and accountability for mass crimes by fulfilling its
obligations towards the Court and the Council. I take
this opportunity before the Council to once again
call on Libya to immediately surrender Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi to the custody of the International Criminal
Court.
As concerns the trial of Abdullah Al-Senussi in
Libya, my Office is closely monitoring developments
in the case, following on recent contacts with the
Libyan authorities and independent trial monitors.
The ongoing violence and alleged threats to judges,
prosecutors and lawyers do not augur well for a fair
trial that respects all of the rights of an accused person.
On the basis of the information collected and the status
of any progress made, I will assess my options in due
course, including whether to apply for a review of the
judges’ decision upholding Libya’s request that the case
against Al-Senussi be tried in Libya.
Similarly, my Office remains very concerned
about the number of individuals in detention, some
of whom reportedly lack access to due process and
may be subject to torture and death in custody. As
the Secretary-General has noted, “The handover of
all detainees to the effective control of the State is a
prerequisite for the establishment of the rule of law in
Libya” (S/2014/653, para. 97). It is incumbent upon the
Government of Libya to ensure that detainees are either
tried within a reasonable time and with full respect for
their due-process rights, or released.
The time is also past due for the resolution of the
Tawergha issue. My Office has encouraged the Libyan
authorities to facilitate a visit by representatives from
the local councils of Misrata and Tawergha to New
York to meet and engage with Council members. It is
envisaged that the visit could materialize next week. The
main purpose of the visit is for those representatives to

14-618523/17

S/PV.7306

The situation in Libya

make their efforts better understood. I must emphasize
that from the perspective of the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court, the mass displacement
of the Tawerghans remains an issue of concern to
my Office and, undoubtedly, to the international
community a whole. I am confident that I share this
concern with members of the Council, and I hope
that within the next six months, the representatives
of Tawergha and Misrata will be able to update the
Council on the progress they have made in redressing
the displacement of the inhabitants of Tawergha.
In conclusion, it is worth recalling that it was for
reasons of peace and security, and, indeed, the suffering
and plight of the Libyan people that the Council
galvanized to unanimously adopt resolution 1970
(2011), and, more recently, resolution 2174 (2014). The
Libyan people’s hopes and aspirations for a peaceful
and stable State that thrives and sits firmly on the pillars
of justice and accountable Government are yet to be
realized. We therefore owe it to them to coordinate our
efforts more effectively to promote a peaceful and just
solution to the current situation in Libya. In accordance
with its mandate, my Office is certainly attempting to
do its part in strengthening justice and accountability
for international crimes in Libya and is coordinating,
as appropriate, with the Libyan authorities. There is
certainly room for all of us to do more. To be sure, we
must not fail Libya, but Libya must also not fail itself.
The President: I thank Ms. Bensouda for her
briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina wishes once again to thank the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for her briefing on her eighth report pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011).
Argentina wishes to recall that the referral of
cases to the ICC reflects the explicit recognition by
the Council of the role of justice and the fight against
impunity for crimes of international concern, and the
contribution of the Rome Statute and the ICC to that
goal. I wish to reiterate that for my country, Argentina,
it is unacceptable that the culture of memory be
transformed into a history of oblivion. For my country,
truth, remembrance, justice and reparations are the
right not only of the victims, but also of society as a

4/17

11/11/2014

whole and the international community, so as not to
compromise on the issue of impunity.
Libya is facing numerous challenges in the area
of strengthening rule-of-law institutions; however, a
constructive dialogue among the Libyan authorities and
the Office of the Prosecutor continues to unfold. Since
2013 that dialogue has been more fluid, in particular
regarding the implementation of the memorandum of
understanding on the distribution of the workload in
future investigations and trials signed by the Attorney
General of Libya and the Prosecutor.
I should like to focus on three key issues relating to
the situation in Libya.
The first is the obligation of Libya to cooperate with
the Court. While Libya had challenged the admissibility
of the case against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi before the
Court, the decision of Pre-Trial Chamber I handed down
on 31 May 2013 and upheld by the Appeals Chamber on
21 May 2014 makes it clear that Libya should hand over
the accused. We are aware that there is a trial in Libya
against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi; however, Libya
should ensure that that trial does not undermine its
responsibility and obligation to cooperate with the ICC.
The second issue concerns the allegations of crimes
committed in Libya since 2011 and more recently,
particularly since May 2014, when two major armed
coalitions emerged there — the forces of Operation
Dignity and of Operation Libyan Dawn — leading to
the establishment of two parliaments and Governments,
one in Tripoli and one in Tobruk, with the house of
representatives of the latter being the legitimate Libyan
authority as recognized by the United Nations.
The Office of the Prosecutor continues to address
cases of arbitrary detention, torture, the cruel treatment
of detainees, the forced displacement of approximately
30,000 Tawergha civilians, assassinations in the
context of the conflict, threats against journalists and
human rights defenders, in particular against women
human rights defenders, and against prosecutors,
judges and lawyers. Some of those cases were reported
on by the Ministry of Justice, with the assistance of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. However,
the Court was unable to investigate those allegations
of crimes under the Rome Statute owing to a lack of
access for security reasons. We believe that the Libyan
authorities should ensure that they are investigated and
the perpetrators brought to justice.

14-61852

11/11/2014

The situation in Libya

Thirdly, and in conclusion, the Prosecutor is clear
about the situation resulting from the proposed cuts in
the budget of the Court, which affects the Office and its
capacity to undertake new investigations, in particular
regarding the crimes committed by the rebels, and with
respect to the implementation of the memorandum of
understanding in a more ambitious manner.
This leads my delegation to make a comment
that we reiterate every time the Council considers
the question of referrals to the ICC. Argentina find
it inexplicable that the Council has determined that
the costs of referrals are not covered by the United
Nations but, rather, by the States parties to the Rome
Statute. Beyond the fact that this contravenes the Rome
Statute and the Relationship Agreement between the
United Nations and the International Criminal Court,
the situation and the facts show that, with the growing
number of cases, there has been an intensification of
the pressure on the resources available to the Court.
Thus today we see in the report of the Prosecutor
what the effects are of the United Nations not covering
the costs of referrals to the Court. This threatens not
only the current activities of the Prosecutor but could
also jeopardize the long-term viability of the Court.
We reiterate that the fight against impunity is
not an obligation exclusive to the States parties to the
Rome Statute; it is, rather, that of the international
community. It is also a priority for the United
Nations. That goal, however, should also come with a
commitment to providing the Court with the resources
it needs to function. If the Organization can provide
such resources for the two ad hoc Tribunals, we fail to
understand what is preventing it from doing the same
for the International Criminal Court.
We should emphasize Libya’s willingness to deal
with its situation and to enable the current violence to
yield to political dialogue, so that justice can be the
essential element in the country’s social, political and
ethical reconstruction. Argentina, like the Prosecutor,
fully understands the many challenges the Libyan
authorities are facing, and commends the Office of the
Prosecutor for its willingness to continue to support
the Libyan Government in its efforts to address as
many cases as possible through its jurisdiction. But
we also believe that Libya’s need for institutions such
as the legitimacy of the rule of law is clearly greater
than any cooperation the International Criminal
Court can supply, and for that it is essential to have
a comprehensive strategy of which national justice

S/PV.7306

is a key component. It is vital that the Libyan people
see justice done for serious crimes, regardless of the
perpetrators, and that they see it done not only in The
Hague but also in Libya.
The Prosecutor suggested the possibility of
creating a contact group. Argentina believes such an
undertaking could provide Libya with the support of a
group of countries that would work in close consultation
with Libya, particularly on how to fight impunity at
the domestic level. The international community’s
cooperation is essential to achieving a genuinely
peaceful Libya, with security, reliable and effective
institutions and respect for its citizens’ human rights,
but we also believe that the Security Council should
assist such efforts with the support they need. One
aspect of following up on referrals is that the Council
should be considering alternative ways of backing up
the efforts of Libya and the international community to
support the country.
As we do every time we discuss the International
Criminal Court, the Argentinian delegation would like
to emphasize its belief that the Court represents one
of the most significant contributions we can make to
achieving accountability for crimes of international
concern, and that it is as essential today as it was when
it was established in 1998. I commend the Prosecutor
for her values and dedication to eradicating impunity. I
would also like to acknowledge the efforts of the Libyan
authorities and people in embarking on a path that we
should all support — that of memory, truth, justice and
reparation.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her
presentation of her eighth report pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), and to reiterate our support and appreciation
for the work she and her Office are doing.
After 40 years of dictatorship, building a
democratic nation in Libya is a lengthy and difficult
process. Libya is facing significant challenges,
particularly in the area of security, as the recent events
that Ms. Bensouda referred to have shown. However, it
continues to maintain a constructive dialogue with the
Court. We welcome the steps taken to implement the
memorandum of understanding between the Office of
the Prosecutor and the Government of Libya, designed
to encourage collaboration and sharing of tasks
related to investigations and prosecutions, as well as a
strategy for arrests. We especially welcome the recent

14-618525/17

S/PV.7306

The situation in Libya

11/11/2014

fruitful meeting in Rome between the Prosecutor and
the Attorney General of Libya’s team on practical
arrangements for implementing the memorandum.

idea of forming an international contact group on
justice-related issues that would facilitate legal and
material support for Libya is worth considering.

Concerning the Prosecutor’s other investigations,
we note that Ms. Bensouda’s report points out that
the lack of sufficient resources is still significantly
delaying the collection of evidence against other
potential suspects. In that regard, we reiterate our
consistent position that the Court should be provided
with the means necessary to enable it to fully discharge
its duties.

In referring the situation in Libya to the Prosecutor
of the ICC under resolution 1970 (2011), the Security
Council demonstrated its ability to act quickly and as
one in order to fight impunity. We should now ensure
that that approach is vigilantly followed up. More
generally, the Security Council’s continued and active
support to the International Criminal Court is essential
to enabling States to cooperate with the Court and to
ensure that referrals to the Court achieve their goal of
seeing justice done and maintaining international peace
and security. As the Prosecutor said, we can all do more
to help the Court in its vital work. I would therefore
like to conclude by reaffirming our support for an idea
that was mentioned on 23 October during the open
debate on our methods of work (S/PV.7285), in which
Ms. Bensouda also took part — that of establishing a
mechanism that reflects the Council’s commitment to
effectively monitoring the situations it refers to the
International Criminal Court.

Concerning Libya’s obligations, the Prosecutor
rightly recalled both in her report and her presentation
that Libya is obliged to hand over Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi to the ICC. We know that a suit has been
filed in Libya, but it should ensure that the trial does
not contravene Libya’s obligations to the Court. We
also note with concern the slow progress that has been
made on the issue of detainees in Libya. We call on
the Libyan Government to work to put an end to that
situation, release the detainees there is no evidence
against and refer cases where there is evidence to
the national courts, in accordance with the law on
transitional justice. Many of those prisoners have been
subjected to torture and other ill-treatment. We again
urge Libya to enforce the law criminalizing torture,
forced disappearances and discrimination. We are
concerned that the Prosecutor’s report indicates that
so far no State official or member of an armed group
or militia has been brought to justice to answer such
charges. We also urge the Libyan Government to
resolve the situation of the inhabitants of Tawergha. It
is essential that a strategy be devised to ensure that the
30,000 displaced persons can return home.
As in the past, we also encourage the Libyan
Government to develop and implement a comprehensive
strategy for putting an end to crime and impunity
in Libya, with the help of its key partners where
appropriate. The Court and the Council should be kept
informed of progress in that area. It is up to the Libyan
authorities to ensure respect for the rule of law in their
country. We call on them to redouble their efforts to
create a stable security environment that guarantees
freedom, justice and respect for the rights of every
individual. For its part, the international community
should continue to help Libya in this crucial phase
of its transition. The issue goes beyond the scope of
the cooperation between Libya and the International
Criminal Court. In that regard, we believe that the

6/17

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have taken note of the eighth report of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
on its investigation of the situation in Libya, and we
thank Ms. Bensouda for her presentation of the report.
We cannot help but be concerned about the
information in the report on the continuing violence
in Libya and the complex displaced-persons situation.
The report details unlawful arrests and detentions,
the torture of prisoners and abductions and murders
of civilians. Lawyers and judges working on internal
Libyan trials concerning former associates of Muammar
Al-Qadhafi continue to be persecuted, and flagrantly
unjust decisions have been handed down, including
cases where the death penalty has been imposed.
We support efforts aimed at bringing to justice
those who committed serious crimes during the events
in Libya since 2011. We hope to see progress in the
work of the ICC in this matter, however we see little
sign for optimism in that regard.
On 24 July, the ICC Appeals Chamber took a
decision confirming the conclusion of the lower
court that Libya was able independently to carry out
an investigation into the Abdullah Al-Senussi case.
Although we do not question its competence on these
issues, we still find no material justification for such

14-61852

11/11/2014

The situation in Libya

an approach in the light of the entirely contradictory
decision in the Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi case and the
aforementioned assessment of the ICC Prosecutor with
regard to the situation in the country.
Crucial to strengthening the authority of the Court
is its ability to impartially carry out investigations
into the acts committed by all parties to the conflict,
including in Libya. There has still been no significant
progress in that regard. As we have already noted,
there is sufficient information on the crimes allegedly
committed by representatives of the Al-Qadhafi regime
as well by insurgents. However, judging by the report,
no real steps have been taken against the insurgents.
There is no information on specific actions by the ICC
with regard to the ongoing practices of torture and illtreatment in Libyan detention centres.
There is unfortunately no news on the fate of the
30,000 Touaregs. As for the many civilian casualties as
a result of NATO airstrikes, which breached the terms of
resolution 1973 (2011) and was not in line with its goals,
the ICC Prosecutor continues to distance herself from
consideration of this issue, for unknown reasons. We
would like to hear clarification in that regard, if there is
in fact an explanation for this. We call for all instances
of the use of disproportionate or indiscriminate force
during the conflict that resulted in civilian victims to
be investigated, without any exception.
In conclusion, we are forced to note that the
experience of referrals to the ICC related to Libya
cannot be considered a success to date, neither in terms
of providing justice nor in terms of assisting the process
of national reconciliation. This is, of course, a major
factor when considering proposed referrals of cases to
the Court in the future.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her report and her briefing.
I wish to take this opportunity to reaffirm our full
support to her and to the International Criminal Court
(ICC).
There have been moments in history when the
Council has united to prevent or stop atrocities that, in
the terms of the Rome Statute, “shock the conscience of
humanity”. The announcement in February 2011 by the
Libyan regime itself that it was preparing a bloodbath
triggered such unity. The adoption of resolution 1970
(2011) was one of those historic moments here in the
Security Council. There have been others since, with
the adoption of texts on the Central African Republic

S/PV.7306

and with the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham.
When we review the implementation of resolution
1970 (2011), there is a question that remains, by its very
nature, unanswered: how many lives were able to be
saved? Thousands, without a doubt, and history must
give credit for that to a unanimous Security Council,
to the United Nations and to the International Criminal
Court.
However, did we solve everything? No. Libya is
going through a transition, with its difficulties and
uncertainties. Violent acts continue. Instability persists.
But despite the catastrophic legacy of the Al-Qadhafi
regime, Libyans must show determination and must
continue to come together around a shared political
project to bring the democratic transition to fruition.
The Council has mobilized to help them to do so.
Bernardino León has been appointed by the SecretaryGeneral to assist the political process.
In that regard, we are concerned about the
consequences of the decision taken on 6 November
by the Supreme Court invalidating the election results
of 25 June. We believe it is essential that an inclusive
political dialogue be initiated without delay, as the
Libyan crisis can be solvedb only by political means.
There is an urgent need to establish a Government of
national unity that can quickly return to Tripoli. We
stand ready to use individual sanctions as provided for
by resolution 2174 (2014) to target those who obstruct
the political transition. The designation of Ansar
Al-Sharia as a terrorist organization is also part of this
political context, aimed at separating terrorists away
from the moderate Islamists, who do have a role to play
on the political stage.
Libya’s cooperation with the International Criminal
Court is crucial to end the era of impunity in the country,
which emerged from 42 years of dictatorship in 2011.
How can we prevent armed groups continuing their
abuses if they feel free to act without consequences?
Libya, despite its difficulties, requested to try the
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and the Abdullah Al-Senussi
cases in its own courts, in accordance with the Rome
Statute and resolution 1970 (2011). The Court, as the
sole competent authority in this matter, declared itself
competent to try Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
called for his delivery to the Court. It found the case The
Prosecutor against Mr. Abdullah Senussi” inadmissible
and thereby granted Libya’s request to try the accused.
Libya, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), must comply

14-618527/17

S/PV.7306

The situation in Libya

with the judges’ decision. Compliance by Libya with
its international obligations is a key indicator of its
commitment to the rule of law. There is no competition
between national justice systems and the International
Criminal Court, be it in Libya or elsewhere, but a
principle of complementarity. Libya has obligations
under resolution 1970 (2011), the Council has requested
it to comply therewith, it is as simple as that.
Regarding the other abuses, as Ms. Bensouda
recalled, the signing of a memorandum of understanding
on burden-sharing between the Court and the Libyan
authorities represents an innovative and positive
approach. We must continue on this path despite the
current crisis, which has slowed efforts significantly.
The challenges are immense. We must make shed
light on alleged crimes, such as those committed in
Misrata and Taourga during the armed conflict of 2011
and in Bani Walid in 2012. We regret, in that regard,
that the return of communities of Taouerga to their
villages remains to be achieved.
Finally, we express our deep concern at the use
of torture and at the deaths in detention centres under
the control of armed brigades in Libya. There remain
some 7,000 illegal detainees, including children.
These practices must stop. Like the Prosecutor, we
encourage the Libyan authorities to implement the law
passed in April 2013 that criminalized torture, forced
disappearances and discrimination. Armed groups
must recall that the fight against impunity also applies
to them.
As I said at the outset, resolution 1970 (2011)
continues to serve as an example of how the Security
Council can take swift and united action. Faced with
the abuses committed by the Libyan leadership at the
time, the United Nations and regional organizations
were united in their condemnation of the atrocities. For
its part, the International Criminal Court was central
to the process of isolating the criminals, regardless of
their rank and regardless of their side.
Today, we must ensure the follow-up to these
steps. The fight against impunity requires both the full
cooperation of Libya with the Court, the improvement
of the security situation, full consideration by the
Secretariat and the Mission to Support the United
Nations in Libya, and the activities of the Prosecutor.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Prosecutor Bensouda
for her briefing and for her eighth report to the Council.

8/17

11/11/2014

We have carefully studied the report and taken
due note of the main issues contained therein. On the
issue of cooperation, it is an obligation on the part of
States parties to the Rome Statute to cooperate with
the International Criminal Court (ICC). In addition,
resolution 1970 (2011) calls on States to cooperate
with the Court, and resolution 2174 (2014) reiterates
this point. In that regard, we urge Libya to continue to
cooperate fully with the Court.
We take special note of the meeting between the
Prosecutor and the Libyan Minister of Justice held
on 18 July. This should send a clear message that
the Court and the Government of Libya will work
together to investigate and prosecute those committing
grave violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in Libya.
We look forward to the technical meeting both
parties are planning to organize on the issue of burdensharing. It is our expectation that the meeting will help
to strengthen cooperation between the Court and the
Government of Libya.
Concerning the case of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi,
the decision of the Pretrial Chamber and the Appeals
Chamber is that the case is admissible. Therefore,
Libya has an obligation to surrender Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi to the Court. Libya should also return the
materials seized from the former defence counsel of
Mr. Al-Qadhafi and cooperate in facilitating a visit by
the defence counsel of Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi.
The report of the Prosecutor indicates that resource
constraints and security considerations have hampered
the ability of her Office to fully prosecute crimes that
may have been committed by different parties since
February 2011. We are concerned that if the situation
persists, it may negatively affect the credibility of the
Court and encourage impunity. Therefore in order to
send a strong message that impunity will not be tolerated,
it is essential for the Government of Libya, with the
support of the international community, to investigate
the alleged crimes. We acknowledge that this would
be difficult in the current security situation in Libya.
We therefore call for an immediate and unconditional
ceasefire across the country. Libyan militias should
refrain from targeting civilians. They should lay down
their arms and participate in the ongoing national
dialogue to restore peace, law and order in the country.
Finally, we urge the Office of the Prosecutor, the
Government of Libya and the United Nations Support

14-61852

11/11/2014

The situation in Libya

Mission in Libya to continue to work together with a
view to ending impunity in Libya.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing. Since the briefing
before the Council on the seventh report of the ICC
on 13 May (see S/PV.7173), the political and security
situation in Libya has undergone numerous changes.
We note that since then the militias have continued to
clash with increased violence, making the security and
political situation ever more confused and volatile.
On the human and humanitarian rights front,
civilians are living in totally precarious conditions.
They continue to be the targets of many attacks and
tribulations, both at the hands of the militias and the
State authorities, who engaged in torture, inhumane
treatment and discrimination despite the publication of
Law 10/2013. The eighth report of the Prosecutor refers
to the displacement of the Tawergha without hope for
an improvement in their situation.
On the judicial front, despite the decision of the
Pretrial Chamber of May 2013, confirmed a year later
by the Appeals Chamber, recognizing the admissibility
of the case of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, no judgment
concerning him has been rendered up to now. That
absence of accountability continues to bolster the
impunity that reigns throughout the country. That
encourages the commission of numerous crimes against
civilians that neither the Libyan Government nor the
international community are able to end.
The Libyan Government has expressed its
willingness to cooperate with the ICC in the case of
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, but it continues to use
the prevailing insecurity as an excuse for why it has
not done so. Everyone recognizes the seriousness of
the security situation in Libya today and the limited
means of the Government to address it. We therefore
encourage the Libyan Government to persevere in its
desire to promote justice and to cooperate with the ICC.
We also encourage it to make the effort necessary to
organize the visit of the defence counsel of Abdallah
Al-Senussi, and to provide the information requested
by the ICC regarding the case’s prosecution in Libya.
Moreover, it is regrettable that the budgetary
constraints are limiting the work of the ICC in opening
new prosecutions and in collecting evidence on other
suspects outside of Libya. We therefore reiterate our
call on the Security Council to seek a solution to the

S/PV.7306

problem of financing in the cases it refers to the Court.
The issue of detainees has not been addressed, and we
therefore urge the Government of Libya to do all it can
to either release them or to prosecute them.
We welcome the ongoing dialogue between
the Libyan Government, through the Office of the
Prosecutor, with the ICC, and urge them to strengthen
it. We also support the proposal of the ICC Prosecutor
regarding the creation of a contact group of key
countries in judicial matters in order to support the
efforts of the Libyan Government to bring justice to the
victims. That would surely help to strengthen justice in
that country, which needs it so very much.
Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): I would like
to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for presenting her
eighth report on Libya to the Security Council. We
welcome the ongoing investigation by the Office of the
Prosecutor, and its efforts aimed at implementing the
memorandum of understanding concluded last year. We
stress the importance of the Office of the Prosecutor
continuing to exercise its jurisdiction over all alleged
war crimes, crimes against humanity, or any acts of
genocide committed within the territory of Libya since
15 February 2011. We take good note of the Prosecutor’s
message that the overall environment is clearly not
conducive to closing the impunity gap. It is a worrying
development indeed.
The International Criminal Court is an important
partner for the Libyan authorities in ensuring
accountability. We recall that, in accordance with the
decision of the Appeals Chamber taken on 21 May,
Libya has an obligation to surrender Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi to the ICC. The obligation to surrender to
the Court individuals against whom arrest warrants
have been issued must be respected.
In relation to the case of Abdullah Al-Senussi,
against whom the proceedings before the ICC have been
concluded, we hope that, in spite of the deteriorating
security situation in the country, domestic proceedings
in Libya can be assured, and we will be listening
carefully to what the Court has to say on that matter.
We would welcome further regular contacts
between the Court and the Libyan authorities on
cooperation and burden-sharing. It is essential to assist
the Libyan authorities in strengthening the country’s
judicial system and capacity-building and in ensuring
the impartiality of the judiciary. Strengthening the

14-618529/17

S/PV.7306

The situation in Libya

rule of law and improving the criminal justice are core
elements of rebuilding State authority in the midst of
the current turmoil.
Lithuania remains concerned about the pervasive
human rights abuses and criminality, including
assassinations, abductions of civilians, torture and
murder, as well as attacks on civilian infrastructure.
The report presented by the Prosecutor notes that
while fewer than 7,000 detainees have been held by
the judicial police, only 10 per cent of them have been
tried. Furthermore, a significant number of detainees,
including civilians, remain in the hands of various
armed groups, outside the control or influence of
the State. As stressed by the Secretary-General this
past September, the handover of all detainees to the
effective control of the State is a prerequisite for the
establishment of the rule of law in the country.
Let me also briefly refer to the situation of the
Tawerghans. We take note of the fact that the parliament
in Tobruk discussed the return of internally displaced
persons, including Tawerghan refugees, and that a
relevant draft decree is in the making, as indicated in
the report. We underline that investigations into related
abuses must continue, and express our support for the
work of the Office of Prosecutor in that respect. We
encourage the Government of Libya to take further
measures to address the situation. Ensuring the safe
return and protection of the Tawerghans should be seen
as an important element of national reconciliation.
Lithuania believes that the Security Council should
continue to monitor the events and situations referred
to the Court, as well as the potential obstacles that
the Court may encounter in conducting its work. We
reaffirm our call for an investigation of all crimes
against humanity and serious violations of human
rights that may have been committed in Libya.
Finding democratic means to resolve past tensions
and injustices is essential for the country’s transition
and recovery. The international community should also
extend all necessary assistance to Libyan authorities
for strengthening rule of law and justice institutions
which are essential for the country to return to a path
of reconciliation and for restoring trust and cohesion of
the complex social fabric in the country.
I would like to conclude by expressing our strong
support and commitment to the International Criminal
Court and the work of the Office of the Prosecutor
and to reiterate that the United Nations has to ensure

10/17

11/11/2014

proper resources for the investigations in the situations
referred to the Court by the Security Council. Making
referrals without considering how they are financed
could jeopardize the effectiveness of the activities of
the Office of the Prosecutor and the Court’s long-term
viability.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): First of all,
my delegation would like to thank the Chief Prosecutor,
Ms. Bensouda, for her briefing. We commend her efforts
in the Libyan situation, including her effort to reach out
to the Libyan authorities for improved cooperation in
her tireless pursuit of other serious criminal allegations.
Over the past two years, the Court has achieved
a new milestone in admissibility cases. Such
achievements should be translated into reality on the
ground without further delay. We hope that Libya’s
international obligations stemming from the cases
should be discharged in a timely manner through close
cooperation with the Court. We also hope that the
International Criminal Court (ICC) continues to take
the steps necessary to ensure fair trials for the accused.
The implementation of the memorandum of
understanding on burden-sharing is another case
in point to produce fruitful outcomes through close
cooperation. Mutual efforts to that effect should be
further strengthened.
Although we have been briefed about many attempts
to make progress in the Libyan situation, our shared
goal of ending impunity in Libya remains elusive due
to, inter alia, the unstable security environment. The
worsening security situation provides fertile ground for
additional crimes to be committed by different parties.
It also prevents the ICC from conducting effective
investigations on allegations of crime and hinders the
Libyan authorities from cooperating with the Court to
the fullest possible extent. That vicious circle should
be broken.
To that end, we need to redouble our efforts
to improve the security situation in the country.
Improvement of the overall security situation and our
goal of ending impunity are closely related in Libya.
In that regard, the Security Council’s engagement with
the situation should be strengthened. In addition, we
believe that an effective follow-up of referrals by the
Council to the ICC can play a role in improving the
cooperation between the two organs in a more mutually
reinforcing way. Through such a follow-up, Libya, the
ICC and the Security Council can engage one another

14-61852

11/11/2014

The situation in Libya

more constructively and effectively to deliver justice
in the country. We will continue to work with other
Council members and the international community to
make progress to that end.
Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I thank the
Prosecutor for her briefing on Libya and for introducing
the report submitted to the Security Council pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011).
The United Kingdom is concerned about the
continued violence and political instability in Libya.
The recent Supreme Court ruling that the internationally
recognized Government is unconstitutional highlights
the significant challenges the country is facing. The
United Kingdom is examining that judgment and the
circumstances surrounding it. We are particularly
concerned about reports that a car bomb went off in
front of the security headquarters in the eastern city of
Shahat on Sunday.
It is imperative that all actors in Libya work
towards political solutions to the challenges the country
is facing. We call on all Libyans to set aside their
individual differences and support the United Nationsled efforts to mediate between key Libyan leaders, agree
to a ceasefire and reach a lasting political settlement.
That is the only route to stability and prosperity.
However, it is not just for the Libyans themselves
to work towards a solution. A stable, democratic
and prosperous Libya that contributes to stability
and security in the region is in all our interests. The
international community must support the efforts
of the United Nations. Jonathan Powell, the United
Kingdom Special Envoy to Libya, is working to support
the efforts of United Nations Special Representative
Bernardino León, and we call on all States to give their
full support to his work. The United Kingdom supports
the call of the Prosecutor for all parties involved in the
ongoing fighting to refrain from targeting civilians or
civilian objects. We urge all parties to refrain from
Rome Statute crimes or human rights violations.
In order for there to be a sustainable peace in Libya,
individuals who have committed atrocities must be held
accountable for their actions. There must no impunity
for perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against
humanity. It is also important that those who have
committed human rights abuses in the ongoing fighting
should face justice. It is vital that Libya’s future is built
upon the firm foundation that protects and promotes
human rights for all. The United Kingdom recalls the

S/PV.7306

statement in July of the Prosecutor in which she stated
that her Office is monitoring the situation in Libya and
may exercise its jurisdiction over any crime against
humanity or war crime committed there since February
2011.
The United Kingdom welcomes the continuing
dialogue between Government of Libya and the
Office of the Prosecutor and appreciates the spirit of
collaboration. We encourage the Government of Libya
to continue to work with the Prosecutor to confront
the challenges that Libya faces, including through
implementation of the memorandum of understanding
on burden-sharing regarding the investigations and
prosecutions of former Al-Qadhafi officials.
The United Kingdom thanks the Prosecutor for the
update on the cases against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi. The United Kingdom
continues to urge Libya’s full cooperation with the
Court. We recall Libya’s obligation to cooperate fully
with and provide any necessary assistance to the Court
and the Prosecutor, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
We also note the 21 May Appeals Chamber decision
confirming that the Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi case is
admissible before the International Criminal Court.
Libya remains under an obligation to surrender him to
the Court.
The United Kingdom will continue to support
efforts to bring about a sustainable peace in Libya.
An important part of those efforts must be holding
perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against humanity
to account. There must be justice for the Libyan people
who have been the victims of atrocities.
Mr. Cai Weiming (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing.
China is deeply worried at the worsening situation
in Libya. The priority for the time being is for the parties
in Libya to place the interests of their country and
people first, comply with relevant Council resolutions
and the commitments made at the Ghadames dialogue,
immediately reach a ceasefire and resolve their
differences through inclusive political dialogue so as
to restore the security and stability of their country as
soon as possible. That is the precondition for and the
foundation upon which to achieve justice in Libya.
China’s position on matters involving
International Criminal Court remains unchanged.

the

14-6185211/17

S/PV.7306

The situation in Libya

Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, for her briefing
and for the introduction of the eighth report submitted
to the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011). Jordan stresses its continued support for the
International Criminal Court (ICC) based on our
commitment to the Court’s founding principles. The
Court is a cornerstone in promoting criminal justice,
ending impunity on behalf of the perpetrators of the
most egregious crimes and in the maintenance of
international peace and security and upholding the rule
of law.
As indicated in the Prosecutor’s eighth report
to the Council, Jordan appreciates the continuing
consultations between the Libyan Government and the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC. Jordan stresses
that the Court’s success will depend on constructive
cooperation on its behalf. In that respect we call on
the Libyan Government to fully cooperate with the
Court by facilitating the logistical support necessary
in collecting evidence, coordinating investigations,
information exchange and the detention and extradition
of individuals.
Similarly, Jordan recognizes the enormous
challenges facing Libya. We highlight the importance
of its continuing efforts in establishing the rule of
law, ensuring that all perpetrators of crimes face the
international criminal justice system with a view to
upholding justice and paving the way in facilitating the
Court’s exercise of its jurisdiction. The establishment
of criminal justice is a basic prerequisite in stabilizing
Libya and guaranteeing the non-recurrence of war
crimes and crimes against humanity.
In conclusion, Jordan stresses its commitment to
respecting the unity, territorial integrity, sovereignty
and political independence of Libya. We are committed
to comprehensive dialogue, the rejection of violence and
supporting the political process. We call for providing
full support to Libya’s legitimate constitutional
institutions as well as the immediate cessation of
hostilities and all acts of violence on Libyan territory.
We call for the cooperation of all Libyans to enable the
Libyan State to restore stability and extend its authority
throughout the entire territory. Cooperation is necessary
to continue the democratic transition and strengthen
the political process based on open dialogue among
all political parties and their rejection of violence and

12/17

11/11/2014

terrorism with a view to achieving agreement on a new
constitution for the country.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, for her briefing on the activities of her
Office, herpresentation of the eighth report on the
implementation of resolution 1970 (2011) and for her
team’s work in a challenging environment in Libya.
The continuing deterioration of the political and
security situation in Libya is very concerning. We
took note of the 6 November ruling of the Supreme
Court, which declared the House of Representatives
unconstitutional. We hope that the decision will not be
mishandled and risk causing greater divide in Libya
but, rather, that it will become an opportunity to forge
a way towards a sustainable political solution to the
crisis in the country. There are important tasks ahead
and we urge all the parties involved to put aside their
political interests and engage constructively in building
an inclusive Government.
As reminded by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Rwanda also notes with
concern that all sides in Libya continue to commit the
most serious crimes since February 2011, including
indiscriminate shelling, assassinations, torture and ill
treatment of conflict-related detainees, abduction of
civilians and mass displacements of Tawerghans. We are
also alarmed by the continuing intimidation of judges
and prosecutors and assassinations of security forces,
which all affect the efficiency of the justice system,
not to mention threats to members of the media and
human rights defenders. Despite the current situation
on the ground, it is critical that the Government of
Libya play its part in ensuring that all perpetrators of
mass atrocities in the country are brought to justice and
receive a fair trial.
We understand that security challenges in Libya
hamper the work of the justice system and that of the
ICC investigation team. But we emphasize that no level
of insecurity can deprive the victims of their basic
right to justice and reparation. Accountability for war
crimes and crimes against humanity is in fact the best
guarantee for ending the cycle of violence in Libya.
Failure to quash the blooming culture of impunity will
negatively affect efforts to restore peace and security
in the country.

14-61852

11/11/2014

The situation in Libya

In that regard, the Government of Libya should
reiterate its commitment to the full implementation
of law 29/2013, on transitional justice, which requires
authorities to charge or release all detainees affiliated
with the former regime, and law 10/2013, criminalizing
torture, ill treatment and discrimination. We note that
no militia member or State official has been brought to
justice to face such charges, and we call for additional
efforts by the Libyan Government in that regard.
Our long-standing position on international
criminal justice is well known. We believe in the
importance of accountability for the most serious
crimes, under national or international jurisdiction,
based on the principle of complementarity. We stress
that national jurisdictions are ultimately better placed
to provide justice and promote reconciliation. But at the
same time, we are of the view that national sovereignty
should never serve as a pretext in the denial of justice. In
the case of Libya we note the Government’s continuing
commitment to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court and we again highlight the importance
of the complementarity clause contained in the Rome
Statute.
Nonetheless, we recognize that Libya continues to
face serious challenges in rebuilding its judicial sector.
In that context, we support the recommendation of
the Prosecutor to establish a contact group of Libya’s
partners on justice issues, through which material and
legal support could be provided regularly to enhance
Libya’s efforts to provide justice to the victims. That
technical support could come in handy, especially in
relation to the Abdullah Al-Senussi case, where the Court
upheld Libya’s request to hear the case domestically.
Lastly, Rwanda would like to emphasize that
accountability for mass atrocities is one of the building
blocks of post-conflict peacebuilding. Therefore,
the international community, which in 2011 rightly
exercised its responsibility to protect in the case of
Libya, must redouble its efforts and support the Libyan
people in restoring peace and security, as well as in
strengthening the national judicial system. Indeed, an
efficient judiciary in Libya will significantly contribute
to ending the cycle of violence in the country and
to promoting justice, reconciliation and long-term
stability.
Ms. Jones (United States of America): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her informative briefing and
for the ongoing work of her Office to help end impunity
for atrocity crimes committed in Libya.

S/PV.7306

When the Council decided, in 2011, to refer the
situation in Libya to the International Criminal Court
(ICC) (see S/PV.6491), it stressed the importance
of accountability. Even with Libya’s increasingly
complex and unstable security situation, the call for
accountability remains necessary. Like Prosecutor
Bensouda, we are alarmed by the growing number of
atrocity crimes in Libya. Those abuses and violations
are laid out not only in the Prosecutor’s report, but also
in the Secretary-General’s September report to the
Council (S/2014/653) and in a range of reports from
civil society organizations and other observers on the
ground.
The United States condemns the recent surge in
politically motivated killings, kidnappings and other
abuses, many of which appear calculated to silence and
intimidate a wide range of actors — from politicians
and journalists to human rights defenders and civil
society organizations. Assassinations, violence and the
intimidation of judges, lawyers and the judicial police
resulted in the closure of courts in Benghazi, Sirte and
Derna and in the spread of coercion throughout the
justice system.
Nevertheless, cooperation with the ICC remains
critical. We welcome Libya’s continuing coordination
with the ICC’s Prosecutor and Registry, including with
their memorandum of understanding and approach to
burden-sharing.
We encourage Libya to continue to prioritize
prosecutions that focus on those bearing the greatest
responsibility for their crimes and to explore other
accountability measures such as those envisioned in
Libya’s transitional justice law.
Libya and the Council have an interest in ensuring
that the alleged perpetrators of atrocity crimes in Libya,
including the former regime officials who are already
subjects of ICC proceedings, are held to account and
that it is carried out in a way consistent with the rights
of the defendants and Libya’s international obligations.
The United States continues to call on all parties
to accept an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire
that would allow for the political process to proceed
and to engage constructively in the United Nationsled political dialogue to resolve the ongoing crisis. We
are deeply concerned about the explosions near the
meeting between Prime Minister Al-Thinni and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bernardino
León this past Sunday, 9 November. While the

14-6185213/17

S/PV.7306

The situation in Libya

circumstances of that event are unclear, we emphasize
that the political process must continue despite the
challenging circumstances in Libya, since only a
political solution can pave the way for the country’s
democratic transition.
We support Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Leon’s continued commitment to achieving this
goal through political consensus. We urge neighbouring
countries to support the Libyan Government through
sustained and constructive engagement. We also
support the implementation of resolution 2174 (2014),
particularly its measures to address threats to Libya’s
peace and stability or security. But Libya’s ability to
navigate its many challenges and to secure justice for
the worst crimes against Libyan civilians ultimately
depends on the willingness of all parties to the conflict
to put Libya’s future above their own narrow political
and economic interests.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our thanks to
Prosecutor Bensouda and her Office for the work they
have done to advance the cause of justice for the people
of Libya.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and we
welcome the presence of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda. We also
appreciate her eighth report to the Council.
We begin our remarks recognizing the complex
political and security situations in Libya. On
6 November, the constitutional tribunal in Tripoli
declared invalid the Parliament that emerged following
the 25 June elections — and with that also the current
Government of Abdullah Al-Thinni, which we
recognize. It is essential to preserve the work and efforts
deployed for an inclusive political dialogue that favours
the strengthening of institutions, respect for the rule of
law and human rights as well as cooperation with the
Court and the Prosecutor pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011).
Those who cooperate with the international
community are strengthening their legitimacy.
Therefore, we call upon the legitimately elected
Libyan authorities to do what they can to comply with
the request to turn over Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to
the International Criminal Court. Let us recall that,
following the decision of 7 August regarding Abdullah
Al-Senussi, the Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi case is the only

14/17

11/11/2014

case of the original three before the Court that needs to
be dealt with.
We believe that we also need to strengthen the
legitimacy of the Council. Since 15 February 2011,
there have been a series of acts that are worthy of our
attention: the situation of the thousands of detainees
who are being held without any charges, the killing of
countless people in the contect of the conflict in the
country, as well as the matter of the forced displacement
of some 30,000 Tawerghans. We appreciate the followup work of the Prosecutor on the issue.
We reiterate our concern about the more than 7,000
detainees who have not been charged. Each passing day
that they remain in detention — in extremely difficult
conditions — serves to undermine their most basic
human rights. The situation cannot remain as it is.
We also condemn the politically motivated
assassinations, including the cowardice murder of
Salwa Bugaighis, who was stabbed to death in her
own home in Benghazi on the day of the parliamentary
elections last June.
We recognize the work of the Prosecutor in the
investigation of the crimes committed since February
2011. We urge her to persevere that work in order to
ensure accountability and to ensure that those guilty
of crimes, regardless of their origin, are brought before
justice, including those who carry out acts against
minority groups in Libya.
Lastly, we emphasized the importance of the
Libyan Government moving forward and sharing with
the Council and with the international community its
national strategy for facing those crimes. That would not
only allow for a reaffirmation of Libya’s commitment to
the modern judicial system, in step with international
standards, but it would also help to identify the areas or
needs to which cooperation should be allocated in the
security sector reform efforts under way in Libya.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Australia.
First and foremost, Australia wishes to thank the
Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing on the
work of her Office in relation to its ongoing efforts to
ensure accountability for serious international crimes in
Libya. I would also like to thank her for her determined
efforts on behalf of justice and the rule of law.
The Prosecutor’s biannual briefings on both Libya
and Darfur are integral to ensuring that the Council is
14-61852

11/11/2014

The situation in Libya

fully appraised of the efforts undertaken by the Court
at the request of the Council, to ensure that the Council
is in the best possible position to provide the support it
must to the Court’s ongoing efforts. As the Council’s
meeting on 4 November underscored, there is reason
to be deeply concerned by the deteriorating security
situation in Libya. There is no military solution to
the current crisis. All parties must commit to an
unconditional ceasefire and to political dialogue.
The Prosecutor’s report highlights her Office’s
concerns that Rome Statute crimes continue to be
committed. Of particular concern are the reports of
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure in
Tripoli and Benghazi, ongoing unlawful imprisonment
and mistreatment of detainees and the unresolved
situation of forcibly displaced Tawerghan civilians. It
is imperative that all parties adhere to their obligations
under international humanitarian and human rights
law. And the Council must do what it can to prevent the
commission of future Rome Statute crimes.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) also has a
role to play. We support the Office of the Prosecutor’s
ongoing efforts to monitor the situation in the
challenging security situation. As the Prosecutor has
said this morning, the present turmoil in Libya makes
the pursuit of justice very difficult. But such challenges
make the rule of law more important. Justice is integral
to public confidence in national institutions and
leaders. Justice provides a pathway to breaking cycles
of violence. And, delivered efficiently and fairly, it has
the potential to have a critical deterrent effect.
In that context, Australia urges Libya to do all
that it can to meet its obligations to cooperate with the
ICC and to ensure that it continues to investigate and
prosecute other serious international crimes committed
in Libya that fall outside the Court’s jurisdiction. We
welcome advice from the ongoing discussions between
the Office of the Prosecutor and the Libyan Government
on burden sharing. We hope the discussions will bear
fruit, and we thank the Office for its demonstrated
willingness to work with the Government of Libya in
an effort to ensure that as many cases as possible are
addressed.
In relation to the ICC’s share of the burden, we
note the Prosecutor’s advice regarding its ongoing
investigations in relation to a second case and its
collection of evidence against other possible suspects
outside of Libya. For our part, Australia will work with

S/PV.7306

other ICC States parties to ensure that the Office has
the necessary resources under the Court’s budget to
progress in those efforts. In turn, we call on relevant
States, including Libya’s neighbours, to deny safe haven
to those accused of committing serious international
crimes during the violence in 2011 and to cooperate
with the Court.
The ICC cannot deliver justice alone. We support
the Prosecutor’s call for Libya to share its strategy for
investigating and prosecuting serious international
crimes. That will demonstrate that justice remains a
key priority underpinning efforts to ensure peace and
stability in Libya. A key step in the plan must be the
surrender of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the Court,
consistent with the Appeals Chamber’s decision of
21 May and resolutions 1970 (2011) and 2174 (2014).
Libya has followed the Rome Statute in challenging the
admissibility of the case. We trust it will now follow the
Court’s decision made pursuant to the Statute.
The international community also has a role to
play. Australia notes the call made by the Prosecutor
for Libya to be provided with the necessary support to
deliver justice, including through the possible formation
of a contact group on justice issues. We are interested
in discussing what assistance can be provided to help
Libya create the conditions that will facilitate the
delivery of justice in a manner that is consistent with
international standards.
It is essential that the Council also play its part. The
Council’s role is not over once it adopts a resolution
to refer a situation to the ICC; a referral resolution is
just one step on the path to justice. As it continues to
consider the situation in Libya, the Council must not
lose sight of the importance of ending impunity and of
the role it is obliged to play in that regard.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I welcome and give the floor to the representative
of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I wish you and your delegation every
success in that endeavour. I also want to thank
Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, for her report and her statement, which was
very comprehensive. I also thank Council members for

14-6185215/17

S/PV.7306

The situation in Libya

their steadfast support to achieving justice in Libya by
integrating Libya’s international legal efforts with the
efforts of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
At the outset, I would like to recall that every
successive Libyan Government since the end of the
dictatorship in 2011 has stated repeatedly that it was
determined to ensure justice and combat impunity. That
is what the current legitimate authorities, as represented
by the elected Parliament and its Government, have
stated. There is no doubt that the current cooperation
between the office of the Libyan prosecutor and the
Office of the ICC Prosecutor is just one example of that
determination.
However, as members know, justice anywhere
depends on security. True security also depends on the
effectiveness of the authority of the State. The authority
of the State must extend to the entirety of the country’s
territory and be recognized and respected by all citizens
as an integral part of respect for the rights of all and the
rule of law.
Unfortunately, those conditions have thus far not
been met in Libya. Libya is the victim of armed terrorist
groups that are decimating the State, dismembering it
and dividing up its resources. They spread rancour,
despair and hatred among Libyans. The heads of those
groups and their henchmen, whether they are scheming
politicos or people dressed in the trappings of religion,
are driving young people to die in fratricidal wars
and to destroy their property and the property of the
State. Meanwhile, those new leaders amass funds that
they smuggle out of the country and use to purchase
property in Turkey, Morocco, Tunisia and Egypt.
Most the time, their families live outside Libya, and
their children study in foreign schools, all at Libya’s
expense. Sadly, they are just a band of criminals who
lure our young people with money to then use them for
cannon fodder and mutually accuse each other of being
responsible for their deaths. In reality, their only reason
for perpetuating the conflict is to derail constitutional
reform and bring down the institutions of the State so as
to maintain the state of anarchy that aids them in their
efforts to pillage the resources of the State.
Despite all of that, and despite the destruction,
bloodshed and the deterioration of the situation,
Libyans continue to hope that those criminal instigators
will show proof of conscience. They continue to hope
that young people will become aware of the truth of
the situation. They continue to wait for assistance from
the United Nations and from our brothers and friends
16/17

11/11/2014

to settle disputes and reach an agreement on a political
solution that respects the law and the rules of the
democratic process. At the same time, we hope that the
Libyan authorities will receive the necessary assistance
to confront terrorism.
In conclusion, I can say that we have been
committed to the path of bloodshed and civil war in
Libya, when the armed groups took Tripoli, when each
murderer became a hero and every victim a martyr.
We in Libya — and in the Council — need to work
to put an end to that path as soon as possible in order
to restore the rule of the State, save lives and preserve
property. We hope that Mr. Bernardino León, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, will be
successful in his mission with the support of everyone,
including the Council.
The circumstances I have just described have
paralysed the work of the police, the prosecutors and
the courts. Today ordinary Libyan citizens no longer
have a voice or recourse to uphold their rights or to
present any case against anyone over anything, despite
all the injustices they have been subjected to. In saying
this, I am not trying to say that the Libyan Government
is abdicating its responsibilities. I just want to recall the
difficulties that face the Government in upholding its
obligations, in particular in those parts of the country
that are outside its control.
The Libyan authorities want Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and the other accused to be subject to a just
and equitable trial. However, the security situation in
Libya has forced the competent Libyan tribunal to defer
its hearings on the case until the circumstances are more
favourable. To that end, the Parliament and provisional
Government are seeking to regain control of the State
institutions in the capital, Tripoli, and are determined
to do everything necessary to restore the rule of law
and ensure a favourable climate for a resumption of the
hearings in order to uphold the rights of the accused
and to hold trials in line with international standards.
The Libyan Government wants the ICC to
recognize the competence of the Libyan tribunals in
the case of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, as they did for the
case of Abdullah Al-Senussi. We support the ICC, but
we hope that it will show prudence when it comes to
cases concerning public officials. Simply applying the
law does not cause justice to prevail. The law must be
applied in a measured manner, with full knowledge of
the political situation and security status of the country
concerned. We also need to keep in mind the impact
14-61852

11/11/2014

The situation in Libya

of the judgements handed down by the Court on the
credibility of the Court and of its judges, in particular
when such judgements undermine the sovereignty of a
State or represent a provocation against the people of
a country. There is therefore a need to avoid insisting
that representatives of a State appear before the Court,
except in cases where there is a lack of an effective or
reformable national legal framework.
The parliament and the provisional Government of
Libya are determined to meet their legal and judiciary
commitments in order to restore security and stability
in the country, combat impunity, render justice for the
crimes committed and try all of those who are believed
to have committed crimes, destroyed private property or
violated human rights in Libya since 15 February 2011,
this regardless of the identity of either the perpetrators
or the victims. The parliament and the provisional
Government are determined to provide reparations to
the victims, achieve national reconciliation, guarantee

S/PV.7306

the return of internally displaced persons to their
homes, and guarantee the participation of all in political
life, without any discrimination or marginalization.
To conclude, I wish to state that the Libyan
authorities hope for greater cooperation among Member
States so as to help them to find the perpetrators of the
crimes committed in Libya in order to hand them over to
the Libyan judicial authorities and to locate individuals
whose assets were frozen by the relevant Security
Council resolutions. The Libyan authorities also hope
that measures will be taken at the international level, in
line with resolution 2174 (2014), against all those who
are undermining State institutions and impeding the
democratic process in Libya.
The President: The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

14-6185217/17
