THIRTY-THIRD

NEW

YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2056)

Opening statement
Adoption

by the President

of the agenda

. (. . . . . , , , , , . , . . , . . . . . . , ,. . . . ,
. . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . .

. , . . , .. . . . ,

. . . . , , . . . . . . . . +. . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . .

4

The question of South Africa:
(a) Letter dated 25 January 1978 from the Permanent Representatives of Gabon,
Mauritius and Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the

Security Council (S/12538);

fb) Note by the Secretary-General

(S/12536)

. , . . . . . . . . . . .. . . , . . . . . . ,

4

SjPV.2056

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornhirrrd wirfk
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quartcrll;
Supplements of the Official Records of the S’ecuriQ Comcil. The date of the drrcunxnt
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with ;I s);stcrt~
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcsohtiwts mtcf flwisicttrs rf fh*
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroacfivcly to rmfulions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date,

2056th

MEETING

Neld in New York on Thursday,
President; Mr. J. N. GARBA (Nigeria).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2056)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
(a) Letter dated 2.5 January 1978 from the Permanent
Representatives of Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/ 12538);
(b) Note by the Secretary-General (S/12536)
The nzeeting was called to order at 3.45 p. m.

26 January

1978, at 3 p.m.

4. Now I should like to seek the indulgence of the Council
in permitting me to make some remarks in my inaugural
statement as representative of NIGERIA.
5. We joined the Council because we believed that our
modest contributions
would further boost international
action for a constructive and realistic solution of the
problems facing mankind in southern Africa. Nigeria and
Africa are very much concerned that the Security Council,
which has special responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, should take effective
action this year, since to postpone effective steps would be
tantamount to missing the last train to peace and stability
in the region.
6. I am confident that, as the Council sets about its
programme of work in the new year, members will continue
to bear in mind during the deliberations in this august body
the supreme necessity of placing in clear perspective at all
times the moral principles of natural justice, equality,
freedom and human dignity which constituted the motivating spirit behind the founding of this noble Qrganization in
the hope of bringing and guaranteeing international peace
and security to a world that had barely survived a colossal
genocidal conflict.

Opening statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT: Nigeria began its term of office as a
member of the Security Council at the beginning of 1978.
At the same time, it assumed the presidency of this
important organ of the United Nations. Thus both an
honour and a responsibility have been placed on our
shoulders-a responsibility which we accept with the
promise to carry it out with dedication.
2. In presiding over this first meeting of the Council in
1978, I am happy to welcome the other new members:
Bolivia, Czechoslovakia, Gabon and Kuwait. I am sure that
I express the feeling of all the members of the Council
when I pay tribute to the representatives of the five
outgoing members, Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Pakistan, Panama and Romania, for the contributions they
made during their term of membership to the Council’s
efforts to maintain international peace and achieve international justice.
3. On behalf of the members, I wish to express the
Council’s deep appreciation to the Minister for External
Affairs of Mauritius, Sir Harold Walter, and the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius, Mr. Ramphul, for having very
admirably guided the work of the Council during the
month of December 1977.

7. I feel compelled to draw attention to the spirit of the
San Francisco Conference in the hope that, even at this
eleventh hour, members of the Council-in particular the
Western Powers which, undoubtedly, have political leverage
in regard to the unfolding events in southern Africa-will
fulfil their obligation to the international community, an
obligation that comes pari passu with the privileged
position they have consistently enjoyed in this body, by
arresting the current dgngerous slide into a racial war in the
region.
8. Please permit me to dilate briefly on some of the events
in the region in the past few weeks which continue to
reinforce our fears that the racist minority r6gime at.
Salisbury and its fanatical mentors at Pretoria are in no
mood to listen to the voice of reason in their weird pursuit
of their inhuman policies of naked brutality and wanton
oppression against the majority African population or their
criminal armed incursions into neighbouring sovereign
independent African States-justified
again and again by the
obnoxious doctrine of “hot pursuit”.
9. Members of the Council will recall that on 23 November, the very day that Anthony Parker, Secretary of the
Rhodesian Ministry of Combined Operations, said that
Rhodesian army atrocities were being investigated, that

same army was carrying out its biggest operation yet,
which left 1,200 persons, mostly women and children, dead
in refugee camps in Mozambique. The raids, only announced six days later, involved rebel Mirage fighterbombers supplied from Western arsenals, helicopter-borne
troops and infantry which entered Mozambique via routes
prepared weeks before by Rhodesian commandos.
10. We in Nigeria have always believed in the peaceful
resolution of conflicts, and it is on that basis and acting in
good faith that we considered the Anglo-American pro
posals on Rhodesia as a basis for negotiation in spite of
some of their glaring inadequacies, At all times, during most
meetings here at the United Nations and in private
consultations
with the parties sponsoring a negotiated
settlement, we have inquired about how Smith would be
removed. Our inquiries were not answered or, at best,
merely provoked ambiguous responses. Our fears were
confirmed when the Anglo-American initiative suddenly
lost steam with Smith’s announcement that he was seeking
“possibly better ways” of ensuring white confidence.
11. The most logical deduction regarding the shameless
drama emanating from Salisbury is that the acts of military
aggression against Mozambique, which for some months
now have been routine, were calculated to cripple the
capacity of the liberation forces to resist an internal
settlement. The stalling of the Anglo-American initiative
cannot but be seen as a tactical move to permit Smith to
try his hand at, a so-called internal settlement, so that the
international community and the Security Council are
faced with a fait accompli as it were.
12. Yesterday’s reported announcement to the effect that
the rebet leader might declare that a settlement had been
reach.ed with some African leaders inside Rhodesia-at a
time when Ambassador Andrew Young and British Foreign
Secretary David Owen were slated to meet Patriotic Front
leaders Joshua Nkomo and Robert Mugabe in Malta on the
modalities for a cease-fire in the war in Rhodesia-was
hardly an accident. The Malta conference has been used
throughout this month to block action here in the Security
Council. The strategy is indeed easy to comprehend.
Western objectives in Rhodesia, as in the whole of southern
Africa, have never changed. What has emerged is a switch in
the strategy designed to achieve the same objectives and
preserve the same interests,
13. I should, however, like to sound a note of warning
here: no settlement which is inconsistent with the genuine
aspirations of the people of Zimbabwe has the siightest
chance of taking root, The Security Council must rise above
sectional interests and act fast and firmly if Rhodesia is to
be prevented from sliding further down the precipice into a
bloody racial war which will only further inten@
the
hardships and sufferings of the people. I sincerely hope that
those who aided and abetted Smith in his flagrant defiance
of the international community will now pause and reflect
on their past deeds and stop just short of the final
which can only spread disaster and ruin
catastrophe,
throughout the Territory.
14. The pattern in Namibia is in no way different. All
sorts of red herrings have been raised by the racist regime al:

Pretoria to block progress in the current negotiations being
undertaken by five members of the Council. The style of
negotiation and the strategy adopted by the racists have
consistently been geared towards maintaining their illegal
stranglehold over the Territory, in defiance of the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council.
The South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO),
which is recognized by both the Organization of African
Unity and the United Nations as representing the authentic
voice of the Namibian people, has merely demanded the
implementation of Council resolution 385 (1976). Eut
South Africa has been hedging about its implementation
just as it has arrogantly refused to implement other
resolutions of the United Nations.
15. The racists pretended to terminate the notorious
proceedings in the Turnhalle conference which would have
saddled Namibians with an unworkable constitution, effectively polarizing political control along ethnic lines. Such a
constitution, which meant that Parliament could act only
by ethnic consensus, is reminiscent of the liberum veto-the
so-called rule of unanimity that crippled the Polish Government in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. It would
have been extremely hard, if not impossible, for Namibia to
act as one nation. The country would really have been a
tribal confederation, without the slightest chance of changing the property and other laws that assure white-minority
domination.
16. Now the Pretoria rCgime plans to achieve the same
objectives ostensibly abandoned at the Tumhalle by resuscitating them and bringing them in through the back door in
a so-called internal K-‘.=”.ion. To sell this glamorous deception to the international community, the racists have
promised free elections for a new Namibian Government
and agreed to permit United Nations observers. But the
cardinal provisions of resolution 385 (1976), including the
withdrawal of the racist military and paramilitary forces to
create the right political climate for free and fair elections,
are yet to be implemented, Undoubtedly, the Pretoria
regime is hoping, through its policy of recalcitrance and
brazen refusal to fulfi proper conditions for a peaceful
poll, to exclude both SWAP0 and the United Nations from
the election.
17. In such an event, the international community will be
confronted by an election premised on an ethnic constitution that SWAP0 rejects, one involving no political
figures with a real national base. Even now, SWAP0 has
genuine apprehensions as to the reliability of South Africa’s
promise to grant political freedom. Only last December, all
the party leaders were suddenly arrested and SWAP0
meetings were broken up by racist hirelings and thugs. A
year ago, Mr. Vorster sold a dummy to the international
community by pretending that he had decided to get rid of
Namibia in order to ease international pressure against
South Africa. NOW it has become clear that he is determined to defy the whole world on this issue, as on his
policies of racism and repression. If we wish to look for
examples of such arrant defiance, we do not have to look
far, for just before the opening of last year’s session-the
thirty-second
session-of
the General Assembly Vorster
served notice of his evil intent and shook his fist at the

entire world by annexing Walvis Bay, in flagrant violation
of every known norm of legality and moral rectitude.
18. Members of the Council should therefore act from the
standpoint that the racist regime at Pretoria will strive to its
utmost to ensure that a state of affairs will continue to
exist in Namibia, CVCII in the post-independence period,
which will enshrine the perpetuation of the ruthless
exploitation of Namibia’s rich exhaustible mineral resources
for the benefit of the racists and their economic collaborntors and to the detriment of the majority African population, to which these resources belong by birthright.
19. In South Africa itself, the racist regime, intoxicated, as
it were, by its recent hollow electoral victory based on an
all-white franchise sce~nsdetermined to utilise every and
all means at its disposal to maintain the obnoxious
aparrlrcid system. 1 need not recall the ugly rhetoric used
and the inflammatory statements made by Vorster and
members of his ruling Nationalist Party during last year’s
election campaign. Some sections of the international press
had tried, prior to the elections, to hoodwink us by
suggesting that Vorster’s strategy for the clcctions, including his call on the whites to reject the policy of interfcrencc
in South AFrica’s internal affairs by giving him a resounding
victory, was designed to strengthen his hand to enable him
to institute much-needed reforms in the apartheid system,
20. If there were any lingering doubts as to the real
intentions of the racists, they were instantly dispelled in a
blare of renewed acts of repression, bannings, indiscriminate dctcntions, kangaroo trials, numberless cases of torture hangings and the quiet elimination of the white
opponents of upmth’d, like Mr. Richard Turner, a 36-ycarold political science professor at Natal University.

statement, the magistrate delivered his verdict in three
minutes after an inquest that had spread over 1.5 days of
hearings. Since that ignoble act, 48 other defenceless
African patriots have been murdered in cold blood by
Vorster’s Security Police What the Biko verdict--as well as
many other cases-proves is that the criminal poIitica1 order
in South Africa will not commit suicide by voluntarily
incriminating itself in respect of the African population,
which is the very cause of the country’s state of siege.
23. The racist regime, in flagrant violation of resolutions
of the General Assembly, has persisted in the balkanization
of South Africa, as is evident in the granting of so-called
independence on 6 December 1977 to the bantustan of
Bophuthatswana. Members of the Council arc undoubtedly
aware that the establishment of the bantustans is part of a11
articulately devised scheme-indeed, another diabolical
t&ct of the apart/m2 system designed to perpetuate white
domination in the 87 per cent of the country which is
responsible for 97 per cent of the gross domestic product.
This nefarious plan relegates the Africans to 13 per cent of
the land, divided into uneconomic and disjointed reserves.
It is meant to segregate Africans into “buffer states” and
use them as “cannon fodder” as the wave of freedom
rumbles along from the Limpopo to the Cape.
24. The world’s response, rcflccted in Security Council
resolutions 417 (1977) and 418 (1977)-the former condemning South Africa’s acts of repression and the latter
imposing an arms embargo 011the racists--seems to have
been counterproductive since the over-all effect has been to
make the racists intensify their policies of repression and
rcorganize the domestic industries towards the attainment
of self-sufficiency in the production of armaments.

21. The sl~am inclucst into Stcvc Biko’s death is one case
in point which has finally convinced the racists’ most
ardent supporters that the country is now truly run on evil
lines. The suppression and distortion of evidence which
chaructcrized the entire proceedings were executed with
undisguised abandon and gross insensitivity to a possible
moral pronouncement by the international community. JJI
spite of the plea of the counsel for the Fiko family,
Mr. Sidney Kentridge, to the cffcct that a verdict which
absolved Vorstcr’s terrorist security force of any complicity
or even negligence in Biko’s death would be tantamount to
a licence to abuse or maim hapless and defencelesspersons
with impunity, and even against the weight of the overwhelming cvidcnce painst~akingly catalogued against Biko’s
heartless gaolers, the verdict of the magistrate was that no
one was to bla~ne for Bike’s death. And, as if to make tllc
verdict even more painful to the Biko family and the
generality of the African population, Biko’s brother Khaya
and his cousin Solomon were arrested without any visible
charges and unceremoniously hauled away to the Same
dctcntion camp where Biko had met his untimely death.

2.5. Now the question is: what steps can the Security
Council take? That is a question which has been raised in
the Council time and again in respect of the excessesof the
South African Government in past years. We have now gone
beyond the stage of merely expressing our grave concern
over such wanton destruction of human lives, which has
since become routine in South Africa against the majority
African population in that unhappy country. The situation
now obtaining in the territory is even worse than the
situation last November, when the Council took the first
bclatcd step under Chapter VI1 of the Charter against the
uparthek~ r6gime. Everyone agreesthat the racists will need
credits, bank loans and fresh invcstmcnts in order to gear
domestic military industries into the realm of sclf-sufficiency. South Africa’s Wcstcrn backers can act in token of
their good faith by taking immediate measures calculated to
block such a fresh infusion of capital, which cannot but
frustrate and render ineffcctivc the noble objectives of the
Council in adopting resolution 418 (1977). That is not all.
My delegation believes that unconscionable regimes like the
ones at both Salisbury and Pretoria have become sacred
cowswhich cannot bc touched.

22. Those of us watching the South African drama like
one endless nightmare were hardly taken aback by the
verdict. The magistrate is a civil servant who is ultimately
responsible to James Kruger, the racist Minister of Justice,
who earlier had told a shocked world that Biko’s death in
prison had left him cold. Taking a cue from that callous

26. Western interests can still be preserved if the West
terminates its links with the illegal regime at Salisbury and
canner firmly to the side of natural justice, equality and
freedom in its dealings with South Africa in conformity
with Western ideals which have been espoused with
manifest consistency for generations. It is also within the

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
to the request.

powers of the Western members of the Council to compel
South Africa to implement resolution 385 (1976) in respect
of Namibia, if for no reason other than to reinforce the
Council’s credibility and strengthen black Africa’s faith in
the Council as mankind’s veritable guarantee of international peace and security.

A was so decided.
30. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have also received a letter dated 26 January
from, the representatives of Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria
which reads as follows:

27. The year 1978 is a crucial one which poses the Council
its greatest challenge to date. Nigeria and the rest of Africa
look to it for support in staving off a fratricidal and racial
war in both Rhodesia and Namibia that would only bring
disaster and tragedy to all people in the region. Internal
solutions designed to protect certain group interests but
forged in flagrant disregard of the genuine aspirations of all
peoples of the area to genuine independence are doomed to
fail. Far from being faced by a fait accompli, as the
protagonists expect and hope, the Council may well be
toying with a latent bomb which, on explosion, is likely to
cause untold havoc in the entire area. The Council has an
abiding responsibility to preserve international peace and
security. ! hope it will live Up to international expectations
and Africa’s legitimate aspirations concerning issues of
common interest to us all, My delegation hopes that
members will be forthcoming with progressive ideas that
can effectively halt the dangerous slide into a racial
confrontation in the entire southern African region, with a
view to strengthening mankind’s confidence in the Council’s ability to fulfil the purposes and objectives enshrined
in the Charter.

“We, the undersigned members of the Security Council,
have the honour to request that, during its meetings
devoted to consideration of ‘The question of South
Africa’, the Council extend invitations under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. M. J. Makatini of
the African National Congress and Mr, David M. Sibeko,
observer-representative of the Pan Africanist Congress of
Azania.”
This letter will be issued as document S/12543. If I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to the
request and; at the appropriate time, I shall invite
Mr. Makatini and Mr. Sibeko to make their statements.
It was so decided.
3 1. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council is meeting
today in response to the request made on behalf of the
African Group in a letter dated 25 January from the
representatives of Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria (S/12538].
Members of the Council also have before them document
S/12536, which contains the text of a letter dated 19
January from the Chairman of the Special Committee
Against Apartheid to the Secretary-General.

28. In conclusion, I should like to place on record
Nigeria’s profound appreciation of the efforts of the
Secretary-General, who, during his recent travels, has been
able to inject fresh momentum into the cause of the
relaxation of tension in the world. I hope members of the
Council will co-operate in strengthening his efforts, since
we cannot really claim to establish and guarantee international peace and security so long as regional conflicts
continue to deteriorate and raise the spectre of big-Power
confrontation.

32. The first speaker is Mr. Donald Woods, to whom the
Council has extended an invitation under rule 39. I
welcome him and invite him to take a place at the Council
table to make his statement.
33. Mr. WOODS: I think it may be of interest to you,
Mr. President, and to the other members of the Security
Council to know that, although since 19 October all
newspapers and radio and television in my country have
been forbidden to quote any words 1 may utter or write, I
understand that today special permission has been given
them by the Pretoria Government to quote what I am
about to say here. No doubt the intention behind the
decision is to convey to the white people of South Africa
what a traitor I am to the white race in South Africa. But,
regardless of this motive, I personally welcome the chance
for the people of South Africa, including the whites, to
know what I am going to say in this forum.

Adoption of the agenda
i%e agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
(al Letter dated 25 January 1978 from the Permanent
Representatives of Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12.538);
(bj Note by the Secretary-General (S/12536)
29. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/12539, which contains the text of
a letter dated 25 January from the representatives of
Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria which reads as follows:

34. I speak in several capacities. First, I speak to the
Council as an African, as a descendant of several generations of Africans, and as one who by commitment as well as
by birth is proud to bc a son of Africa.

“We, the undersigned members of the Security Council,
have the honour to request that, during its meetings
devoted to consideration of ‘The question of South
Africa’, the Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Donald Woods,
former Editor of the South African East London Daily
Dispatch. ”

35. When I, as a white African, had to flee with my family
from our country in order to continue my own fight against
apartheid, the helpers who guided me across the border to
freedom were black; the hands that reached out in welcome
to Legotho, to Botswana and to Zambia were black; black
4

leaders of black-ruled States detailed black security guards
to protect my white-skinned children. And, on our last
night in Africa, I and my wife and children were privileged
to dine at the table of one of the great men of our
continent, President Kenneth Kaunda. And now has come
the greatest honour to which a private citizen of that
continent could aspire-the privilege of being invited to
address the Security Council under sponsorship of the most
influential African States represented in this world forum.
That is why I am especially proud to speak to the Council
today as an African.

everywhere give way to despair for the future of the human
race.
41. But that is unthinkable, and so we have to take up the
challenge that confronts all of us as citizens of the world
and as members of the family of man-to call out to alI men
of all nations to reach out to each other in a new response
to those higher impulses which all too often are driven out
of human consciousness by the material preoccupations of
daily life.
42. This challenge implies both an attitude and an
implementation of that attitude in practical terms. This
means that not only must the goal of human brotherhood
be held up at all times to all men, but that their chosen
leaders should constantly keep before them practical
programmes to be examined, debated and acted upon for
the increasing implementation of that goal.

36. But I speak also in another capacity-as one of the
many millions all over our globe who are separated from
our territorial birthright. We answer to many names. We are
called refugees; we are called exiles; we are called displaced
persons. Driven from our homes by hatred and made
travellers by tyranny, we wander beyond our boundaries in
search of brotherhood and justice. It is a measure of the
progress mankind has made that most of us find that
brotherhood. And it is a measure of the progress mankind
still has to make, that we cannot abandon that search for
justice.

43. It is my belief that the vast majority of the people of
the world are ready to follow such a lead if only the issues
and the facts can constantly be made available to them and
the decision-sharing processes opened up to them and that
the strongest power which mankind can harness to achieve
this goal of human brotherhood is the power of moral
force.

37. The truth that flows from these conclusions points to
the third capacity in which I speak to the Council-as a
member of the family of mankind. Much is made of the
baser characteristics of human nature-the selfishness, the
cynicism, the treachery and the cruelty of which we human
beings are all capable. But I have seen throughout my life
such an abundance of the higher qualities of which human
beings are capable that I must pay a tribute here, before the
cabinet council of mankind, to the heights which I have
seen the human spirit reach. In my own country, I have
witnessed acts of self-sacrifice, of valour and nobility whose
recounting would move the hearts of men of all nations.
They were heights of response to situational challenge, and
that response is within all men everywhere.

44. But before any call for the effective use of moral force
can succeed, there must first be a refutation of the
argument of those who dismiss the power of moral force as
ineffective in the realm of international affairs. Such a
refutation is not difficult. Indeed, this contention is refuted
by history itself. And for the prime example which history
affords of the effective use of moral force, we have to
thank a great man of Africa, and indeed of South Africa.
This man, one of the greatest men in history, was a product
of his South African background and experience. I refer to
the incomparable Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi.

38. Nobility of human spirit is not the preserve of any one
nation, and because it is the ultimate expression of human
love, and because human love is most ordinarily manifested
in the disposition of most people everywhere to ordinary
friendliness-a disposition which I have noted in every one
of the 33 countries of the world that I have been privileged
to visit at various times during the past two decades-I am
persuaded that the brotherhood of man is no unattainable
myth but a practical reality that is achievable if we, the
citizens of the world, will but pursue it with all the zeal of
which we are capable.

45. When this Natal lawyer left South Africa in his middle
age to become the father of modern India and a hero of the
whole human race, he took with him and was able to
unleash the awesome political power he had evolved
through his clashes with that other South African genius,
Jan Smuts, who played a leading role in the formation of
the United Nations Organization. That political power was
passive resistance. Without ordering the firing of a single
bullet, without commandirlg a single soldier, Mahatma
Gandhi freed hundreds of millions of people from colonial
rule. That is moral force. That is the prime example of the
massive use of a united ideal to generate moral force.

39. Our technology today has broken the barriers of
human credulity which stood firm only a generation ago.
To give only one example, how many of our grandfathers
would have declined to dismiss space travel as an unattainable myth? Yet to our children the concept no longer
remains even in the realm of the bizarre.

46. I want now to suggest the generation of such amoral
force in pursuit of a goal long set for itself by the
Organization-the liberation of the people of my country
from the policy of statutorily-entrenched racismknown as
apartheid. In doing so, I want to plead for a new approach
towards apartheid in the United Nations, and for a new
understanding of the complex difficulties which all my
countrymen face in regard to this issue.I want to plead
here the case for South Africa, and by that statement I
mcan that I want to present here the real casefor the real
South Africa.

40. Can we seriously doubt that the achievements of our
technology are massively exceedable by the limitless
capacity of the human spirit to soar far beyond these
merely physical goals? We cannot yield to such doubts. We
cannot surrender to such cynicism. If we do, then let the
United Nations Organization be disbanded and let all men
5

47. The real South Africa is the entire nation Of 25
million and he victims of apartheid are all 25 r&on
Of
them. ‘And although the yoke of apartheid bears down
hardest upon my black countrymen in Ways now known
and condemned aI over the world, I am also concerned for
my white countrymen whose psychological enslavement to
the policy
today threatens so tragically to unleash uPon
them tomorrow the violent consequences of such enslav@
ment.
48. It has to be acknowledged that race prejudice exists in
many parts of the world, but the unique affront which
ap&leid
represents to all mankind is the fact that it is only
h South Africa that racism is institutionalized through
actual statute law.
49. I do not have to detail here the evils of apartheid.
Those evils are well enough known and UniVerSdlY COI+
demned. But I do have something new to say about
apartheid, and that is that the whole issue has now assumed
a deadly urgency not only for the people of South Africa
but also for wider international relationships.
50. The Organization has already agreed on the principle
that apartheid is a threat to international relationships, and
therefore to world peace, but I am more concerned now
with its disastrous effects within my country. My concern is
for the preservhtion of peace to the fullest extent possible
within South Africa itself and for the saving of as many
lives as possible within South Africa itself, of young blacks
and young whites alike, becausethey all can be and one day
must be brothers of the same nationhood.
51. I therefore ask that United Nations action against
upurfheid should be positive, constructive and non-violent. I
also ask that it should be practical and effective. And when
I plead for a new approach to this end, what I am pleading
for is a new synthesis of response from the factions this
issue has created in the past.
52. What is needed now is a realistic unity of purpose
among alI nations on this issue, with a view to the adoption
of a moderate but effective cotirse of action which alone
can save the youth of South Africa from the horrors of a
racial civil war. And the adoption of that course of action
depends now on the nations of the West.
53. For many years, and for a variety of reasons, the
Western Powers have resisted the implementation of effec.
tive Punitive measures against the Government of South
b&a. But the time has now come for the West to reassess
its past attitudes.
54. Effective punitive measures need not and should not
be extreme, but they have to be sufficiently severe to bring
the Pretoria r&me to its senses, or certain tragedy wgl
overtake the people of South Africa.
55. This implies the urgent reconsideration of the institution of economic sanctions, and those who oppose
tllis on
the grounds of attendant economic hardship to blacks
should take note of the fact that the most authentic black
Vokesmen in South Africa have consistently stated that
they would Prefer such hardship to a continuation of a

they

policy

facet

“f

regnrd

their

as it ~lqytiorl

lives.

This

]liIs

01’thir

~CCII

in eVcl>
C~~rltir~~l~ll~!
illll!

Ili~rI~~Init~

Sliltt!Kl

consistently hy leaders goillg back to Ncls~n ht;Illdcla arid
includirlg the late Steve Bike.
56.

~~

to

avoid

failing
the

own

belief

a firmer
iIl their

moral

world

in

t]lird

is tllat,

if’ th!

comIylitIllCIlt
duty
its

\bJCStl!FIi
011

to ~l;~sp

re:lcjlirlg

thiS
tile

OlJt

StCttlfS
kSUc.

roll’)*

uufStrctch2d
for

c(~IltiIltlC
Wil

hC

1tilIld

01

rLX~$!Ilitii~ll

111’ thC

and will :IIstr 1111
I’;lilirtg
obligations of n comIllorl
hIIll~~I~~~~,
tile peol,Ie of my coutltry -white anti bl;tck irr their llclur
of mortal danger.
57.

‘j’]le

family

cllauvinisms
seen
could

to

of

l]efiIlod
llave
flourisll

less

m;lIl

is gr<1willg ClCjsCr iiIld

by Il;~tioIlnl
sigIlificaIlW.
is&ItioIl

huurlthrics
The

rnylh

a’1’
th;tl

ttlC

Ldd

iIlcrwsiIl~iy
srly

ccwfltrj

is irlcrcasin~~y
CX~~~SC’~
;IS iI
fallacy, Indeed, it is surprisingtIIiI1 it haspcrsi!Xt!tl 50 Ic~I&!,
because
history 118s
SK)
often rn:ftk n~rnsCn,K,
of’ thC itlC;rth;lt
frontier postswerethe natural irihcritancc l)I’ miirrkinrl.
iIl

58.
The
old
belief that C;IC~ tribc”s
lIiclll\w!hip
WiIS
defined forever by ;tccitkrttS Of birth llIld ~Lftl~:I’;l~~~I~~ ililti
that eachracehasa permanentlyordainud turritttr), is now
rightly consignedto the realmof ithsurdity. In hist\lr)s it 1~1s
long beenan absurdity highlightedhy the hi& incidc‘nccof
intensenationalismsarticulatctl hy foreign-hrVn ICiIllCl’Sin
the lands of their adoption. Nopt&W was Hot IIorri in
France;Stalin was not born in Russia;do Valer;t w;1snot
born in Ireland; Hitler wasnot born in German>-;V’c‘rw~Icrd
wasnot born in South Africa. ‘I’otl;ty thcrc isINI ltrrlgcr blk
of white Africans being L’Europeans*‘.
.Ad
jrlst
;IS tcldily
there are white Africans, SO thcrc arc today hhck
bhghtlmenandblack Americansrccognizedand itlcntilicd niorc LIS
membersof thosenationsthan ;ISrncrnhcrs
of’ iI rm.

59, As mankinclprogresses,
so the Family of III;I~I thws
closertogether. And just asa mcmher of any fl~ily nlight
have to be chastisedfor his owrl good and in coristxlmrux
be drawn closerinto the body of the flunily. so twhy
I
believe that the rulers of my country lrovc to fxc
the
concertedchastisementof the united family ol‘ 1t1;uiifGcy
are to be brought peacefully introits hrtrthcrht)~ld. Wtrcther
this can be done in time to prevent larl:c-scalcwiolcncc in
South Africa now depends,IISI havesaid, on the West. Can
the nationsof the Westdeclinethe appealit’ t11c rest of’ tlrc
world community?
60. To the Americans I Say this: C’nn t11c hxl
wllicll
producedAbraham Lincoln and Martin Luther King, and
which fought a bitter civil war solong ;lgrt over the issue01
humanenslavement,seriouslyconsitlcr tftat its conirriitmcnt
to the central
idea upm
which the (~~lnstitution 0t’ thcsc
United
States
was founded,
IIBIIIL’I~,
human litxrty, 11t~t
now be confined and go no further than Ltifr(\lIi sea to
shiningsea”?
61. TO the Frwh I WY this: You wcrc ;lle first n;ltion in
histo~ to dedicateyourselvesto the precept tll:it the few
maYnot arrogateto themsclvcsthe right ttr rule the ml\ny
Ongroundsrelated solely to heredity. YUUwere the first to
articulate the constitutional concept of liberty, ~CI[lality
and fraternity. It would be unworthy of I::rancoto be the
last to he uP to this concept in the counci[sc)ftllp world.

62. To the Germans I say this: No nation in history has
more effectively illustrated the human capacity to rise so
swiftly from the depths of destruction and universal
condemnation to the heights of achievement and universal
acclamation to a point where mankind no longer identifies
your people with the sins of a dead dictator but identifies
you once again with the land that produced Bach, Goethe,
Beethoven, Schiller and most of the cultural giants who
personified the heights to which the human spirit can
aspire. You, the producers and heirs of such men, have a
special obligation to take an uncompromising stand against
regimes obsessed with race. Your past experience indicates
it and your present standing demands it.

this. Many others, mostly leading officials of the Black
People’s Convention, such as that organization’s president,
Hlaku Rachidi, were also detained on 19 October, and on
the same day several other friends of mine were bannedthe Reverend Beyers Naude, the Reverend Theo Kotze,
Cedric Mayson, Brian Brown, Peter Randall and the
Reverend David Russell, all of whom worked for racial
reconciliation and national peace. Other friends of mine
detained to this day are: Malusi Mpumlwana, Noble
Mohapi, Thami Zani and Mxolisi Mvovo. These actions by
the Pretoria regime illustrate clearly that it will no longer
tolerate even the slight margin of effective criticism that
was publicly allowed before 19 October.

63. To the Canadians I say this: The black people of
South Africa are grateful to you for taking the lead in
commencing the process of dissociation from their rulers.
This action by you has had a valuable effect on black
morale in my country, and the growing hope there is that
your example will be followed by others whose present
involvement is more extensive.

68. Some degree of criticism is still allowed in the press,
but only if it is ineffective and does not constitute a
significant embarrassment to the regime.
69. As to the implementation of apartheid, this will
clearly intensify with the further imposition of the policy
of bantustanization, whereby the regime seeks to drive
territorial wedges of division between the tribal groups
among the blacks-a policy which would be comprehensively rejected by most blacks in South Africa if they were
ever given a chance to signify this by vote following an
open canvassing of the issue.

64. To the British I say this: You have evolved the most
civilized society I have encountered; you have contributed
more to human freedom than any other nation with an
imperial past and you have enacted more reforms within
your society at less cost in human blood than any other
ancient State. But the achievement for which you will be
best remembered is that you once stood alone and turned
back the onslaught of a more powerful foe whose success,
had you wavered, could have led to the enslavement of
most of mankind. Do not stand alone now against those
who wish to end the enslavement of others.

70. The commitment given to the Organization in October
1974 [180Oth meeting/ by South African spokesman
Roelof Botha that South Africa would move away from
discrimination based on race was a piece of public deceit.
He was playing with words, because what he had in mind
was the “homelands” policy of bantustanization which
aims at creating the fiction that the various tribal groups of
South Africa would each be accorded so-called nationhood
so that apartheid discrimination would be based on
so-called nations rather than races.

65. I should like to follow these appeals to the Western
Powers with a challenge to the ideals of Western society.
That challenge is this: Never again condemn the Vorster
Government if the basis of your reluctance to bring any
particular pressure against it is your own self-interest, for
that is Vorster’s basis as well. But, as an admirer of the
Western ideals of democratic liberty, I expect that, in the
light of recent events in South Africa, there must now be an
end to Western hesitancy on the score of positive response.

71. This semantic formula envisages a day when all South
Africa’s blacks, being regarded as citizens of “foreign”
bantustans, would have no claim to equal civil rights in
so-called white South Africa, enabling Ambassador Botha
to proclaim before the General Assembly that there was no
longer any discrimination against his black fellow-citizens
because he no longer had black fellow-citizens.

66. During the past few months, the actions of the South
African authorities have removed all doubt as to the
direction in which they are heading. In killing Steve Biko,
whose personal friend I had the honour to be, the regime
became responsible for the death of the forty-fifth black
victim of the security laws authorizing imprisonment
without trial, charge or even accusation. And shortly after
this outrage-an outrage made all the more outrageous by
the fact that Steve Biko was the most important political
leader among our people-the regime acted to repress the
final remaining area of effective criticism of u~artheid-the
press.

72. In contrast to Mr, Botha’s public pronouncements
here, I can tell you that in his speeches at home during the
recent all-white election, in which barely 10 per cent of our
people chose the entire nation’s Government, this same
Mr. Botha uttered some of the most extreme defiances of
the very world opinion he was courting so fervently here
with his dramatic declaration in 1974.
73. I was among those guilty of being taken in by his
words at that time. I was among those who welcomed his
speech and applauded Premier Vorster’s statement of “give
us six months” and wrote then that these were welcome
statements which deserved to be taken at face value and
that, therefore, Mr. Vorster’s Government should be given a
chance to implement these undertakings. Today, however,
we know that it was a vain hope based on distorted
meanings being given to ordinary words.

67. Another valued friend of mine, Percy Qoboza, editor
of The World newspaper, was detained without trial and is
in detention as I speak to you, and his newspaper was
closed down by the State on 19 October. I was banned on
the same day, and one of my reporters, Thenjiwe Mtintso,
already banned, was and remains detained without being
informed of what she is thought to have done to deserve
7

74. One week before I fled from my home less than a
month ago, armed policemen forced a young couple and
their two children to leave a bathing beach zoned for whites
only, because their skins were too dark, That happened
during the latter days of December. So much for Ambassador ]Botha’s dramatic 1974 commitment, even in the
realm of social apartheid which might have beenexpected
to be the first elementof apartheid to be abandonedif his
original intent had beensincere.
75. I have to tell you all that the level of black angerin
my country today is so high, andthe determinationof most
white voters-as illustrated in the recent all-white electionto resistfair compromiseis so strongthat both sidesareon
a collision coursetowards a racial civil war. Unlessthereis
concerted action by the world community, sucha tragedy
is a real probability.

Mr. Vorster’s policiesis that sofar its main effect hasbee:n
vocal.
81. For 30 years, successive
South African Governments
have been condemnedat the United Nations, and savedby
Westernvetoesfrom meaningfulpressure.The resulttoday
is that United Nationscensureis regardedin South Africa
asa joke. It is the butt of politicians and comediansalike,
as is the very Westernbloc that has protected Pretoria for
so long. 1 think the time hascomefor the joke to end. To80
many of my countrymen are suffering becauseof it, an.d
too many have actually died at the hands of securit.y
policemenwho feel immuneto world censure.

82. International pressureagainstthe Vorster Government
shouldhavea positive,realisticand specific aim in view, and
that aim shouldbe not to destroy the assetsof my country
nor to harm any of its peoplebut, in their own interests,to
bring them to their senses.Such a positive, realistic and
76. In the name of millions of my people who cannot
specific aim should be the aim of bringing them to the
speak for themselvesat home or abroad, I ask the world
negotiating table with real representativesof the black
community to intensify as soon as possiblea policy of
majority. The Vorster Governmentshouldbe pressuredin1.o
ostracismof the Pretoria rhgime.The first necessityis for
calling a genuinenationalconvention to be attendedby the
the co-operation of the nations of the Westin following the
chosen leaders of the various communities there. The
lead so long given here on this issueby the African and,in
particular, the Scandinaviancountries and the Netherlands. rCgime could not claim that the world was trying to
The first priority of the Westernnations should,I submit, prescribe internal policiesto the people of South Africa if
be an immediate policy of disengagement-disengagement the demandwere limited and aimedat the goal of merely
from diplomatic, cultural, sporting, trade, military, invest- bringing them to the negotiatingtable with the majority of
their own countrymen. This would involve the processof
ment and generaleconomicties now existing.
having the real spokesmenof the black majority chosenby
77. To those Western industrialists and investorswho
the people, and this in turn would involve setting free
plead that their money is benefiting blacksin SouthAfrica
NelsonMandela,Robert Sobukwe,all the political prisoners
and who oppose disengagementon the ground that this
on Robben Island,all the political prisonersthroughout the
would harm the economicwell-beingof blacksin that part
country, all detainees,all banned persons and all the
of the world, my reply is this: Put your money whereit can
legitimate spokesmenof the political movements,wheth:r
do even more good, while helping essentiallythe same banned or underground,inside the country or in exile. If
beneficiaries;put your money into Lesotho, Botswanaand the regimeclaimsthat they arc ordinary criminals and not
Swaziland;pour your philanthropic millions into thesepoor
political prisoners,let the rCgimeprosecute them in open
territories whoseunemployed massesat the momenthave courts under normallaw.
to seekwork in apartheid territory.
83. If concertedinternational action basedon suchmoral
78. To those who arguethat further pressurewould only
force, backed by such practical action, is aimed at the
serveto drive the white South Africans into a laager,my
Vorster Government with this goal of bringing it to the
reply is: they arc already in the laager. Their State-con- negotiatingtable, most,of my countrymen will beginat last
trolled television, radio and Afrikaans-languagenewspapers to seethe dawnof liberty in that unhappy land.
have seen to that. Indeed, during his recent election
campaign, Mr. Vorster gained many votes by defying the
84. Since apartheid was first legislatively programmed,in
world to, as he put it, “do your damnedest”.I think that
1948, anentire generationof black South Africans hasbeen
challengeshouldbe accepted.
born into it and hassuffered under it, and far too many
have died violently under it. The time has surely come 110
79. I repeat, however, that such acceptanceshouldbe
begin the only practical processthat can peacefully end
moderate and non-violent. I think that a.llthe nationsof the
their oppressionand, appropriately, the initiative for the
world should consider a full range of psychologicalpres- commencementof that processnow lies in the hands of
suresagainstthe supportersof apartheid. One form of such those countries whoseconstitutions most emphasizethe
pressure could be a refusal to grant visas to known
principle of individual liberty, namely, the Westerndemocsupporters of apartheid, or at leastto those who refuseto
racies.
sign a declaration condemning it. There would be considerablemoral force behind sucha measure.
85. Lastly, 1 appealto the Security Council, in the light of
the United Nations declarationmaking apartheid a crime
80. It would be a mistaketo believeMr. Vorster’srhetoric
againsthumanity, to consideropeninga registerof known
when he shoutsinto radio microphonesat his party rallies criminals pre-eminently guilty of excessesin the furtherthat he and his followers do not care about world opinion. ance of suchcrime. To ensurethat suchcensurewill carry
They care considerably, and the only reasonwhy world
the full weight of international moral force and to prevent
opinion has up to now not had the effect of modifying
such a measurefrom becoming a method of pursuing

merely political vendettas, I would suggest the strictest
procedural controls in terms of correct legal machinery
under the following guiding principles: first, that crimes
against humanity can no longer be dismissed as the
domestic concern of only the Government of the country
within which such crimes are committed; secondly, that in
acting to censure such crimes the Governments of nations
should place the general interests of the whole family of
man above the particular interests of their own national
populations; thirdly, that punitive measures against such
crimes should be aimed at the arch-culprits concerned
rather than at population groups under their sway;
fourthly, that these punitive measures should constitute
moral force and not physical force; fifthly, that those
accused should be given a chance to defend themselves
against the charge under charter of international safeconduct until back within their own borders; sixthly, that,
to emphasize the exceptional nature of such punitive
measures and therefore to increase their moral force,
indictments should be permitted only under categories of
crimes against humanity as agreed by an overwhelmingly
large majority vote in the General Assembly.

90. Mr. JAIPAL (India): Mr. President, let me say how
very happy I am to welcome you and to see you presiding
over the Council during its discussion of a question
concerning the curious behaviour of a white community
whose racist attitude belongs to the last century and is
completely out of tune with modern times.
91. The statement made by Mr. Woods, a white South
African, has special significance for the Council and is welcomed by my delegation as a very useful contribution to the
struggle against apartheid waged by the United Nations. We
find it difficult to comprehend how a minority of 4 million
whites can expect in this day and age to dominate more or
less indefinitely a majority of 18 million blacks and others,
politically and economically, by denying them equal rights
of citizenship. Are they perhaps taking a calculated risk?
How long can they seriously expect to get away with this
sort of exploitation, unless they are confident of the
support of some important countries for trade and
commerce?
92. My first question to Mr. Woods is this. Does he think
that economic sanctions against South Africa will work and
be effective and, if so, how soon will santitions make an
impact on the rigime? How will the African population be
affected by the sanctions? Will it welcome them?

86. I believe that the scope of jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice should be widened to include the
power to add names to the proposed register of such
international criminals. I also believe that the mere listing
of their names in the proposed register, together with
prohibition of all international travel or movement by them
under risk of prosecution, would constitute a powerful
sanction.

93. Secondly, Mr. Woods spoke of the need to generate
moral force on a massive scale to overthrow the apartheid
rbgime. This would of course be possible in South Africa
itself if Ieaders, both black and white, were free to organize
pass&e resistance against apartheid. It seems to me,
however, that the Pretoria regime locks up almost anyone
who holds a different opinion, thereby depriving the black
community of any effective leadership. In such a situation,
does he think that this moral force that he speaks of should
be generated and organized, in European and American
countries in particular, as a mass campaign among their
publics and their Governments so that they may collectively employ the method of passive resistance and non-cooperation against the Pretoria r8gime?

87. It will be realized that crimes against humanity are
committed in countries other than South Africa, and one
trusts that complainants from the countries concerned
would apply to the General Assembly for permission to
present the appropriate indictments. But, as a South
African, I am primarily concerned at this stage with the
racial policy in my country which has already been declared
a crime against humanity and, in the name of the many
millions of my countrymen who have suffered under the
unique crime of apartheid for so many years, I claim the
right to initiate the process whereby its arch-perpetrators
may go down in history as the first to be branded
individually by the court of the family of man for all
posterity. Let those who most fear the implications of such
a register cast the first veto.

94. I should be very happy if Mr. Woods would throw
some light on these various questions that have been
troubling me, although I realize that, in the course of his
statement, he did point to several possibilities in this
direction.
95. Mr. WOODS: The reply to the first question is that the
immediate effects of such a decision would be psychological. It would carry tremendous psychological weight with
the Pretoria Government-the mere knowledge that all the
countries of the world were united at last on the need to do
this. On the other hand, if the imposition of total sanctions
is considered to be too drastic a measure which might have
no final outcome, then there exists the alternative of a
selective and progressive set of graduated steps which could
be correlated with specific demands, for example: “Do this
by such and such a date or the following boycott or
sanctions will be imposed”. So really what I am proposing
when I speak of moral force here is the generation in the
external world of massive psychological censure, the key
word being “united”.
Instead of the West putting the
brakes on, and the third world and the East wanting one

88. These, then, are the various ways in which effective
moral force can be mobilized against those who have
affronted more than two thirds of humanity by elevating
their own esteem of white skin pigmentation above all
considerations of human decency. Their actions are an
outrage not only against their victims but against all people
everywhere; just as their continued impunity creates one of
the most divisive issues straining international relationships
today, so would the new sense of international unity
flowing from concerted action to end this affront to all
mankind result in a new forward surge towards a wider
world peace.
89. The PRESIDENT: Do any members of the Council
wish to address questions to Mr. Woods?
9

thing and the West feeling that it would be going too far,
the power would come from the unified nature of the
action and the psychological force would proceed from
that.
96. The answer to the second question is that the
economic effects on the blacks in South Africa would be
minimal. I think it has been established that fewer than
2 per cent are employed in overseas-invested companies.
Again, the effect would be tremendous psychologically. All
the black leaders that I know-the genuine black leadershave always discounted the economic side of0 it and have
said “We will look after our people. We would rather have
that psychological censure from the external world and set
that our own people will survive. We know what suffering is.
We can survive the minimal suffering which could come
from that.”

belief in southern Africa than anything else. If that is what
the West is relying upon, it is relying upon a straw tiger.
100. The PRESIDENT: I thank Mr. Woods for the
information he has given us this afternoon.
101. Mr. FUENTES IBAREZ (Bolivia) (interpretation
from Sparzish): Mr. President, it is an honour for me, on
behalf of the delegation of Bolivia, to extend to you our
best wishes at this time when, as Commissioner for External
Affairs of Nigeria, you are presiding over the first Security
Council meeting of 1978. You are a distinguished leader of
the new Africa. Your country and mine have joined hands
in the struggle to raise living standards to a level of dignity
and security befitting free men. Your presence as President
is a good omen suggesting that we shall attain these lofty
ideals.

97. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): Mr. President, through
you I wish to welcome warmly the very important
statement made by Mr. Woods. There is one question I
should like to put to Mr. Woods on a point on which he has
not touched.

102. As one of the new members of the Council that you
were kind enough to welcome this afternoon, we should
like to thank you for your kind words. Through you, we
wish also to thank the members of the Council and we
pledge the full co-operation of our Government in the
efforts of this body to achieve the lofty goals of the Charter
of the United Nations.

98. Mr. Woods has told us how the Western Powers have
helped the racist Pretoria regime to maintain itself in
power. For a long time, we were being told that this
Western support for Pretoria stemmed from a policy of
containing communism and protecting the important sea
routes of the Indian Ocean. My question is: is this really so
or was it just a cheap scare on the part of Pretoria to secure
the support of Western Europe in perpetuating apartheid?

103. Finally, I should like to extend my best wishes to the
representatives of Nigeria, Czechoslovakia, Gabon and
Kuwait. Our good wishes also go to the outgoing countries,
in particular to Panama. We shall try to be a worthy
successor to that country and we shall do our utmost to
further the work undertaken by it while it was a member of
the Security Council.

99. Mr. WOODS: The answer is: not so. In fact the irony
of the situation is that the actions of the Pretoria
Government have done more to promote the communist

The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

0
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

78-700054anuary

1980--2,200
