S/2017/917

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 November 2017
English
Original: French

Letter dated 31 October 2017 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my letter of 15 August 2017 ( S/2017/713)
transmitting to the Security Council the executive summary of the report of the
United Nations Security Management System Board of Inquiry ta sked with
investigating the deaths of two members of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which occurred in Kananga (Democratic Republic of the
Congo). In this letter, I also informed the Security Council of my intention to
discuss with officials of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to consult with
Council members regarding the establishment of a follow -on mechanism, in
connection with the murders of Ms. Zaida Catalán and Mr. Michael Sharp, as well
as the four Congolese accompanying them.
I am pleased to inform the Security Council that I held initial consultations
with the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional
Integration of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Léonard She Okitundu, on
17 August 2017 in New York. Thereafter, I dispatched my Special Envoy for the
Great Lakes Region, Saïd Djinnit, and a small team to Kinshasa, from 31 August to
1 September 2017, to continue consultations with the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The understanding reached on United Nations
support to the investigation conducted by the national authorities was further
confirmed by an exchange of letters.
As agreed with the Congolese authorities, I intend to deploy a team to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to assist with the national investigation into the
killing of Ms. Catalán, Mr. Sharp and the four Congolese nationals accompanying
them.
The team will comprise a senior United Nations official, four technical experts
and support staff. I have appointed Mr. Robert Petit (Canada) as the senior official
to lead the team. 1 Mr. Petit will travel to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
regularly and as needed, to liaise with the relevant Congolese authorities and other
parties and to oversee the work of the technical experts. In addition, Mr. Petit will
report to me on a regular basis. The four experts will be based in Kananga,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and be embedded with the team of investigators
appointed by the national authorities responsible for the investigations into the
killing of Ms. Catalán, Mr. Sharp and the four Congolese nationals.

__________________
1

17-19326 (E)

A short biographical note on Robert Petit is on file with the Secretariat.

021117

*1719326*

031117

S/2017/917

The team members will have the status of officials and experts on missions for
the United Nations, as defined by the 1946 Convention on the Pr ivileges and
Immunities of the United Nations, and will be deployed within the legal framework
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), governed by the Agreement signed on 4 May
2000 in Kinshasa between the United Nations and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on the status of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC, renamed MONUSCO in 2010).
I trust that the relevant Congolese authorities will extend to the experts full
cooperation and access. This will enable the team to properly assist and support the
national investigation and help to ensure that the investigation and court
proceedings are based on as comprehensive and robust investigatio ns as possible.
I intend to report to the Security Council periodically on the work of the team.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/2

17-19326
