SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
THIRTIETH

YEAR

MEETING: 4 MARCH 1975

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l818) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 17 February 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1625) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.1818

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates .a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oficial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it’ appears or in which information about
- it. is given. .The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in WA, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1%5. became fully operative
on that date.

.

.

1818th MEETING

.-

.

-

1.

Held in New York on- Tuesday; 4 March i975;:,&, Zf p&i
.
:

.

Pr&ident: Mr. Gonzalo J. FACIO (Costa Rica).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet SocialiSt Republics, United
Kingdom of Great. Britain. and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

1.

-’

agenda

(S/Agenda/l818)

Adoption of the agknda

2. The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 17 February 1975 from the Permanent
Representative -of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11625)
The meeting was called to order at 3.45.p.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring -dent
1 . The PRESIDENT. (interpretation from Spanish):
I wish to express the -gratitude of the St%&y
Council to Mr. Huang Hua, the representative of
China, for the services he rendered the Organization
during the month of February 1975, when he presided
over the Council with such competence and skill.

-

..

..
.

.

3. The .PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
In accordance with the deCisions taken at the 1815th
to 1817th meetings, and with the consent of the Council,
I invite the representatives of Bulg&ia, Saudi Arabia
and Romania to t&e thecplaces reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber in order to participate
in thediscussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Grozev
(Buiga ria) , Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) and
Mr. Datcu (Romania), took the places reserved for
them
at the side of the Council chaniber.
. ._
.,
‘. ‘..

4. Mr. RICHARD (United .Kingdom): Like other
speakers before me- in this debate, and with no less
sincerity , I should like. to welcome the five new
members of the-security Council to our deliberations.
Their Permanent Representatives are all distinguished
diplomats with whom my delegation has been privileged to work in other aspects of United Nations
affairs. For.this reason we are in no doubt that their
presence here will make a substantial contributio-n
to our work. I should also like to thank the delegations Of the five outgoing.members of the Security
Council for the talents and the spirit of b-operation
“.tihich they brought to-the Cbuncil’s affairs.

5. May I also, Mr. President, congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council.
It is, I think , a signal honour to the Council that
the Government of Costa Rica should decide that,
Adoption of the agenda
during Costa Rica’s tenure-. of, the presidency, its
ForeigriMinister should exercise that office personally.
The agenda was adopted.
I am confident that the. Cquncil will benefit amply
from this decision tid.t.hat under your wise guidance
The situation in Cypms:
our deliberations will reach a successful conclusion.
._
_
L+r. &ted 17 February 1975 from the’ Petient
6. I should also like- to congr&late the representarepresentative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
tive of China, who conducted our affairs so skilfully
in February, and the representative of the Byelo(S/11625)
russian SSR, whose conduct of the Council’s affairs
in Janu&-y was so .skilful that we never had to meet
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):.
at all.
In accordance with the decision taken at the 1813th
meeting, I propose, with the’ consent .of the Council,
I need not remind Council members of the United
to invite the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and 7;
Greece to participate in the debate without the right
Kingdom’s long historical association with the island
to vote.
of Cyptis. Many Cypxjots live in Britain and many
British people live in the island of Cyprus. We know
At the invitation of the President, Mr. ‘Clerides
each other well and ,tie in Britain have a concern
(Cyprus), Mr. O/cay (Turkey) and Mr. Carayannis
for the well-being arid the pr&perity of all the people
of Cyprus which .derives froni this close connection.
(Greece) took places at the Security Council table.
.:.
-

Nor need I remind the Council that the Government
of the United Kingdom is a guarantor of the Constitution of Cyprus; we are fully conscious of our
obligations. It was because of these responsibilities
that in the immediate aftermath of the tragic fighting
last summer the Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs met at Geneva with the Foreign
Ministers of Greece and Turkey to agree a joint
declaration [S/11398] as a framework for the solution
of the island’s problems.

aligned status of the Republic of Cyprus and that it
reaffirms that the final objective of the Turkish Cypriots
is to unite with the Greek Cypriot community within
the framework of a biregional federation.
1 1 . But in spite of these words we can only regret
the unilateral declaration of a Turkish Federated
State of Cyprus. It prejudges the intercommunal
talks, since the concept of such a State contains
elements which, if the Greek Cypriot side could
accept them, would render the intercommunal talks
almost superfluous. To that extent, that action
represents an attempt to obtain by declaration objectives which, in our view, should properly be the
subject of negotiation between the two sides. Moreover, its timing was such that it led to the suspension
of the intercommunal talks at the precise moment
when, for the first time, alternative constitutional
plans were on the table and real negotiation could
have begun. That is one reason why the Secretary
of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
said in the House of Commons on 14 February
that the United Kingdom deplored Mr. Denktas’s
statement.

8. Because of our responsibilities and because of
our concern, the United Kingdom Government warmly
welcomed the agreement between the Greek Cypriot
community and the Turkish Cypriot community to
hold talks under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative. We remain firmly
of the view that a lasting settlement to the problem
of Cyprus is only likely to be achieved when the
Cypriots themselves agree upon the nature of a
constitutional settlement. These talks provide the
people of Cyprus, of both communities, with this
opportunity. We were encouraged also that at these
talks the two unnmunities were represented by
Mr. Clerides and by Mr. Denktag, both highly
distinguished and experienced men with the mutual
respect for each other needed for the delicate
negotiations which the situation on the island
demands.

12. The second reason is that, as my Government
has repeatedly said-and it has underlined this view
by its support for successive Security Council
resolutions-we support the sovereignty, the independence and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Cyprus. The United Kingdom Government condemns
all moves which would further divide Cyprus. We
regard Mr. Denkta$‘s proclamation as likely to have
such an effect. We welcome, however, his statement
and that of the Turkish Prime Minister emphasizmg
that the proclamation is not a unilateral declaration
of independence on the part of the Turkish Cypriots
and that is precludes partition or annexation.

9. It goes without saying that the need for a solution
to the Cyprus tragedy is urgent. I need not remind
members of the Council of the pathetic plight of those
Turkish and Greek Cypriots who lost their homes and
livelihoods in the fighting last summer. I need not
remind them either that the problem is urgent for
economic and political reasons also: the islands
economy has been devastated; and, as our own
resolutions make clear, there is always the potential
threat to peace in the eastern Mediterranean. Moreover, we view with the deepest concern the effect
of the situation in Cyprus on relations between Greece
and Turkey, two countries that are linked to my own
by deep and long-standing ties of friendship and of
alliance. If a solution is to be reached, it is, ‘m the
view of the United Kingdom Government, of the
utmost importance that the talks should be allowed
to proceed undisturbed by any unilateral action which
could frustrate the search for a peaceful settlement.

13. The United Kingdom indeed hopes so, for
partition would not be in the interests of either
community, and a unilateral declaration of independence could have the gravest consequences, not only
for the island of Cyprus, but also for the situation
in the eastern Mediterranean as a whole. I should
like to make it clear that, as far as we are concerned,
Mr. Denktas’s declaration does not alter our attitude
towards the legitimate Government of Cyprus, nor
towards our obligations under the 1960 Treaties.’
There is only one legitimate Republic of Cyprus,
and there is only one Government.

10. Now, the Council has met becau.se of action
by one party to the talks which, whatever interpretation is put upon it, has in fact put those negotiations
in jeopardy. We have read with care the text of the
resolution of the Council of Misters and the
Legislative Assembly of the autonomous Turkish
Cypriot administration adopted on 13 February
[S/11624, annex ZZ]. We have noted that this resolution
refers to resolute opposition to all attempts against
the independence of Cyprus and its partition or union
with any other State. We have seen that the declaration also expresses belief in the necessity of the non-

14. In these circumstances, we believe that the
Council has a clear and straightforward duty, that is,
to deplore any action inconsistent with respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Cyprus and to call for the
continuation of negotiations between the representatives of the two communities.
15. As far as the latter is concerned, I should like
to draw the attention of Council members to the
2

shape of a nation’s future structure, one might almost
say its very existence.

letter of 19 February addressed to the SecretaryGeneral by the representative of Ireland [S/11629].
This letter contained the text of a statement issued
in Dublin on 13 February by the Ministers of the
nine member States of the European Economic
Community in which they recalled the association
agreements between Greece, Turkey and Cyprus
with the Community and stated that they continued
to regard as highly desirable the search for a negotiated
solution by way of consultation between the two
communities in Cyprus.

1 8 . May I address myself directly to the representatives of the parties who are attending these meetings
of the Council. My Government believes that it is
hardly surprising if progress is slqw, but we also
believe that it would be a tragic mistake to assume
too quickly that the talks have become irrevocably
deadlocked at any one point. It is true that there
are deep divisions between the two sides, divisions
that spring from fear and from mistrust, from past
history and from remembered injustices. But if the
two communities, with all their gifts and traditions,
can put past wrongs behind them and think and work
for the future, then, despite the differences between
them, the proposals that the two sides have put forward
may yet prove to be the basis on which a solution
will be reached.

16. On the crucial question of those negotiations
between the two communities, may I draw the
attention of members of the Council to the special
report of the Secretary-General on developments
in Cyprus circulated on 18 February [S/11624].
This report records that on 10 February the Greek
Cypriot written proposals for the solution of the
Cyprus problem were conveyed to Mr. Denkm
by the Secretary-General’s Special Representative.
On 13 February-that is, three days later-Mr. Denkta8 handed to the Special Representative a note
containing a set of principles proposed by the Turkish
Cypriot side on the constitutional aspect of the Cyprus
problem. These documents appear as annexes I
and III to the Secretary-General’s report. It is true
that they contain a number of proposals which are at
first sight mutually incompatible; but there is a good
deal of common ground. I have no doubt that these
documents can yet provide the basis for fruitful
negotiation. My delegation was confirmed in this
view when we heard on 20 February both Mr. Clerides
and Mr. Celik read out the proposals of their
respective communities in extenso. Mr. Clerides said
that the Greek Cypriot proposals envisaged a substantial area in the north of Cyprus under Turkish
Cypriot control. Mr. Celik said that nothing in his
side’s proposals should be interpreted as being the
last word. He added that: “since negotiations are
going on, proposals and counter-proposals will be
negotiated, and the final settlement will be mutually
agreed upon” [l813th meeting, para. 1521.

19. The Council has now been considering the
question of Cyprus since 20 February. Progress has
been slow. All of us are aware of the differences
between the two sides which make acceptance of a
draft resolution hard to achieve. However, as
members of the Council know, a number of informal
papers containing wording which might form the basis
of a possible draft resolution have been circulated.
Like Mr. Clerides’ and Mr. Denktas’ constitutional
proposals, these contain many common elements
which we believe could form the basis of agreement,
in this case agreement on a draft resolution which
could have the effect-and this is the aim for which
surely all of us round this table are working--of
enabling the parties to return to the conference
table.
20. In these working papers there is, for example,
general recognition of the importance of the SecretaryGeneral’s role in the search for a negotiated settlement. We warmly welcome this, for the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative have played
an important part in this process since 1967. Since
last year Mr. Weckmann-Muiioz has been instrumental
in bringing the intercommunal talks to a position
which, as I have already indicated, could in my
delegation’s view form the basis for real progress.
We welcomed the statement by the Secretary-General
to the Council on 21 February [MMth meeting],
in which he said that he still believed that the talks
between Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktq could provide
a basis for progress and that he recognized the need
for a new and fresh approach to the negotiating
process. We think that the exercise of the personal
experience, the talents and the prestige of the
Secretary-General himself can contribute to this
process and, in the words of his statement of
21 February, help to ensure “the creation and
maintenance of conditions in which all parties are
prepared to agree to participate” [ibid., para. 101.
We believe that he would be prepared to put himself
personally at the disposal of the parties to facilitate

What is needed is surely for both sides to appreciate
that, although there are great differences of emphasis
between the two sets of proposals, there is nevertheless a good deal of common ground upon which
they can build.
17. The Secretary-General’s report reminds us that
the first meeting on the substance of the Cyprus
problem took place as recently as 14 January and
the proposals of the two sides to which I have just
referred were exchanged only a few days ago. The
problems of Cyprus are not easy; they never have
been and they probably never will be. But a long-term
settlement of the many humanitarian, social and
political difficulties of the Republic as a whole can
only be found by patient and flexible discussion.
.The talks between the communities concern the
3

the resumption and the progress of the negotiations.
For our part, my Government would watmli welcome
the good offices of the Secretary-General in a new
attempt to reach agreement between the parties: a
new impetus in which- the Secretary-General himself
was directly involved, with the backing of the Security
Council behind him. He could count on the whole~i~;~~~pport of the Government. of the United
. .
._.
21. It would not, I think, be appropriate for me to
comment on other aspects of the working papers to
which I have already referred, since .agreement has
yet to be reached -on all the elements which a. draft
resolution should contain. But .my delegation does
believe that it should now -be possible to agree’on a
text which is acceptable both to the Council and to
the parties, and I should like to assure the Council
that, for my part, I am ready to consider positively
the introduction into such a draft of any provisions
which would have the effect of enabling ‘the intercommunal talks to be restarted on a practical and an
:
effective basis.

official meeting of. the Council, we should like to
congratulate t& new members .of the Council--the
representatives of Guyana, Italy, Japon, Sweden and
the United Republic of Tanzania--on their-paiticipation in the work of this major organ of the United
Nations, which bears the primary responsibility for
the maintenance -of international peace and security.
25. The enhanced role and influence of the nonaligned States in the solution of complex international
problems ’ and their positive actions within the
framework of the United Nations in the interests of
just and lasting peace, that appear infer aliu, in the
results of the twenty-ninth session of the General
_ -Assembly, all give us grou.nds .for.. believing that
Mr. Salim and Mr. ,Jackson, the representatives of
the United Republic of Tanzania and Guyana, two
countries which are taking an active part in the non.aligned movement, will make an important contribution to the work of the Council.
.25. Our delegation would also like to express its
satisfaction at the fact that the experienced representatives of Italy, Japan and Sweden-Mr. -Plaja,
Mr. Saito and Mr. Rydbeck-are now taking part
in the work of the Council and to wish them success
in their work on behalf of universal peace and intemational .security and in ..the pursuance of the lofty
goals and ‘nohle principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

22. This-has been a long debate; but we should not
forget that as time passes here in New York the two
communities of Cyprus grow apart, and the prospects
for a negotiated settlement decrease. I have already
said that the need for-a- solution of the Cyprus tragedy
is urgent. I have already: appealed to the parties
not to assume. that negotiations have become
irrevocably deadlocked. I now make the same appeal 27. The Byelorussian delegation would also like to
in respect of our discussions here. In our view; express its good wishes and gratitude to the delegathe time has come for the Security Council to.accept
tions- of Australia, Austria, Indonesia, Kenya and
its responsibilities and to assert its view on how the
for their efforts over two years to enable the
parties can best be brqught together again. It is Peru
Security
Council to discharge its lofty duties with
time, I think, for the parties to heed this call by
regard to the strengthening of peace and intemathe Security Council and to recognize that in the view
tional security.
of the international community it is in this way that
the settIement of the Cyprus problem will be achieved. . 28. More. than six months have elapsed since, as a
I do not underestimate what -we .ane asking. of them;
of outside intervention in the internal- affairs
It demands remarkable qualities of statesmanship result
of
Cyprus,
peaceful life of the people of the
and generosity, but unless these talks are restarted Republic oftheCyprus
disrupted. However,
and unless they are given a fresh impetus; I confess the situation in Cyprus ‘was
during
this period has not
that for my part I see na easy, or indeed early,
returned
to
normal;
by
the
recent
separatist action
resolution of the problems of Cyprus.
of the leadership ~of the. Turkish community it has
23. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian been rendered even more tense and dangerous for the
fate of the Republic of Cyprus. As we know,’ that
Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation from
was the result of steps taken by the leadership of
Russian): I should like, first, to express my satisfaction
the Turkish community to create a separate state
that the Security Council’s discussion of the Cyprus
structure in the northern part of the territory of Cyprus
question is continuing under the leadership of a Costa
occupied by Turkish forces.
Rican statesman who occupies the- importampost .of
.’
Minister for Foreign Relations. A,s’everyone is well
29. : In actual fact, those steps were designed to make
aware, persistent efforts are. now under way-to-produce
permanent a state of affairs which arose as a result
a -decision in the ihterests of the’people of Cyprus, a
of armed intervention from outside in the affairs .of
decision consistent with ,the task of finding a lasting
the Republic of Cyprus. A new blow was dealt to
and just settlement of the Cyprus problem. Our
delegation would like to wish yctu, Mr. President, the sovereign Republic of Cyprus, a Member of the
United Nations and an active participant in the nonsuccess in that work.
aligned movement. Contrary to the interests of the
24. Since this is the first time this year that the people of Cyprus, a new attempt has been made to
delegation of the Byelotussian SSR has spoken at an partition the island; the internal Cyprus talks between
.’

4

i.

representatives of the two communities;which gave
certain grounds for hope for a souition to the Cyprus .
problem by peaceful means, were dealt a serious
blow, and we cannot disregard that fact.

:

the Security Council were to send a special mission
to Cyprus, it would have a favourable impact on the
situation in and around Cyprus; it would enhance the
role of the Council in maintaining the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of a non-aligned
Member State of the United Nations, the Republic
of Cyprus.

30. In this regard we .must stress that all these
actions are in flagrant violation of well-known
decisions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly on the Cyprus question. They are conttiry
to decisions which express support for the iaiyfuiiy
elected Government of Cyprus, decisions designed to
ensure the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus, decisions which
provide for the immediate withdrawal of foreign
troops and the provisions of opportunities for. the
Cypriots themselves to settle the question of the
internal structure of Cyprus. These provisions; which
are contained, inter alia, in General Assembly resoiution 3212.(XXIX) of 1 November 1974, received the
favourable votes of ali Member States of the United
Nations, including Cyprus, Greece and -Turkey.
Furthermore, on -13 December 1974 that resolution
was endorsed by the Security Council [resolution 365
(1974)], thus receiving new binding force; The Security
Council called upon the interested parties to implement
it as soon as possible.
.
31. In another decision-resolution 364 (1974~the
Security Council urged

33. The Byeiorussian delegation endorses the view
of other delegations whose representatives have
.spoken in the Security Council that the situation in
Cyprus has deteriorated and is now extremely
-dangerous for peace in the eastern Mediterranean.
In this regard,. we- think it would be appropriate to
refer to the views expressed by the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim. In his statement to the Security
Council on‘2 1 February 1975 he said:
-“In the first place, I wish to emphasiie the great
seriousness of the risk to peace and security in the
eastern Mediterranean which the Cyprus situation
represents.” [1814th meeting, pat-a. 71.
Our delegation ,entireiy agrees with the assessment of
the latest events in and around Cyprus made in the
TASS communication of 16 February 1975 [S/11627],
and also shares the views expressed by the majority
of the members of the Security Council who have
spoken, as well as the representatives of other States
who have taken part in the discussion of this matter
in recent days.

“the parties concerned to act with the. utmost
restraint and to continue and accelerate determined
co-operative efforts to achieve the objectives of the
Security Council”.

34. We *must see that certain forces which oppose
the easing of international tension and the strengthening of peace and international co-operation have
deliberately been creating a situation of tension and
uncertainty in Cyprus. They are attempting to exploit
for their .own selfish ‘interests .any exacerbation of
the .‘.
situation.
,_
.,

But, in.fact, certain circles, interested not in a peaceful
and just settlement of the Cyprus problem but
rather in the attainment of other goals, have acted
contrary to the provisions of these decisions of the
_ United Nations which were quite rightly viewed and
continue to be viewed as a basis for a apolitical
settlement.

.35. There are continual attempts on the part of
certain circles in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to put into effect their far-reaching plans
and to bring Cyprus within the orbit of their own
ambitions, which run counter to the maintenance
of the Republic of Cyprus as a non-aligned State.
This is a very dangerous trend for the cause of peace
and international security, because all this is occurring
in an area which is near the Middle East, where the
situation is even more complicated and explosive.

.32.. The Soviet Union, at the beginning of the discussion of the situation in Cyprus in the Security
Council, in July and August 1974, put .forward
proposals for the convening of an international
conference [S/1146.5] on Cyprus and the dispatch of.
a Security Council mission [S/11391]. By that time,
after the failure of the Geneva talks, it had become
perfectly clear that the system of guarantees imposed
upon Cyprus by the Zurich and London agreements
of 1959 was not working, and a situation had arisen
which called for a radically new, just and democratic
approach. In the view of the Byeiorussian delegation,
the Soviet proposals are just as timely today because
they indicate a just and constructive approach to a
solution of the Cyprus : probiemt An international
conference on Cyprus could provide new opportunities
for a settlement of the Cyprus problem in the interests
of the whole Cypriot people and in the interests of
peace-and security in the eastern Mediterranean. If

_

36, The Byeibrussian delegation has already
expressed, and wishes once again to express, its
concern at the difficult economic situation which -has
arisen in Cyprus. Serious damage has been done to
the country’s economy. Normal living conditions
have been disrupted-for all sectors of the population,
Greek and Turkish alike, and the problem of refugees
is extremely serious and difficult. The provision of
General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) which states
that all the refugees should return to their homes
5

in conditions of security has also not been implemented.

sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Cyprus and the inadmissibility of any
actions leading to a partition of Cyprus.

37. We cannot fail to see that the proclamation
of the northern areas of Cyprus-which possess the
principal economic resources-as a separate federated
Turkish State of the Republic of Cyprus makes even
more complicated an already diflicult economic
situation in the country and increases the sufferings
of the population. We in the Byelorussian SSR who
suffered through the years of the Second World War
the indescribable tragedy of the total destruction of the
national economy, a tragedy in which practicahy
the whole population was without a roof or a home,
are profoundly moved by the situation which now
prevails in Cyprus and affects both communities.
The sympathies of our delegation are with the people
of Cyprus. What we want is for measures to be
taken which will put an end to the endlessly protracted
crisis in Cyprus, which is doing so much harm to
the normal foundations of life in that country.

42. The resolution should squarely and unambiguously state support for the lawfully elected Govemment of the Republic of Cyprus. The Security Council
should take new steps to call a halt to all foreign
intervention in the a&irs of the State of Cyprus, and
they should be designed to bring about the withdrawal
of all armed forces and foreign military personnel
from Cyprus. If the Council really wants to make a
new contribution to the settlement of the Cyprus
problem, it must come out categorically in favour of
a new approach and express the wish that the Cyprus
question should be considered in a broad international
forum within the framework of the United Nations.
43. The Byelomssian delegation is firmly convinced
that, in the settlement of the Cyprus problem, an
important role could be played by the initiative of the
non-aligned countries, which could take positive
action. All the necessary conditions must be created
for the Cypriots-the Greek and Turkish communities-to resolve their own internal affairs without
lforeign intervention, taking into account the interests
of both communities and the need for preserving
peace and security in this area.

38. The Byelorussian delegation wishes to express
its serious concern at the unilateral actions which
threaten the prospects for the intercommunal talks
on Cyprus, engender new elements of hostility and
separateness, and create additional complications
and barriers to a just settlement, which so many
speakers have already mentioned here in the Council.

44. In conclusion, I should like to thank all the
members of the Council who, at previous recent
meetings, have addressed warm words to me as the
representative of the Byelorussian SSR, which
occupied the presidency of the Council in January
of this year.

39. The Byelotussian delegation opposes any actions
which might lead to the partition of Cyprus, whatever
their shape or form. We consistently and firmly
favour and support the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus,
and we oppose the partition of the island. We are
against enosis or so-cahed double emsis.
40. The discussion has shown that almost all members
of the Security Council share this view. It is important
that four permanent members of the Council share
this view too: the USSR, the United States of
America, France and the United Kingdom. This
emerges clearly from the joint bilateral communiques
and statements of these couritries, as has already been
mentioned in the Council, and also from the statements of their representatives here in the Council.
Greece and Turkey hold similar views. All this, in
our view, should promote the search for solutions
in the interests of a just and lasting settlement.

45. For us Soviet people, 1975 is a special year.
It is the year of the thirtieth anniversary of the
victory of the Soviet people in the great patriotic
war of 1941-1945. That was a period of terrible
suffering-the .worst suffering ever experienced by
our country. In that war there was at stake not only
the fate of the Soviet people but the future of world
civilization, progress and democracy. At the cost of
millions upon millions of lives, the Soviet people
defended their freedom and made a decisive contribution to the. victory over fascism and saved the world
from the deadly danger of this terribIe plague. We
should also properly point out the great contribution
made to this victory by the peoples and arms of the
anti-Hitler coalition.

41. As to a possible positive solution by the Security
Council resulting from a discussion of the Cyprus
question, the delegation of the Byelorussian SSR,
like other delegations, attaches the greatest possible
importance to that. In the view of our delegation,
a solution by the Security Council shduld be designed
to bring about immediate and full compliance with
earlier resolutions adopted by the Security Council
and the General Assembly on Cyprus. We must provide
for strict compliance with the observance of the

46. In that war it was the Byelorussian people which
suffered worst as compared with all the other nations
of Europe. Every fourth inhabitant of the Republic
perished. Towns and villages lay in ruins. The economy
of Byelorussia was set back by almost 30 years. By
its unparalleled heroism and selfless and dedicated
struggle against fascism, aldng with the other peoples
of the Soviet Union, the Byelorussian people
earned the respect of many countries and peoples. And,
as President of the Security Council in January of
6

this year, having heard so many words of gratitude
addressed to me and so many expressions of friendship, I would first of all like to take them as being
directed to the Byeiorussian SSR and to the Byelorussian people, whose contribution to the victory over
fascism and whose active struggle in the United
Nations for peace and international co-operation have
won broad international recognition.

return of the refugees to their homes in safety and
talks between the representatives of the two communities for the purpose of finding a political solution
to the Cyprus problem.
55. Fact 2: between 1 November 1974, when
resolution 3212 (XXIX) was adopted, and 20 February 1975, when I addressed the Security Council,
almost four months elapsed without Turkey implementing or showing any intention of implementing
resolution 3212 (XXIX) by withdrawing its forces
from the territory of the Republic, by allowing the
refugees to return to their homes or by releasing
from its military occupation 40 per cent of the territory
of the Republic. In this way Turkey showed utter
disregard for the independence, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-alignment of the Republic and for
General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX).

47. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Cyprus,
on whom I now call.
48. Mr. CLERIDES (Cyprus): Mr. President, on
behalf of my delegation and on my own behalf I should
like to welcome your presence here, that of the
distinguished Minister for Foreign Relations of the
Republic of Costa Rica, and to wish you success in
the duties you have now assumed as President of the
Security Council.

56. Fact 3: the intercommunal talks on the substance
of the problem, which commenced on 19 December
1974, made no progress at all because the Turkish
side deliberately and repeatedly refused to discuss
items on the agenda pertaining to the substance of
the problem.

49. I have asked to speak in order to reply, to some
extent, to certain allegations and contentions made by
the representative of Turkey in his last statement to
the Security Council on 27 February 1975 [1817th
meeting].

57. Fact 4: on 13 February 1975 the Turkish side,
by a unilateral, arbitrary act, proclaimed, with the
approval of Turkey, a separate Turkish State in that
part of the territory of the Republic which is under
Turkish occupation.

50. In his address to the Council the representative
of Turkey, following the method of sidetracking from
the main issues, attempted to set the clock back by
11 years and tried to establish that responsibility for
what is happening today in Cyprus lies totally with
the Greek Cypriots and with Greece.

58. On the basis of those four facts, which are the
substance of this recourse to the Security Council,
I invited the representative of Turkey to join issue. It
is pertinent, therefore, to examine what his position is.

51. One could easily remind the representative of
Turkey that such attempts have been made in the past
during repeated debates before the Council and the
General Assembly and that accusations of bad intentions, insincerity, ulterior motives, bad faith and so on
have been made by both sides. Nevertheless, this
state of affairs has not led to the solution of the
Cyprus problem, but only to greater confusion.

59. The representative of Turkey, in his attempt to
avoid replying on the issues I raised-probably because
he had no reply to give-stated: “I should like to
adhere to the policy of my delegation of answering
only representatives of Governments whose legitimacy
we recognize” [1814th meeting, para. 681.

52. It is for this reason, and not because of lack
-of proven facts, that in my opening address on
20 February [1813th meeting] I stated frankly that
mistakes had been committed in the past by both sides
and then proceeded to establish at once that, in view
of the rapidly deteriorating situation in Cyprus, it was
necessary to consider what measures were urgently
needed in order to save the situation.

He thus implied that he was inhibited from replying
to the points I raised by virtue of the fact that his
Government did not recognize the Government of
the Republic of Cyprus despite its universal recognition
by the United Nations and by all the Member States
of the Organization except Turkey. Immediately, in
order to facilitate his replying, and in my desire to
have a constructive debate on the points I raised,
I invited him to ignore my capacity of representative
of the Government of the Republic of Cyprus and
to treat me as an ordinary individual.

53. In my opening address to the Council I established the following facts.
54. Fact 1: on 1 November 1974 the General
Assembly unanimously adopted resolution 3212
(XXIX), which Turkey also supported, calling for
respect for the independence, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus;
as well as for the speedy withdrawal of foreign
armed forces from the territory of the Republic, the

60. With the representative of Turkey thus freed from
his inhibition, we heard after some delay and, I must
confess, with amazement, his reply.
61. The representative of Turkey disputed the
need to have a Security Council meeting. He stated:
7
._

“this is one of the rare meetings or probably
the first meeting of the Security Council held to
consider the question of Cyprus without an emergency situation, without a crisis and . . . without,
as far as we are concerned, a sound and solid
reason.

Security Council in its resolution 365 (1974). Thesuffering of the people of Cyprus can onIy increase
the gravity of this situation. It is the duty of the
Council, therefore, as well as of the parties
directly concerned, to exert all possible efforts to
ensure that real and timely progress is made towards
a lasting settlement.” [Z814rh meeting, para. 7.)

“We are here as a result of an attempt on
the part of those who see fit, in spite of clearly
serious consequences, to create confusion and
crisis.” [1817th meeting, paras. 35 and 36.1

66. The renresentative of France. on 24 Februarv.
having refeied to the non-implementation of resold:
tion 3212 (XXIX), stressed that, contrary to that
resolution, foreign armed forces were still on the
territory of the Republic of Cyprus, that refugees :
had been unable to return to their homes and that, by
a unilateral decision of one of the parties, a serious
obstacle had been created in finding a solution to
the problem. The representative of France went on
to describe the situation in the following words:

62. One need not have judged the representative of
Turkey harshly if what he stated consituted an error
of judgement with regard to the seriousness of the
present situation in Cyprus. Mistakes are human and
forgivable, but .the representative of Turkey went
further and alleged that, not only was there no crisis
in Cyprus, but that calling the Security Council was
an attempt by the Government of Cyprus to create
confusion and an artificial crisis.

“We note that ‘the suffering has not diminished
and that the crisis goes on, threatening the peace
and security not only of the island but also of that
particularly sensitive region, the eastern Mediterranean.” [1815th meeting, para. 49.1

63. In order to establish his allegation that there
was neither a need for a Security Council meeting
nor for any action to be taken with regard to Cyprus,
the representative of Turkey, in a feeble attempt to
persuade the Security Council that the Government
of the RepubIic of Cyprus had staged the whole
show, purported to give in chronological order a
number of alleged events from which, in his opinion,
the bad intentions of the Government of Cyprus
could be inferred.

67. The representative of Bulgaria, the same day.,
after referring to the unilateral act of the Turkish
side to establish a separate state in Cyprus, said:
“These actions are without any doubt a direct
infringement of . . . General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) and Security Council resohrtion 365 (1974).

64. I could examine here with members one by one
the alleged facts which the representative of Turkey
enumerated and easily establish that neither a single
one of them taken separately, nor all of them taken
collectively, establish any evidence of bad intentions
to create an artificial crisis in order to bring the
matter before the Council. -The only deduction that
can be reasonably drawn is that the representative
of Turkey has an unusually suspicious mind. Fortunately, however, I need not unnecessarily waste the
time of the Council by such an elaborate and
detailed analysis of the alleged facts paraded and
wrongly interpreted by the representative of Turkey.
Instead, I can quote authoritative views expressed
here in the Council by representatives which repudiate
the contentions of the representative of Turkey and
stress that indeed there is a grave and disturbing
situation and a crisis in Cyprus, that there is an
emergency and that there is a very sound and solid
reason for the Council to meet.

“The gravity of the situation which has recently
arisen should not and cannot be underestimated.
This problem is not only of local significance, it
is also of the utmost fundamental importance,
since it directly affects the very foundations of the
Organization. We have here a direct threat to
eliminate a non-aligned sovereign and independent
State Member- of the United Nations.” [Ibid;.
paras. 125 and 126.1
68. The representative of Romania, on 27 February,
after referring to the non-implementation of resolution 3212 (XXIX), stated:
“Todav. four months later. we note with regret
that resolution 3212 (XXIX) has not been respected
or applied. What is worse, the leaders of the Turkish
Cypriot community have decided to proclaim the
northern part of the island an autonomous and
federated State, a measure which is in contradic- . _
tion with the resolutions of the General Assembly
and of the Security Council. This decision has
complicated the situation in Cyprus even further.*’
[1817th meeting, para 115.1

65. The Secretary-General, who.retumed on 20 February from a visit to the area, stated:
“In the first mace. I wish to emDhasize the great
seriousness of the risk to peace and security in the
eastern Mediterranean which the Cyprus situation
represents as long as no progress is made in
resolving it along the lines . . . endorsed by the

69. The representative of the Soviet Union, ‘on
20 February, after referring to the unilateral actions
taken by the Turkish side, stated:
8

-

_.. .drawal of foreign forces, he could perhaps have
enlightened us as to what period of time constitutes,
in the opinion of the Turkish Government, a speedy
withdrawal of the Turkish forces of occupation from
the Republic of Cyprus. He could have further
indicated what urgent measures the Turkish side
proposes to take in order to permit the 200,000 Greek
Cypriot refugees, under conditions of safety, to
return to their homes in the area of the Republic
from which they have been forcibly expelled by the
Turkish forces of occupation.

“The delegation of the USSR wishes to express
its serious concern over the unilateral actions I
have mentioned, which have been taken by the
leadership of the Turkish community in Cyprus. It is
quite clear that such actions threaten the prospects
for the achievement of agreement in the intercommunal talks. The steps taken by the leadership of the Turkish community in Cyprus will
inevitably lead to a separation of the Cyprus
communities from each other and to their estrangement. Those steps, which will lead to the de facto
partition of the Cyprus State, are in direct contravention of. the .decisions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly.” [18131/r meeting,
para. 182.1

74. In his statement the representative of Turkey
attempted a second method of trying to confuse the
real issues and to sidetrack them. He alleged that
the Greek Cypriot side is responsible for what is
happening today in Cyprus, and in order to support
his theory, he alleged, inter alia, the following: first,
that the leaders of .the Greek Cypriot side were
opposed to the independence of Cyprus and were
not sincere when they spoke of their desire for au
independent and non-aligned State, and that their
real intention was to destroy the independence of
Cyprus in order to achieve enosis; secondly, that by
a coup in December 1%3 the Greek Cypriot side
ousted the Turkish members of the Government of the
republic of Cyprus and the Turkish members of the
House of Representatives; thirdly, that the Greek
Cypriot leaders had forced the. Turkish Cypriots to
live in armed enclaves in order to protect their lives
and properties; fourthly, that the Greek Cypriot
leaders planned the economic subjugation of the
Turkish Cypriots; fifthly, that on 15 July 1974, by
a military coup by Greek officers of the military
junta which temporarily ousted the Government of
Archbishop Makarios, an attempt was made to bring
about enosis..
- - _._
_-. _
.-75. In order to establish his first point-that the
Greek Cypriots are opposed to independence and
are working for its destruction-the representative of
Turkey quoted out of context certain statements of
President Makarios made to the press, to the effect
that he preferred enosis to independence. In answering
the representative of Turkey and Mr. Celik, I
maintained that the Turkish Cypriots were opposed
to independence and non-alignment and that they
were always, prior to and after independence, .in
favour of the partition and double annexation of
Cyprus, and I quoted statements by Turkish leaders
from which their preference for and their commitment to partition could be clearly established. In
fact, on the first of March the leading Turkish
newspaper in Cyprus, Haikin Sesi, explained the
position of the Turkish Cypriot side very clearly,
as
--. _
- follows:
-_

70. I could go on reading extracts from the
addresses of representatives which establish beyond
doubt that there has been no implementation by
Turkey of General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX),
that there has been no progress in the intercommunal
talks and that the Turkish side, by an arbitrary,
unilateral act, has created faits accomplis acting
contrary to and in violation of resolution 3212 (XXIX).
71. Despite the fact that Turkey has not complied
with resolution 3212 (XXIX), that it has not withdrawn
its forces from the territory of the Republic, that
it has- not allowed the refugees to return to their
homes, and that no progress has been made in the
talks in Cyprus, and despite the fact that the Turkish
side on 13 February arbitrarily and unilaterally
proclaimed a separate state in Cyprus, destroying
thus the free negotiating process for a solution to the
Cyprus problem-realities which have not only
been established by my address to the Security
Council but also by the addresses of so many
representatives-the representative of Turkey- tells
us that there is no sound and solid reason for
convening the Council and that we are here as a
result of a staged plan prepared by the Government
of the Republic of Cyprus in order to confuse us
all and to create an artificial crisis.
-..
72. The Government of the Republic of Cyprus has
no reason to create confusion in what is a crystalclear case both of non-compliance by Turkey with
General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) and also
of taking actions contrary to it.
73. I think it a much simpler course for the representative of Turkey to have taken would have been to
admit frankly that Turkey has not complied with
resolution 3212 (XXIX), instead of protesting and
professing to establish that the whole issue before us
is nothing more than a hoax played on the Council
by the Government of the Republic of Cyprus;- -Had
Turkey intended to comply with the resolution, the
representative of Turkey could have been constructive
by elaborating on the fact that Turkey intends to
withdraw its forces and, having regard to the fact
that resolution 3212 (XXIX) urges the speedy with-

“We put forward the demand -for a federal
State based on geographical separation because,
as it appears, Turkey does not consider a compiete
political integration advisable under the present
international situation. The total political integration
9

with the motherland implies the return of Cyprus
to its real owner and its coming under Turkish
sovereignty. This is our final aim. However, since
we have no plan at present to realize our final
aim, we must realize integration in other fields.
We must achieve integration up to the stage before
the final integration. Without economic integration,
there can be no political integration.‘*

I shall, however, confine myself to only two extracts,
taken at random. The first is from the SecretaryGeneral’s report of 11 June 1968:
“Moreover, despite the Government’s normalization measures and their beneficial effects on the
Turkish Cypriot population, their leadership has
not yet found it possible to respond with measures
of its own so as to further a steady movement
towards normality.** [S/8622, pat-u. 95.1

It must not be overlooked that the newspaper Hufkin
Sesi, which contained that article, is owned by and
expresses the political views of Mr. Kii@ik, the exVice-President of the Republic.

The second extract is from the Secretary-General’s
report of 3 June 1969:

76. The representative of Turkey and Mr. Celik
contend that it was the Greek Cypriot side that, in
a coup in 1963, ousted the Turkish ministers from
the Government and the Turkish members from
Parliament. We contend that it was the Vice-President
and the Turkish ministers who deliberately left the
Government-and the same applies to the Turkish
members of the House of Representatives-after some
intercommunal friction and violence, in order to
create the necessary pre-conditions for a de facto
separation that would lead to the partition of the
island.

“On the other hand, some major anomalies persist,
including the policy of the Turkish Cypriot leadership-instituted at the time of the disturbances of
1%3-1964-of denying to Greek Cypriot civilians
access to a number of public roads. I express
again the hope that this policy may now be reconsidered, particularly in view of the fact that
Turkish Cypriots have for more than a year
enjoyed full freedom of movement over the whole
island . ..‘* [S/9233, para. 79.1
80. The representative of Turkey and Mr. Celik
accuse the Greek Cypriot side of bad faith and of a
desire to destroy the independence of Cyprus because
Greek officers belonging to the ousted military
dictatorship of Greece, aided by some Greek Cypriots
belonging to EOKA-B, by an unlawful military coup
temporarily forced out of office the Government of
Archbishop Makarios in an attempt, the representative
of Turkey alleges, to bring about enosis.

77. The representative of Turkey and Mr. Celik
contend that after the intercommunal violence in
December 1963 the Greek Cypriot side forced the
Turkish Cypriots to take refuge in armed enclaves
for their safety. We contend that the Turkish Cypriots
did form enclaves and remained confined within them
in order to create separate areas and to establish
the basis of a separate Turkish geographical region
in preparation for the partition of the island. In support
of that, we point out that in 1964, shortly after the
intercommunal violence incurred in December 1963,
the United Nations Peace-Keeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP) was established, that the Turkish Cypriots
had complete freedom of movement in all territory
of the Republic under Government control, which they
freely exercised without fear or any danger to their
life and property, while at the same time the Turkish
leadership prevented Greek Cypriots from entering
or travelling through areas under its control. In his
reports to the Security Council the Secretary-General
has repeatedly deplored those measures of the Turkish
leadership, which he describes as contrary to the
efforts being made to return to normality.

81. They forget that the Government of Cyprus
called at once for an urgent meeting of the Security
Council and sought to protect the independence of
Cyprus. The representative of Turkey and Mr. Celik,
who in this Council stated that the Turkish forces
were not aggressors because they had been invited
to Cyprus by the Turkish community, overlook the
fact that the Turkish forces, using the military coup
as a pretext, landed in Cyprus, not for the purpose
of defending the independence of Cyprus and restoring
the 1%0 Constitution, as provided by the Treaty
of Guarantee, but for the purpose of occupying a
large part of the island and imposing the “Attila
Plan”, which had been conceived in Turkey many
years before the coup.

78. The representative of Turkey and Mr. Celik
alleged that the Greek Cypriot side planned the
economic subjugation of the Turkish Cypriots. We
contend that the economic plight of the Turkish
Cypriots was the result of their policy of selfsegregation and self-enclavement in armed enclaves
for the purpose of preparing the ground for the
partitioning of Cyprus.

82. Are the assertions of the Turkish side and the
counter-assertions of the Greek-Cypriot side of any
relevance to the present issues? If they are not relevant,
why did the representative of Turkey and Mr. Celik
raise them, instead of joining issue on whether
resolution 3212 (KKDL) had been implementedor not?
83. In my opinion, all these allegations and counterallegations have no bearing on what the Security
Council has been called on to consider. Moreover,
they do not constitute anything new, because the

79. I could cite innumerable extracts from the
Secretary-General’s reports to the Security Council.
10

same allegations have been made with increasing
monotony at every Council meeting except the formal
ones for extending the mandate of UNFICYP.
Moreover, I frankly stated at the beginning of my
opening address on 20 February [1813rh meeting]
that mistakes had been committed by both- sides,
and as a result the representative of Turkey later
grudgingly admitted that there had been mistakes
but he said that Turkey and the Turkish side were
not the first to make them.

cover such statements. We consider that it is not
for anyone except those who live in the country
to decide which is the Government of that country,
and that is especially true when it comes to naming
names. But everyone has the liberty of deciding
on his own action and his own conception of
what is or is not intervention in the internal affairs
of others.” [1817th meeting, para. 91.1
87. I agree fully with the statement of the representative of Turkey that it is not for anyone except
those who live in the country to decide which is
the Government of that country. All I wish to point
out is that he first broke this wise rule by alleging
that the Government of the Republic of Cyprus
was not a constitutional one, and that because of this
he could not recognize me as representing a Govemment which his country did not recognize; but when
he failed to convince anyone and other representatives
made their positions clear regarding the recognition
of the Cyprus Government, he remembered the
correct rule at the wrong time, namely the rule that
the question whether a Government is a constitutional one or not is an internal affair of the country
concerned.

84. If Turkey or the Turkish side is really interested
in establishing who is responsible for the Cyprus
situation, or if they are interested in apportioning
blame, why do they oppose so vigorously, obstinately
and with such absolutism proposals made by representatives for a United Nations fact-finding commission to visit Cyprus, to make its findings and
to report to the Security Council, establishing thus,
once and for all, the facts?
85. Why, in replying to a simple question, which
is whether General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX)
has been implemented, or whether Turkey has any
intention of implementing it, is it necessary, instead
of replying openly and directly to it, first to adopt
the position that there was no need for a Council
meeting to examine these issues, and then to resort
to the past, making assertions which have been made
time and time again and which were well known to
all members of the Assembly on 1 November when
they were voting in favour of resolution 32 12 (XXIX),
and more particularly to the representatives of the
interested parties, who also cast their votes in favour
of that resolution?

88. There is a further very serious matter which has
brought us here before the Security Council, and that
is the arbitrary and unilateral act taken on 13 February
by the Turkish side to declare a separate Turkish
State in Cyprus. This action of the Turkish side has
been criticized by the representatives who have so
far addressed the Council. Some of them have
characterized it as an act contrary to Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX). Let us examine what is the
attitude of the representative of Turkey on this issue.
I quote his own words:

86. The representative of Turkey, in a further effort
to confuse what is a simple issue, raised the question
and challenged the constitutionality of the Government
of the Republic of Cyprus. I do not propose to turn
the Security Council into a constitutional court and
argue the issue before it. It is suflicient to point out
that the Government of the Republic of Cyprus,
under its President Makarios, is recognized universally
by all States Members of the United Nations except
Turkey, and that all the representatives who spoke
before the Council reiterated this fact. All I propose
to do in this connexion is to point out that, while the
representative of Turkey raised this issue and alleged
that the Government of Cyprus was unconstitutional,
he criticized other representatives who stated that they
recognized the Government- of the Republic, and
described such statements as an interference in the
internal affairs of Cyprus. For the sake of complete
accuracy, I quote here his own words:

“The proclamation of the Turkish Federated
State of Cyprus contains nothing that goes against
the principles set out in the resolutions of the
United Nations.*’ [Ibid.. par. 76.1
I propose to search diligently, and with a magnifying
glass, in order to find whether there is even a grain
of truth in the statement of the representative of
Turkey.
89. In paragraph 4 of resolution 3212 (XXIX) the
General Assembly states that it:
“Commends the contacts and negotiations taking
place on an equal footing, with the good of&es
of the Secretary-General, between the representatives of the two communities, and calls for their
continuation with a view to reaching freely a
mutually acceptabie political settlement, based on
their fundamental and legitimate rights”.

‘There have been several statements indicating
the preference that the speakers’ countries had with
regard to which is the legitimate Government in
Cyprus now; sometimes they went so far as to
name its head. My country’s description of interference in the internal affairs of others would

90. Does the unilateral and arbitrary creation of
faits accomplis by one of the parties during the process
of negotiations, prejudging thus the issue of the
11

negotiations, constitute a proper negotiation to arrive
freely at a mutually acceptable solution, as provided
by paragraph 4 of resolution 3212 (XXIX)?91. That this was the true intention of the Turkish
side can be established by the following statement of
the representative of Turkey:
-“For th$ Turkish side, andbythat I mean Turkey
and the Turkish Cypriots, there are two principles
on which a compromise is out of the question.
Those two principles are, first, that Cyprus should
be a biregional and bicommunal federation and,
secondly, that the existing guarantees, as set forth
by the international agreements; should prevail.
The rest are matters which are negotiable . ..*’
[1817fh meeting, para. 781.
92. The Turkish side was perfectly free to have its
views on the nature of the solution of the Cyprus
problem. It could have come to the negotiations and
put its views for discussion. But it had no right to
impose those views by declaring a separate State in
the areas under Turkish military occupation by Turkish
forces, which, contrary to resolution 3212 (XXIX),
were not withdrawn. Such action or behaviour is
clearly and undeniably a violation of paragraph 4 of
resolution 3212 (XXIX). It establishes beyond doubt
that since the Turkish side has not expressed any
regret or remorse for such action but has sought to
justify it, a new procedure of negotiations is needed.
93. The second objective of the Turkish side in
creating a separate State is the destruction of the
independence and non-alignment of Cyprus, despite
assurances~
to the contrary given to the Security
Council by the representative of Turkey, and the
creation of a Turkish protectorate in Cyprus. The
Turkish separate State would continue to exist and
Turkish forces would continue to remain in Cyprus
until a solution of the Cyprus problem- had been
found. In the meantime, or in the absence of a solution,
the international personality of Cyprus would have
been destroyed, or at least would be nonexistent; it
would have been reduced to that of two separate
regions, neither seeking, requiring nor deserving
international recognition as independent States, but
existing and operating as autonomous administrations
under the control and supervision of Greece and
Turkey, the two guarantors.
94. It is for that reason that the Turkish side opposes
any reference to the Government of the Republic
of Cyprus or to the recognition of that Govemment. It is for that reason that the Turkish side
wants all references in any resolution of the Security
Council to be references to the representatives of
the two communities. It is for that reason that the
Turkish side insists that any provisional arrangement
pending the finding of a solution, such as that
regarding the international airport of Nicosia, the
port of Famagusta, and so forth, must be under the
control and supervision
of the two guarantors.
_..-. _

-

-__.

. . . . .-.

12

95. The Turkish position with regard to free negotiations- is.- as follows.. _
_.
.,
96. First, Turkish forces occupy 40 per cent of the
territory of the Republic and will not be withdrawn
despite General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX).
97. Secondly,. by a unilateral act the Turkish
side on 13 February established a separate Turkish
State in Cyprus in the area under the control of the
Turkish forces of occupation.
98. Thirdly, there is no Government of the independent Republic of Cyprus and none should be
mentioned in or recognized by any United Nations
resolution.
99. Fourthly, there is no legal personality of the
independent, non-aligned State of Cyprus, but only
two separate, regional, autonomous administrations
operating in their respective regions created artificially
by the force of Turkish arms, neither requiring nor
having international recognition but operating under
the control and supervision of the two guarantors.
100. Fiithly, if these views are accepted, there can be
negotiations for the rest-that is, the details. If not,
the independent State of Cyprus does not exist and
will not exist. What will remain will. be a Turkish
protectorate, Turkish forces on the territory of the
Republic, Turkish occupation of 40 per cent of the
territory of the Republic, and 200,000 suffering Greek
refugees.
101. That is what, according to the Turkish representative, constitutes negotiations on an equal footing
in order to arrive at a freely and. mutually agreed
solution, as provided by General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX).
102. Can it be denied that Turkey landed forces in
Cyprus under the pretext of defending it from the
illegal coup carried out by the military forces of the
ousted Greek military Government and that, having
done so, it is using such forces to impose its own
solution to the Cyprus problem?
.
103. Can it be denied that Turkey, by occupying
and continuing to occupy 40 per cent of the territory
of the Republic, by permitting, encouraging, accepting
and condoning the setting up of a separate Turkish
State in the area under its military control and
occupation, while objecting to the recognition. of the
Government of the Republic, has attempted to
extinguish the independence of Cyp~s, which it was
bound as a guarantor to protect, and seeks to impose
on the people of Cyprus a. solution of its own
choosing?
_._
104. Can it be denied that unless Turkey’s conditions
are accepted by the Greek Cypriots, who constitute
the majority of the population of Cyprus, there will
-

be no solution of the Cyprus problem and therefore
no independent non-aligned State?

promises to do so in the context of a final solution to
the Cyprus problem.

105. Can it be denied that Turkey has not complied
and does not intend to comply with Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX)?

112. There is therefore an urgent need, in addition
to setting a time-limit, to create a United Nations
committee consisting of members of the Security
Council to keep under observation the implementation
of General Assembly resolution .3212 (XXIX), to
participate in and lend its good offices in a. wider
forum in which a solution of the Cyprus problem can
be worked out, not under duress nor as a result of
faits accomplis but by the process of a freely negotiated
and commonly agreed solution of the Cyprus problem.

106. In view of all that, is the Security Council
to remain idle, as Turkey wishes it to be?
IO7. Turkey does not agree that there was need for
the Security Council to meet and alleges that there
was no sound reason for convening it. Turkey
alleges that there is no need for a resolution because
nothing has happened which has changed the situation.
Turkey objects to any reference in the resolution
to the Government of the Republic of Cyprus. Turkey
objects to condemning, deploring or even expressing
regret about the arbitrary unilateral action taken by
the Turkish side. in setting up a separate State in
Cyprus while the negotiating process continued.
Turkey wants us to go back and continue the intercommunal talks as if nothing had happened.

113. If such decisions are not taken by the Security
Council, the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Cyprus and its non-alignment will be
left in deadly peril. It will be a sad result for Cyprus,
but a sadder- day for the United Nations and the
entire world.
114. The PRESIDENT (interpretation front Spnnish): I call on the representative of Turkey.
115. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I just want to say that
I did not start the exchange of allegatiens, neither
did Mr. Celik, as far as I can recollect, and I do not
intend to continue it.

IO& If I were gifted, I would draw the following
cartoon. I would have Turkey sitting at the dining
table eating a non-lean or non-aligned chicken called
“Cyprus”. I would show myself approaching the dining
table and asking, “Can we talk about Cyprus?“.
To which Turkey would reply, “Yes, by all means.
But do you mind if I go on eating my non-aligned
chicken?“.

116. The sad history of Cyprus is known to all
concerned. It is the history of a State whose President’s
first official action was to proclaim that he had
signed the very act registering its birth under duress; a
President whose 15 years in office were devoted to
achieving union with another country and the elimination of one of the founding communities of his State.
That is what, in our eyes, transformed him into the
head of only one of the communities and that is why
we consider that he has forfeited his right to pretend
to be the head of both.

109. We are not here to decide what Turkey wants
or agrees to nor what the Government of Cyprus
requests. We are here to examine and adopt the
measures needed to save the sovereignty, the independence, the territorial integrity and the non-alignment of Cyprus and the principle of respect for
and compliance with the resolutions of the United
Nations, without which the world will revert to the
rule of the jungle, where the strong devour the weak.

117. An in-depth analysis has been made of my
motives and those of my Government in the Council
during the negotiations around the table here. I think
that my position, the position of my Government,
has been made clear. I can give further explanations
about it, if that is felt necessary, at any stage during
this debate.

110. Measures are needed. They are needed now.
They-are needed urgently. They must be effective to
protect the weak from the strong. They must aim
at bringing about the implementation of General
Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX), thus restoring free
negotiations for the solution of the Cyprus problem.

118. With regard to the pas! history of Turko-Greek
relations in Cyprus, however I am sure that Mr. Celik
is in a much better position than I am to give the
necessary answers.

111. In my opening address I stated that a timelimit must be set within- which full implementation
of General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) must be
carried out. Nothing has been said since my statement
by. the representative of Turkey that indicates any
willingness on the part of Turkey to proceed with the
speedy withdrawal of its forces from Cyprus and to
take urgent measures for the return of the refugees.
On the contrary, from what has been said it is clear
that Turkey does not intend to comply with either
requirement of resolution 3212 (X.XIX) and only

119. Just to put the record straight, nowhere in my
statement have I or could I have mentioned the
“Government of the Republic of Cyprus”. If I have
done so, please consider it now and in future a lapsus
linguae.
120. Again, to set the record straight, I should like
to say that with regard to who in Cyprus :;poke
13

of, worked for or plotted for enusis, and when and
how, I would prefer Mr. Gel&, if he so desires and
with the Council’s indulgence, to present a brief
upequ of the file on the subject.

a result of faits accomplis’. The faits accomplis go
back, as I have had occasion to say, to the time when
it was discovered that there were a few thousand-I
do not know how many thousands-ihegal
Greek
forces of occupation in Cyprus, whose departure in
1%7 was the beginning of one series of negotiations.
Then those troops have returned many times and there
have been the Grivas episode, attempted murders,
foiled coups , there have been many things in Cyprus,
but negotiations continued. The Secretary-General has
had many representatives, and the Ambassador now
present here is the second in the series of representatives of the Secretary-General who have taken part in
these negotiations; and I believe that the records of
the Security Council are full of what may, in one form
or another, be considered faits accomplis. There has
been the fait accompli of illegal importation of arms,
recognized by the Security Council. There have been
a lot of faits accomplis and unilateral actions.

121. I shall say only one thing in conclusion-and
I believe this also constitutes an answer: Turkey
continues to believe that a solution to the problem
can only be found at the negotiating table, which I
think should never have been abandoned.
122. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the representative of Greece.
123. Mr. CARAYANNIS (Greece): The last remark
of the representative of Turkey gave me a little hope.
He spoke of “the negotiating table”; does he mean with
faits accomplis or without?
124. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the representative of Turkey.

126. Therefore, I believe that none of them should
put an end to the negotiating process which is, I repeat,
the only way out of the Cyprus crisis.

125. Mr. OKAY (Turkey): In answer to my friend
and colleague from Greece, I would say that there
have been so many faits accomplis before and during
the negotiating process in Cyprus-that is during the
past seven or eight years that negotiations have been
taking place-that I consider his question a bit
irrelevant, because negotiations in Cyprus started as

The meeting rose at 530 p.m.
Notes

1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 382, pp. 3 and 8.

14
Litho in United Nations, New York

00300'

82-61202-October

1983-2200
