United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.8953 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8953rd meeting

Tuesday, 25 January 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Syed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Norway)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Peçi
Ms. De Souza Schmitz
Mr. Tian Bingxu
Ms. Lebatteux
Mr. Nanga
Mr. Boateng
Mr. Setia/Mr. Ravindran
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Mr. Leonidchenko
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Ms. Mudrick
Mr. Pine

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
War in cities: protection of civilians in urban settings
Letter dated 10 January 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Norway to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/23)

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by
a compilation of annexes (S/2022/54) containing the statements submitted by interested
non-members of the Council.

22-23972 (E)
*2223972*

S/PV.8953 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphones will
prompt speakers to bring their remarks to a close after
four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rae (Canada) (spoke in French): I thank
the Government of Norway for its efforts to put the
protection of civilians at the centre of its presidency of
the Security Council.
(spoke in English)
Given the global situation today, this is not a
theoretical discussion. We all know that real lives are at
stake. When we look at the remnants of large parts of
historical cities and areas of conflict around the world,
we see decimated landscapes that are reminiscent of the
Second World War: destroyed buildings, unexploded
ordinance and mountains of debris as far as the eye
can see.
Those cities were once thriving centres with
markets, schools, places of worship, hospitals and small
businesses. Those examples must not be repeated or
added to.
Our first obligation as Member States is to respect
the Charter of the United Nations and avoid aggression.
I would remind everyone of what it says in Article 2,
paragraph 4:
“All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of
any state.”
Thirty years after the Second World War and the
signing of the Charter, the world negotiated the first
Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions. The
modern principle of distinction — that parties to armed
conflict must at all times distinguish between civilians
and combatants, between civilian objects and military
objectives — was finally written into treaty form, along
with the principles of proportionality and precautions
in attack.
Today those principles form the undisputed basis of
international humanitarian law governing the conduct
of hostilities in all armed conflicts.
2/21

25/01/2022

(spoke in French)
For States that are willing to conform, what should
be done is clear: international humanitarian law
treaties should be ratified, adopted as national law and
integrated into military doctrine, training, operational
decision-making and disciplinary procedures.
(spoke in English)
All of us have an obligation to understand the
consequences of our actions. The urban environment
is complex and the precautions that international
humanitarian law requires include an understanding of
the foreseeable effects of attacks — who will die, who
will be displaced, whose homes will be destroyed and
whose health will be affected for all time.
We have to take into account the different roles of
men, women, boys and girls and their communities and
how that impacts their likelihood of being injured or
killed or exposed to sexual and gender-based violence. It
is critical for all parties to armed conflict to understand
the specific protection needs and priorities of women
and girls.
Where a State or an armed group flouts the law,
we have to go beyond ritual condemnation and take
action. For the past 20 years, we have seen that happen
less frequently because the Security Council is too
often obstructed by the veto. Since 2011, it has been
blocked 16 times from taking urgently needed action on
Syria, including to address some of the most pressing
humanitarian aspects of the civil war.
It is incumbent upon all States Members of the
United Nations to challenge the Security Council when
its will is blocked by the veto and pressure it to achieve
its mandate or find alter-native avenues of collective
address within the Charter of the United Nations.
To sum up, the first obligation for all Member
States, the Secretary-General and the Secretariat is
to prevent armed conflict and aggression from taking
place. We also owe it to those who have been killed
and maimed and displaced by unlawful attacks to
take every practical measure to ensure that parties to
armed conflict abide by the law. And yes, international
humanitarian law is the law. Collectively we actually
have the means to do so. The question is: do we have
the will?
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
22-23972

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking Norway for convening this important meeting.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
the President of the Inter-national Committee of the
Red Cross and others for their briefings.
As a staunch supporter of the concept of human
security, Japan attaches great im-portance to the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts, especially in
urban settings. Urban warfare kills, injures and displaces
a significant number of civilians, destroys critical
civilian infrastructure and disrupts essential services.
Explosive remnants of war hinder the reconstruction
of cities and prevent the return of displaced persons,
the return to school and the recovery of livelihoods.
The Security Council and Member States must take
concrete actions to prevent and mitigate such tragic
impacts of war in cities.
In that context, Japan joined the statement of
the Group of Friends on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. Japan reiterates that international
humanitarian law provides a robust legal basis for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, including
in cities.
In the same vein, Japan co-sponsored resolution
2573 (2021), on the protection of objects indispensable
to the survival of the civilian population, and echoes
the grave concern about indiscriminate attacks and the
establishment of military positions in densely populated
areas, as well as their devastating impacts on civilians.
Japan is actively engaged in operational activities to
help civilians affected by armed conflict, particularly in
urban settings. For example, Japan has long supported
the people in Gaza, including by contributing to the
conflict preparedness and protection project of the Mine
Action Service (UNMAS), which substantially reduced
casualties due to explosive ordnance through extensive
risk education. Japan is also starting to support the
UNMAS explosive risk reduction project in Ethiopia.
Japan is determined to continue to make every effort
for the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We will
continue to work closely with other Member States,
the United Nations system, international humanitarian
organizations and civil society organizations to
contribute to that endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.

S/PV. 8953 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): Last week I had the opportunity to contribute
to the Security Council open debate on women and
peace and security (see S/PV.8949). In addition, I
closely followed the debate on the Middle East and the
briefing on Colombia. January has been a busy month
for the Council, and I wish to express my appreciation
to Norway for the inclusive manner in which it has
conducted its presidency. Today’s open debate is vital
to the core objective of this Organization, which is the
protection of human beings, their well-being and peace.
This year is also central to efforts to advance the
implementation of the New Urban Agenda (General
Assembly resolution 71/256, annex), adopted at the
Conference on Sustainable Urban Development,
Habitat III, in Quito, Ecuador, which recognizes
the humanitarian impact of war on urban areas.
In its paragraph 30 we acknowledged the need for
Governments and civil society to further support the
provision of resilient urban services during armed
conflict, as well as the need to reaffirm full respect for
international humanitarian law.
The equation is simple, yet regrettable: war and
armed violence are an obstacle to the implementation
of the New Urban Agenda and to the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Through the
Quito Declaration on Sustainable Cities and Human
Settlements for All, we committed to supporting a
shift from a reactive to a proactive approach, investing
in and building resilience, while ensuring effective
responses to address the immediate needs of people
affected by armed conflict. We also agreed to give
special attention to countries in situations of conflict
and post-conflict countries, as well as countries under
foreign occupation.
I am grateful for this morning’s briefings. My
country shares the briefers’ concern regarding the
increased suffering in conflict areas, as also reflected in
the annual report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/423).
The violence, threats and attacks that health-care
workers continue to suffer, even six years after the
adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), are unacceptable.
Ecuador rejects and condemns the continuing at-tacks
on health services and schools. We also condemn
and reject the use of cyberspace to destroy or affect
critical infrastructure.

22-239723/21

S/PV.8953 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The Organization and all its entities, including
the Security Council in particular, must rise to the
challenge of protecting the civilian population and
the assets indispensable to their survival. That is why
Ecuador co-sponsored resolution 2573 (2021). The
Council must strengthen the Organization’s efforts
against the use of explosives in populated areas. On
this occasion, we emphasize our condemnation of the
use of such weapons, as well as our commitment to
continuing to support the efforts of the United Nations,
the Inter-national Committee of the Red Cross and civil
society to promote the effective implementation of
international humanitarian law and alleviate the impact
and suffering caused by conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Keçeli (Turkey): We thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this open debate and for
bringing an international focus to war in cities.
Urban warfare is not a new phenomenon. The United
Nations itself was created following the destruction of
cities around the world. Yet history repeats itself with
devastating consequences. Parties to conflict continue
to perpetrate attacks that target civilians and destroy
civilian infrastructure.
My country hosts approximately 4 million Syrian
refugees, many of whom fled from cities that were
targeted by the regime. When they return in the future,
they will do so knowing that life will never be the same.
The Syrian regime and its backers continue to target the
civilian infrastructure in cities.
Most recently, the Arşani water distribution and
pumping station close to central Idlib was hit. That
deliberate attack impacted almost 250,000 Syrians.
Such violations add to the gravity of the humanitarian
situation on the ground.
The Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s Protection
Units (PKK/YPG) terrorist organization also targets
civilians and civilian infrastructure in northern Syria,
where only last year more than 350 civilians lost their
lives in such attacks. It is now a matter of common
knowledge that the PKK/YPG release Da’esh members
from the camps in north-eastern Syria in exchange for
financial gain or for committing terrorist acts. The
terrorist organization also targets hospitals and medical
centres, continues to recruit children and prevents
4/21

25/01/2022

the civilian population, including Syrian Kurds and
Yazidis, from returning to their homes.
The lack of accountability signifies our collective
failure to prevent violations from occurring and,
indeed, reoccurring. We must act now to establish and
support the existing accountability mechanisms in
order to end impunity.
The Security Council formally recognized the
protection of civilians in armed conflict as a matter of
international peace and security in 1999. Since then,
more than 20 years have passed, which has provided
enough space to create the necessary tools to enhance
that agenda. Yet the internal dynamics and decisions of
the Council have reduced the role of the United Nations
to aftermath intervention.
We need a unified position from the Security
Council. We expect the Council to uphold its
responsibility in order to prevent and ease suffering
around the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Skoog: I thank Norway for convening this
important debate. I am pleased to address the Security
Council on behalf of the European Union and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the Re-public
of North Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Pro-cess
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
As many densely populated cities have become the
primary battleground for armed conflicts, protecting
civilians in the face of urban warfare remains a
critical challenge. The humanitarian consequences
of hostilities in urban areas are direct and indirect,
immediate and long-term, invisible and visible.
On numerous occasions, the Security Council has
addressed the protection of civilians, as well as
infrastructure and essential services, including the
protection of education, yet the situation on the ground
remains deeply worrying. Against that backdrop, the
European Union welcomes the discussion about the
ways in which contemporary urban conflicts are fought,
the devastating humanitarian consequences they cause,
and the actions needed to improve the protection
of civilians.
22-23972

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV. 8953 (Resumption 1)

The responsibility to protect civilians lies, first
and foremost, with those fighting wars. In that respect,
the EU calls on parties to conflicts to ensure that they
comply with international humanitarian law, with due
respect for the specific challenges that urban contexts
pose to civilians and civilian infrastructure. The EU is
also deeply concerned about the challenges associated
with the indiscriminate use of explosive weapons in
densely populated areas, including near hospitals,
schools or universities, or along routes to or from them,
and their impact on civilians. In that regard, we thank
Ireland for the transparent and inclusive consultation
process on protecting civilians in urban warfare, which
is aimed at developing a political declaration to address
humanitarian harm. The international community
also must take a more outspoken stance in calling on
all parties to armed conflict to respect international
humanitarian law, including by condemning violations
of international humanitarian law, finding political
and practical solutions to protect civilians and objects
that are vital to civilian populations, guaranteeing
that services are maintained or restored, ending the
military use of schools when unlawful, and ensuring
accountability for all violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights abuses in order to
ensure justice for victims.

committed to supporting humanitarian actors during
the active conflict phase, addressing the critical needs
of populations, undertaking light rehabilitation of key
infrastructure such as water stations and networks,
hospitals or schools, and ensuring at least minimal
services. It is also necessary to create space for
humanitarian workers to operate during conflicts.

The Council must do more to play a leading role
in protecting civilians in situations of urban warfare.
Specific statements by the Council noting the particular
concerns of urban warfare, including recognizing the
differential impact of urban armed conflict on women
and girls, can be helpful in bringing this issue to the
forefront of the United Nations agenda. We note with
appreciation the Secretary-General’s annual reports
on the protection of civilians. It is also necessary to
adequately monitor the implementation of thematic
Security Council resolutions related to the protection
of civilians, such as resolutions 2286 (2016), on the
protection of health-care workers; 2475 (2019); on
persons with disabilities; 2417 (2018), on hunger and
conflict; and 2601 (2021), on the protection of education
in conflict.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.

In line with the EU’s strong commitment to
international humanitarian law, we will continue to use
all the tools at our disposal to promote compliance with
the laws of armed conflict, including the protection of
education from attack. That will also be a key theme
at the upcoming European Humanitarian Forum.
As a world-leading humanitarian donor, the EU is

Authorities, donors, humanitarian and development
actors have a key role to play in better preparing
for and responding to the long-term impact of
protracted conflict in urban settings, by investing in
the sustain-ability and resilience of infrastructures,
as soon as the opportunity arises. In that respect,
strengthening the humanitarian-development-peace
nexus can enhance a holistic approach to addressing
urban warfare. Among other actions, development
agencies could provide a wealth of information on urban
services and technical guidance to humanitarian actors
at the outset of an emergency, and humanitarian actors
could actively strive to work together with development
actors during the early recovery phase, including by
clearing explosive remnants of war.
Given the increasing scale of urban warfare, we all
need to redouble our efforts to protect civilians and the
infrastructure necessary for their survival.

Mr. Vidal (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
wishes to thank the Permanent Mission of Norway for
having convened this meeting. We commend Norway
for attaching such importance to the issue under
discussion, which is further highlighted by having the
Prime Minister of Norway preside over the meeting
(see S/PV.8953). We also take this opportunity to thank
the briefers for their interventions (see S/PV.8953).
We have been entrusted with the duty to protect
civilians. That duty deserves maximum scrutiny and
commitment in the way it is addressed, in particular
when it comes to urban areas. Such areas, due to the
rapid pace of urbanization, are where we are witnessing
the extent of the impact of urban warfare, which is
estimated to affect 50 million civilians worldwide.
Today urbanization is a facilitator of violence, due to
such facets as the rise of densification, the anonymity
provided by buildings and the dependence of
combatants on resources, as well as the frequent use
of civilian structures as shelters and shields. Added to
that is the disproportionate impact caused by damage to

22-239725/21

S/PV.8953 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

infrastructure that is critical to the survival of civilians.
Such infrastructure often ends up as collateral damage
in armed confrontations. By destroying public-service
infrastructure and blocking access to humanitarian
assistance, conflict irremediably affects the lives of
the civilian population, damaging the supply of items
necessary for subsistence, such as food, access to
health, sources of electrical energy and fuels. That
directly harms the full enjoyment of human rights and
the dignity of people, which is especially evident in the
condition of children, who see their social environment,
schools and hospitals destroyed, and who are often
frequently used as soldiers, exposing them to serious
physical and psychological consequences.
The international community must therefore place
the protection of civilians at the heart of its concerns,
in particular with respect to the most vulnerable
groups, such as women and children, who suffer the
most from the severity of the confrontations. That
said, Chile stresses the need for parties to conflict to
avoid the use of explosive weapons with far-reaching
impact in populated areas and to evaluate and adapt
their choice of weapons and tactics in accordance with
international law, international humanitarian law and
all relevant instruments. Furthermore, Chile believes
that it is not only important to protect civilians, but
also to empower and support them, not as victims
but as agents of their own stories and leaders of their
com-munities. We must recognize that we, as Member
States, have an obligation to carry out our mandate to
protect and ensure that civilians can heal and move
towards resilience and recovery.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to thank the delegation of Norway for
convening this open debate, which allows us to reflect on
the impact of armed conflicts on the civilian population
when such conflicts occur in urban environments.
A traditional military approach assumes that urban
areas should be avoided and that attacks in urban areas
should only be undertaken as a last resort. However, both
history and the present show us that the main battles are
conducted in cities. Unfortunately, cities are the main
targets of military attacks and are increasingly the
main battleground in armed conflicts. The very nature
of an urban environment challenges the capacity of the
parties to a conflict to evaluate with accuracy and to
6/21

25/01/2022

anticipate collateral damage to civilians and to civilian
infrastructure. This demonstrates that guaranteeing
full compliance with international humanitarian law in
such contexts is all the more critical. The protection
of civilians and of civilian infrastructure will therefore
depend on how combatants apply the standards that
govern the conduct of hostilities.
When war takes place in cities, civilians experience
direct and indirect harm, ranging from death and injury
to the interruption of basic services and the destruction
of infrastructure. One challenge for military forces
is how to cope with the threats of the enemy when
that enemy is located within or near the population
without causing civilian victims or the destruction of
critical urban infrastructure. Urban warfare can have
devastating consequences for civilians, in particular
when the parties to a conflict do not respect the norms
of international humanitarian law. However, even
supposing that international humanitarian law is upheld,
the cumulative effect of urban warfare inevitably leads
to human suffering.
Urban environments are precisely where the
tension between the military need to defeat the enemy
and the challenge to protect civilians becomes most
clear. Implementing international humanitarian law
in such circumstances implies specific challenges in
terms of dissemination, training and the planning of
operations. Poorly trained troops and/or poorly planned
operations in urban areas significantly increase the
exposure of civilians to lethal threats and can turn
military operations into humanitarian tragedies. It is
essential to ensure that military operations conducted
in urban environments comply fully with international
humanitarian law, including the principles of precaution,
distinction and proportionality.
With regard to the norms of international
humanitarian law, it is expected that all parties to
an armed conflict in an urban environment adhere
to the same or a higher level of diligence that would
apply in a non-urban environment. International
humanitarian law demands additional measures to
ensure the protection of civilians who are the most
exposed to hostilities, through appropriate use of
tactics, selection of targets and weapons technology.
Furthermore, in situations of prolonged urban conflict,
responding to the humanitarian needs of civilians is
another major challenge due to the interconnected
characteristics of urban services and the extremely high
dependence of residents on these services. Damage
22-23972

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

to urban infrastructure caused by conflicts affect a
disproportionately large number of people, which
requires large-scale humanitarian efforts.
While wars in cities are not a new phenomenon,
there has been a resurgence in urban warfare over
the past few decades. It is expected that, by 2035, the
majority of the global population will live in cities.
That is why urban warfare will continue to be a
defining characteristic of armed conflicts in the years
to come. Unless the complexities of urban warfare are
addressed through coordinated international action,
the already unacceptable humanitarian consequences
of urban conflicts will only be aggravated. While there
is a normative framework concerning the protection of
civilians, that normative framework must be translated
into concrete results on the ground.
The Security Council must strengthen its
efforts to explore the best way to achieve that. The
Republic of Argentina would like to reiterate its
position of unrestricted support for the promotion and
implementation of international humanitarian law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine appreciates the
initiative of the Norwegian presidency to hold this
important debate and expresses its gratitude to the
briefers for their useful presentations (see S/PV.8953).
While Ukraine aligns itself with the statements
made by the observer of the European Union (EU)
and by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of
the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict, I would like to make the following
comments in my national capacity.
The issue of war in cities has been an extremely
painful one for my country. Just yesterday, Ukraine
com-memorated one of the most tragic pages in its
modern history. On 24 January 2015, the Russian
occupation forces shelled the densely populated areas
of the Ukrainian city of Mariupol with Grad and Uragan
rockets. That heinous attack left 31 civilians, including
children, dead and over 100 wounded. The then Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, speaking in
this Chamber, labelled the attack as having “knowingly
targeted a civilian population” and one that constituted
“a violation of international humanitarian law”
(S/PV.7368, p.2). That is just one example of the fact
that since the very beginning of the Russian aggression,

S/PV. 8953 (Resumption 1)

the residential areas of Ukrainian cities in the conflict
areas have been an integral element of the aggressor’s
military plans. In the Government-controlled part of
Ukraine, such areas have served targets for shelling or
terrorist attacks. In the occupied areas, they have been
used by the occupiers for the deployment of artillery
weapons, with the local population serving as human
shields. That has contributed, according to the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, to the death of almost 4,000 civilians and up to
900,000 wounded in Donbas. Almost 1.5 million people
have had to leave their homes in the occupied areas of
Ukraine, becoming internally displaced persons.
In addition, one of the biggest losses caused
by combat activity in urban areas is the enormous
damage to civilian infrastructure. In Donbas, that is
often the result of the indiscriminate shelling by the
Russian occupation forces. Conflict-related damage to
infrastructure leaves many people with no access to
water, sanitation, electricity and fuel. The destruction
of infrastructure and deliberate impediments to
repair work often result in serious environmental and
epidemiological threats. All of that has been a tragic
reality for the residents of the occupied part of Donbas,
especially during the initial stage of the Russian
aggression, when the level of violence on the ground
was at its highest.
The civilian population in the situation of conflict
in urban areas is also extremely exposed to flagrant
violations of human rights. That is exactly the case for
the population in the temporarily occupied territories in
Donbas and Crimea.
The topic of today’s debate is even more strikingly
relevant for Ukrainians living close to the border
with Russia and along the administrative line with
temporarily occupied Crimea. As we all know, a
Russian military force of more than 100,000 soldiers
is amassed on the border with Ukraine, against the
backdrop of warmongering rhetoric and unacceptable
ultimatums by Russia. Its illegitimate and manipulative
claims strike at the core of the United Nations, its
Charter, purposes and principles, in particular the
sovereign equality of States and refraining from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State. The State that is
questioning international law and the rules-based order
now cynically attempts to present itself as a victim in
need of security guarantees. One can hardly imagine

22-239727/21

S/PV.8953 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

a more upside-down way to defend oneself than by
plunging one’s neighbour into bloodshed and suffering.
Let me reiterate that Ukraine has no intention
whatsoever of taking any military action on the occupied
parts of its sovereign territory, let alone along the
border with Russia. We see no alternative to a political
and diplomatic solution to this international armed
conflict and will continue to seek any viable option
to secure peace. The starting point must begin with
Russia de-escalating the security situation on Ukraine’s
borders and withdrawing from Donbas and Crimea.
Since the Council bears primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, we
encourage the Council to make full use of its man-date
so as to avoid any escalation of military confrontation.
Although it is unimaginable to have the aggressor State
among Council members, we do believe in the integrity
and the commitment to the United Nations Charter
of the other members of the Council — an essential
element of the credibility of this body.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): I thank the delegation of
Norway for convening this open debate.
Urban warfare is not a new phenomenon. We are
also very familiar with its devastating humanitarian
con-sequences on civilians. A single attack on a
densely populated urban area can destroy schools,
hospitals, housing and other key infrastructure, killing
many and depriving even more of key public services,
including often even the most basic necessities required
for survival. The Security Council must continue to use
its moral weight to protect civilians in armed conflict,
especially women and children. In that context, allow
me to emphasize three points.
First, we reiterate the calls for global ceasefire. To
save lives, all violence must cease. There is no other
way. At the same time, humanitarian access must be
given to help innocent civilians. Time must be allowed
for political dialogue to take place and to give peace
a chance. Those who are fighting should make use
of ceasefire to look at the devastating impact on the
ground and to reassess what the people need.
Secondly, we need to enhance community
engagement in the protection of civilians. Policies
aimed at protecting civilians should be strategic,
inclusive and, most importantly, people oriented.
8/21

25/01/2022

Local communities must play an integral role in the
development and implementation of strategies to protect
civilians. Civilian-protection programmes should be
tailored to the needs of the affected communities. For
Indonesia, genuine community engagement remains
one of the most effective tools for peacekeepers to
prevent the loss of life.
Thirdly, we need to place women’s empowerment
at the heart of civilian protection. As agents of civilian
protection, women have greater access to communities.
They are essential enablers with respect to building
trust and confidence. Women play an important
role in providing humanitarian assistance during
armed conflict and even in preventing conflict from
happening in the first place. They also play a role in
peace-keeping. Indonesia is committed to increasing the
number of female peacekeepers, in line with resolution
2538 (2020). We believe that the full, effective and
meaningful participation of women in peacekeeping
operations, including at the leadership level, can
contribute to more effective community engagement
and therefore protection of civilians.
Allow me to conclude by calling on all of us to
strengthen our commitment to the Charter of the
United Nations. All Members, including the founding
Members of the United Nations, need to always uphold
such principles as non-use of force, respect for territorial
integrity, peaceful settlement of disputes and respect for
international law. Upholding those key principles saves
lives, and that commitment goes beyond the context of
armed conflicts. Naturally, our calls go out not only
to the Council but also to all who hold a position of
responsibility and are able to save those lives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
holding this open debate on the protection of civilians
in urban settings, and for the concept note provided
by Norway (S/2022/23, annex), which reflects an
understanding and analysis of the significant negative
effects of armed conflicts on civilians, especially in
cities and populated areas.
Unfortunately, 76 years after the establishment of
the United Nations, humankind still suffers from the
escalation of wars and armed conflicts, especially
non-international ones. The international community
remains unable to provide the tools necessary to
22-23972

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

protect civilians and civilian infrastructure, despite
global consensus on the need to end the suffering of the
victims of armed conflicts and to mitigate the effects
of said conflicts. Countries of the South, especially in
Africa and the Middle East, are most affected by armed
conflicts and their disastrous repercussions on the
people. I note in this regard what the Secretary-General
said this morning about the destruction and casualties
of wars in our Arab region, the latest of which was
the war on Gaza in May 2021 (see S/PV.8953). The
grave violations committed against civilians in these
conflicts are being met with indifference, as if the lives
of people, children and women in those regions had
no value.
I have referred to non-international or domestic
wars, which constitute the majority of armed conflicts.
Unfortunately, parties to those conflicts try to avoid
their obligations towards civilians under international
humanitarian law by refusing to acknowledge that
those conflicts are actually armed conflicts, describing
them instead as internal clashes or as legitimate fights
against terrorism, as if fighting terrorism were an
excuse to target civilians and collectively punish them.
Parties to many of these conflicts do not acknowledge
that international humanitarian law is applicable to
internal domestic armed conflicts. The responsibility
rests in that regard with the Security Council and
States parties to the 1949 Geneva Convention and its
protocols. They must compel parties to such conflicts
to respect their legal obligations related to protecting
civilians and civilian targets. They must leave no doubt
that international humanitarian law is applicable to
those conflicts.
The Council has an important role to play by
reaching consensus on standards that should be
applicable to all armed conflicts, international and
internal, especially when it comes to protecting
civilians in urban areas. That includes prohibiting the
excessive use of force and weapons that cause grave
harm to civilians. Parties must abide by the principles of
necessity and proportionality in the use of force, as well
as the principle of precaution in military operations. The
concept of military objective must be interpreted in the
narrowest of senses. The Council must show parties to a
conflict that the international community is monitoring
their behaviour by deploying fact-finding missions
during conflicts, by authorizing criminal investigations
of violations and by referring situations to international
criminal justice, where applicable. Impunity is what in

S/PV. 8953 (Resumption 1)

many cases emboldens parties to a conflict to violate
international humanitarian law. States also must be
resolute in confronting such violations against civilians
as indiscriminate attacks against populated areas and
the collective punishment of civilians. The concept
of criminal accountability must be consolidated in
their military doctrines, the rules of engagement must
prohibit such violations and perpetrators must be held
accountable before their courts.
We must raise awareness and promote a culture of
respect for international humanitarian law, nationally
and internationally. It is important to pressure parties
to conflicts in urban areas to commit to not attacking
civilian targets and to declaring safe zones where no
party undertakes military operations. They must also
respect the role of the Red Crescent and the International
Committee of the Red Cross. Humanitarian
organizations must also work under the auspices of
the United Nations, while upholding the principles of
humanitarian action, especially non-discrimination
and neutrality to reduce the risk of being targeted.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): Slovakia highly appreciates
your initiative, Madam President, to organize this open
debate on the protection of civilians in urban settings,
which is indeed relevant and of grave concern. Slovakia
fully aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier
by the observer of the European Union.
The Secretary General — who, together with
other speakers, I would like to thank for today’s
remarks — pointed out in his 2021 report that armed
conflicts continue to be characterized by
“high levels of civilian deaths, injury and
psychological trauma, sexual violence, torture and
disappearance, as well as damaged and destroyed
homes, schools … hospitals and essential civilian
infrastructure (S/2021/423, para. 2).
He also highlighted the disproportionate impact
of explosive weapons on civilian populations in
urban settings. Moreover, the already grave general
situation has been further exacerbated by the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
Slovakia seizes this opportunity to express its
strong commitment to international humanitarian law
and the principles on which it is based. Respect for
international humanitarian law is an irreplaceable tool

22-239729/21

S/PV.8953 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

for the effective protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The theatres of armed conflict have increasingly shifted
from open battlefields to populated areas, which has
had a devastating humanitarian impact on civilians.
We must beef up our efforts to prevent, minimize
and mitigate the adverse impacts of military operations
on civilian populations in order to protect them from
threats and acts of physical violence, which in recent
times we have unfortunately seen occur far too often.
That approach must be based on the core principles of
international humanitarian law, under which all parties
to conflicts have an obligation to protect civilians.
They also have the obligation to distinguish between
civilians and combatants and between civilian objects
and military objects and to ensure that attacks comply
with the principles of necessity and proportionality. In
that regard, the Security Council clearly plays a crucial
role in condemning every breach of those obligations so
that respect for international humanitarian law becomes
a reality rather than merely existing on paper.
With regard to identifying avenues for increasing
the protection of civilians in urban settings, we would
like to highlight the following three points.
First, the international community should seize
every opportunity to call on all parties to armed conflict
to avoid fighting in urban settings.
Secondly, it is also of paramount importance to
strengthen data collection on civilian harm, support
establishing the relevant investigative and data
collection mechanisms and hold accountable the
perpetrators of serious violations of international
humanitarian law.
Thirdly, we must expand the traditional
understanding of the protection of civilians and
adapt our approach to new realities and challenges,
particularly with regard to the development of new
technologies and their deployment in armed conflict.
Furthermore, it is also essential that the different
components of the United Nations system work
together as a whole and support each other effectively.
We must also achieve better results in promoting the
nexus between peace and security, development,
humanitarian action and international humanitarian
law. Often we do not move beyond the verbal stage of
our work. We need to achieve better, tangible results in
practical situations.
10/21

25/01/2022

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Ms. Eneström (Sweden): I am honoured to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries:
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own
country, Sweden.
We thank Norway for organizing this important
signature event. We welcome the remarks made by the
Secretary-General and by Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
Armed conflicts are increasingly being fought
in urban areas, with devastating consequences for
civilians. We share the concerns of the SecretaryGeneral and call upon all parties to armed conflict
to prevent civilian harm resulting from the use in
populated areas of explosive weapons, particularly
those with wide-area effects. In addition to the civilian
casualties and destruction of civilian infrastructure
they cause, armed conflicts often disrupt the delivery
of basic services such as health care and education.
That increases the burden on the humanitarian system,
which is already overstretched.
That increasingly pressing problem deserves the
full attention of the Security Council and adequate
monitoring of the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. The Council and the
international community as a whole have a shared
responsibility to fully uphold and respect international
law, including international humanitarian law and
international humanitarian principles. We recall
our joint obligation to respect and ensure respect for
international humanitarian law, as enshrined in article
1 common to the Geneva Conventions. The Nordic
countries are strong defenders of the rules-based
international order, at the heart of which is international
law, including international humanitarian law.
We are key humanitarian donors and actively
engage in conflict resolution around the globe. We
would like to emphasize in particular three aspects of
today’s debate.
First, we would like to highlight the importance
of safeguarding objects that are indispensable to the
survival of civilians. The fact that the risk of collateral
damage is higher in urban settings must not be an
excuse, but rather a strong imperative for even more
caution and prudence. In that context, we welcomed
the adoption last year of the landmark resolution 2573
22-23972

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

(2021), on the protection of civilian infrastructure
in global conflicts, and call on all parties to armed
conflicts to fully adhere to its provisions.
Secondly, the targeting of humanitarian and healthcare personnel must end. International humanitarian law
is clear: medical workers, facilities and transport must be
protected. The wounded and sick must be cared for and
spared. Attacks on medical care — which is protected
under international humanitarian law — amount to
war crimes and may further aggravate ongoing armed
conflicts. They may also undermine the Security
Council’s efforts to maintain international peace and
security. In that context, we call on all parties to armed
conflict to comply with the relevant international
law, including resolution 2286 (2016), on attacks
on hospitals.
Thirdly, continued access to education in armed
conflicts is crucial for the protection and future of
children and young people. In that context, we call for
the protection of education and the implementation of
resolution 2601 (2021).
There is no lack of international instruments to
protect civilians in urban settings. Unfortunately, what
we are missing is respect for, and compliance with,
both international humanitarian law and international
humanitarian principles. In that context, we would
like to highlight the ICRC guidance document entitled
“Protecting health care: Guidance for the armed forces”,
which can provide practical examples of how to protect
health care while carrying out military operations and
hopefully inspire better implementation.
Accountability is necessary, not only to ensure
justice for the victims of breaches of international
humanitarian law but also to prevent and deter
future violations. We must ensure that accountability
is an integral part of how we work to strengthen
compliance with and implementation of international
humanitarian law.
Last but not least, we would like to pay tribute
to the brave humanitarian health-care workers who
work — often at personal risk — to address the needs of
people affected by warfare in urban settings. Needless
to say, attacks, threats and intimidation against those
brave men and women are unacceptable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.

S/PV. 8953 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): I would like to express
my appreciation to Norway for placing the protection
of civilians among the priorities of its Security Council
presidency. I thank Secretary-General António Guterres
and Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for outlining the evolving
challenges with respect to the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts, particularly those civilians who are
trapped in conditions of urban warfare.
The presence and intervention of the Prime
Minister of Norway earlier today during this open
debate demonstrates the high importance and urgency
of protecting civilians. I would like to acknowledge
Norway’s long-standing and historic record in
humanitarian affairs.
In Armenia, we remember dearly the legacy of the
great humanitarian Fridtjof Nansen, whose name is
often associated with the principles of human rights.
Documents for stateless persons — widely known as
“Nansen passports” — issued at the initiative of Nansen
in his role as League of Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, were instrumental for the protection of
civilians, including tens of thousands of survivors of
the Armenian genocide, in the aftermath of the First
World War.
Armed conflicts characterized by intense levels
of warfare, with massive and targeted uses of heavy
weaponry and prohibited armaments, turn densely
populated areas, cities and settlements into zones of
devastation. The placement of military installations
and positions in, or in close vicinity to, residential
neighbourhoods further complicates the safety and
security of civilians and threatens their lives.
In our region, we are faced with the consequences
of Azerbaijan’s brutal use of force against the people
of Nagorno-Karabakh, which claimed thousands of
lives, brought devastation to civilians and destroyed
residential buildings, hospitals, schools, churches
and critical infrastructure. The cities of Stepanakert,
Shushi, Martakert, Martuni and Hadrut were targeted
by multiple-launch rocket systems, heavy artillery,
unmanned aerial vehicles and prohibited weapons such
as cluster munitions.
Launching a war in the middle of a global
pandemic, in gross violation of the existing ceasefire
agreement and international humanitarian law, must
be acknowledged for what it represents: a premeditated
and carefully planned and executed attempt to inflict

22-2397211/21

S/PV.8953 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

maximum casualties that fully demonstrates an intent to
destroy, in whole or in part, an ethnic group. No amount
of distorted narrative or false justification for military
action can alter the truth and the facts on the ground.
The obstruction and politicization of granting United
Nations agencies safe and unhindered humanitarian
access to Nagorno-Karabakh has undermined
international efforts to conduct comprehensive
assessments of the humanitarian situation and the
protection and recovery needs and human rights of the
affected population.
Armenia appreciates the unique role of the
International Committee of the Red Cross in addressing
the immediate life-saving needs of the population
of Nagorno-Karabakh and channelling urgent
humanitarian assistance.
The activities of the humanitarian response centre
of the Russian Federation’s peacekeeping forces in
Artsakh have also been instrumental in providing
vital assistance and services to the population, while
at the same time conducting humanitarian demining
and clearing thousands of unexploded ordnance
and explosive objects from residential areas and
agricultural fields.
The evolving methods of warfare and the further
sophistication of weapon systems necessitate stronger
efforts by the international community to ensure
the full implementation of the obligations under the
Geneva Conventions and their Protocols Additional.
The United Nations and the international community
should have the ability and capacity to identify and
address situations of gross violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law to
ensure that people trapped in conflict situations are not
left behind and have access to humanitarian assistance,
in line with the principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence.
While we recognize that there may be inherent
limitations of the working methods of international
structures, allow me to conclude by emphasizing the
need to be impartial but not value-neutral.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank Norway for organizing this open debate on the
protection of civilians in urban areas.
12/21

25/01/2022

Luxembourg fully endorses the statements made on
behalf of the European Union and the Group of Friends
for the Protection of Civilians.
The Secretary-General’s 2021 annual report
(S/2021/423) on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict highlighted the devastating impact of the
use of explosive weapons in urban areas on civilians
and critical civilian infrastructure, including schools.
Urbanization will continue to accelerate those trends.
In the post-conflict context, rehabilitating damaged
critical infrastructure can take years and delay the
return of displaced people. Access for humanitarian
organizations is limited, and sometimes entire cities
are destroyed on such a scale that they are beyond
reconstruction, as in the case of Syria.
The impact and suffering that occurs when schools
are attacked and closed weighs not only on adults and
children — especially young girls — but also on society
as a whole. In the absence of access to education, many
children must go to work. Once children have taken that
path, it is often impossible for them to return to school,
which reinforces a cycle of exploitation and poverty and
makes them vulnerable to recruitment by armed groups.
The protection of education must therefore remain a
priority. Luxembourg remains firmly committed to the
Safe Schools Declaration and urges all States to join it.
That view also forms part of Luxembourg’s
approach to its membership of the Human Rights
Council for the period 2022 to 2024. We have made
the protection and promotion of the rights of children,
including those affected by armed conflict, a priority
for our term. Luxembourg will also continue to focus,
through humanitarian action, on the protection of
children and education in emergency situations, in
particular with respect to access to education for girls.
As the President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) pointed out in his briefing,
greater respect for international humanitarian law
is needed to alleviate the suffering of the civilian
population. The ICRC is one of Luxembourg’s longstanding humanitarian partners. In the wake of the
deplorable cyberattack that recently targeted the ICRC,
we want to assure the ICRC that it can continue to
count on Luxembourg’s solidarity and active support in
promoting respect for international humanitarian law
at all levels by all parties to conflicts. That respect is
essential for guaranteeing the protection and dignity of
all, especially those in urban areas.
22-23972

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Those responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law must also be held accountable. There
must be an end to impunity. In that regard, Luxembourg
stresses the important role of the International
Criminal Court.
The collection of data on the impact of conflicts
on civilians in urban areas is essential and must
be strengthened. We must also link the protection
of civilians in urban areas with post-conflict
peacebuilding. In that context, we must better link
humanitarian action with development activities.
Finally, Luxembourg continues to support the
development of a political declaration in which States
would commit themselves to avoiding the use of
explosive weapons with wide-area effects in populated
areas and welcomes the negotiations led by Ireland in
that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to the
United Nations.
Archbishop Caccia: The Holy See would like to
thank Norway for organizing today’s important debate.
Since the Second World War, the vast majority of
civilian casualties have resulted from internal, rather
than international, conflicts. While the Protocol
Additional II to the Geneva Conventions extends
protections for civilians in those conflicts, such
protection has proven inadequate in the face of what
Pope Francis calls another world war, fought piecemeal,
which increasingly involves harm to civilians in densely
populated areas where, sadly, the deafening noise of
conflict has been intensifying.
Every year, tens of millions of people now suffer the
consequences of armed conflict in cities. The SecretaryGeneral has further reported that civilians make up
almost 90 per cent of those killed or injured by explosive
weapons in urban settings. Such statistics demonstrate
that in densely populated areas, distinguishing between
combatants and non-combatants is very difficult,
calling into question whether the use of explosives in
such settings is lawful at all.
Beyond the initial tragic loss of life, urban
warfare can devastate critical civilian infrastructure
such as hospitals, sanitation systems, schools and
places of worship. Meanwhile, explosive remnants
contaminate urban centres, complicating the return
of displaced persons, hindering reconstruction efforts

S/PV. 8953 (Resumption 1)

and inhibiting integral human development long after
conflicts are settled.
In recent years, the Security Council has taken steps
to rectify the issue of inadequate recourse by parties
to armed conflict to the principles of distinction and
proportionality. Resolution 2573 (2021) demands that
parties to armed conflict refrain from attacking objects
critical to the survival of civilian populations and
rightly expresses grave concern at the establishment
of military positions in densely populated areas, which
treats non-combatants as pawns of war rather than as a
class of people to whom protection is owed.
In that regard, the Holy See supports efforts
responding to the call of the Secretary-General to
develop a political declaration in which States commit
themselves to avoiding the use of explosive weapons
with wide-area effects in populated areas, including the
ongoing consultations process to that end led by Ireland.
While States bear the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians from the effects of explosives,
everyone is bound to observe the limitations imposed by
international humanitarian law to protect defenceless
peoples and civilian structures. Efforts to constrain
the use of explosive weapons in urban settings should
therefore engage all parties, including non-State actors,
including those operating in conflict settings.
The Holy See would also like to acknowledge the
tireless work of the International Committee of the Red
Cross. It is our sincere hope that today’s open debate
will advance measures to protect civilians in armed
conflict and end the culture of impunity that has sown
death and suffering among urban populations. For their
sake, we pray that the words expressed here today are
translated into concrete action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): South Africa
wishes to thank Norway for convening this important
open debate, which highlights the effects of conflict
on civilians, including those in urban settings, as well
as the imperative to enhance efforts to ensure their
protection. I also wish to thank the briefers for their
insightful briefings this morning.
Urban areas are largely concentrated and are centres
of social and economic activities. It is therefore of grave
concern that urban areas are often deliberately targeted
in escalating and protracted wars. We have heard from

22-2397213/21

S/PV.8953 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

25/01/2022

other speakers about the detrimental impacts of conflict
in urban settings, including the death and injury of
civilians and damage to infrastructure.

humanitarian organizations to protect and assist in
building essential urban services that are resilient,
especially during challenging times.

The Geneva Conventions and the principles of
international humanitarian law clearly stipulate the
obligations of parties to armed conflict to primarily
protect civilians and civilian objects. South Africa
underlines the importance of all actors, including those
who are involved in armed conflicts, to ensure that
they comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law.

Finally, the international community must shore
up political will and act immediately and without
selectivity to protect human lives and peacefully and
justly resolve the conflicts plaguing our world. In
doing so, we must not be seen to favour the protection
of some people while ignoring the plight of others. It is
important that we work together to reduce violence and
help cities and communities better cope with fragility
in order to mitigate the effects of wars on people.

It is regrettable, however, that the plight of civilians
in protracted conflict situations, such as in Palestine
and Western Sahara, seems to not receive adequate
attention, while accountability for violations against
civilians in those territories remains elusive. Current
and recent armed conflicts, such as the conflict in
Gaza, have continued to expose the devastating effects
on civilians of the use of heavy explosive weapons in
populated areas.
The use of explosive weapons exacerbates the
humanitarian crisis for people living in the Gaza Strip
and negatively impacts civilians’ living conditions and
livelihoods. The destruction of civilian infrastructure,
such as houses, schools and hospitals, as well as the
impact on the environment, will further intensify the
long-term consequences of the escalation of violence.
We now wish to make a few points.
First, the Security Council and Member States need
to be pragmatic and innovative in developing tailormade solutions to the specific needs of the affected
communities, taking into consideration the particular
dynamics of each context.
Secondly, we suggest that drawdowns of United
Nations missions include a protection-of-civilians
mandate. The Security Council may wish to consider
adjusting the procedure for drawdowns based on a
benchmark system similar to the one implemented in
the Central African Republic. That could better ensure
that countries are adequately competent to protect
civilian populations before drawdowns take place.
Such benchmarks may also assist in better gauging the
situation of conflict on the ground while the future of a
mission is considered.
Thirdly, Member States ought to engage and
encourage partnerships with local authorities, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and other
14/21

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): Lithuania sincerely
thanks the Norwegian presidency for holding this
important open debate. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral, the President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross and the other briefers for their briefings.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union (EU). I would also like to
make the following comments in my national capacity.
We fully agree with those who have underlined
that the scourge of urban warfare is a growing problem.
The estimates that 50 million civilians worldwide
are affected by fighting in heavily populated areas
are evidence of the challenges faced in upholding
international humanitarian law across the world.
As noted in the EU statement, the responsibility
for protecting civilians in cities rests predominantly
with those who are fighting. The particular challenges
of combat in urban areas pose severe dangers to those
civilians who are trapped in cities. The international
community must be more outspoken in holding
combatants up to the standards of international
humanitarian law. That means condemning violations
and finding political and practical solutions to protect
civilians and civilian objects and ensuring that
those responsible for any breaches of international
humanitarian law be held to account.
Special attention is needed to acknowledge
the particular vulnerabilities of the groups that
are sometimes overlooked. Armed conflicts have
devastating impacts on children, who are especially
vulnerable to abuse, exploitation and trafficking.
Women and girls in conflict-affected areas can find
themselves subjected to appalling levels of sexual
22-23972

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and gender-based violence. They also suffer targeted
attacks, intimidation, abductions, forced marriages and
restrictions of movement based on their sex. People
with disabilities are disproportionately impacted and
experience even higher levels of risk in war zones.
I would also like to note the situation in our region.
Today Russia’s actions in eastern Ukraine do little
to inspire confidence, except for the willingness of
Russian-backed forces to comply with the principle
of distinction. The region has seen indiscriminate and
deliberate shelling, resulting in widespread damage
to civilian infrastructure and property. Currently,
nearly 4,000 civilians have been killed and 1.5 million
internally displaced.
The challenges faced daily by residents of eastern
Ukraine — or along the line of contact — are significant.
Key infrastructure, such as water-pumping stations that
serve communities, continue to be exposed to shelling.
Entire villages have been without electricity for weeks.
Mines and unexploded ordnance are an additional layer
of risk for people living close to the line of contact.
Too many families have lost loved ones or seen them
severely injured while working in the fields, going to
school or simply playing in the yard. Hundreds of people
are still searching for their missing family members.
Regretfully, despite all the diplomatic efforts,
Russia further escalates and continues military
deployments around the Ukraine borders in Crimea.
Moreover, Russian troops are deployed in Belarus as
well, so we find ourselves on the eve of another potential
invasion, discussing how best to avert such a tragedy.
Clearly it is up to the international community, and the
Security Council in particular, to call out breaches of
international humanitarian law.
Cooperation between the development and
humanitarian sectors, as well as support for
humanitarian actors in the early stages of a conflict in
addressing the critical needs of the population, can do
much to ameliorate the immediate emergency and may
even positively affect the direction of a conflict.
Lithuania remains committed to strengthening
the capacity of humanitarian actors to better prepare
and respond to emergencies, in particular conflicts in
urban settings.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.

S/PV. 8953 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Kridelka (Belgium): Belgium aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union and with the statement of the Group of
Friends on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
This is a critical time for civilians in conflict
settings, a time when respect for international
humanitarian law has dropped to an all-time low and at
the same time humanitarian needs have increased to an
all-time high. The resurgence of urban warfare in the
last decades has had a devastating impact on civilian
populations, infrastructure and essential services such
as schools and hospitals, with civilians now representing
close to 90 per cent of the casualties. More recently, the
coronavirus disease pandemic has further exacerbated
those trends.
Belgium supports a multidimensional approach
to the protection of civilians, an approach based on
prevention, protection and assistance activities adapted
to the urban context. That approach would also ensure
child protection and child-protection mainstreaming
and pay particular attention to the most vulnerable
groups and individuals, such as refugees, children,
unaccompanied and separated children, girls and
women, people with disabilities, the elderly and
other communities.
What can we do all together? I wish to quickly
underline six points.
First, Belgium calls on all parties to armed conflict
to strictly comply with international humanitarian
law and respect its rules and principles, in particular
strict compliance with the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precautions in attack. The
prohibition of direct attacks against civilians and
civilian objects is key to ensuring the protection of
civilians in conflict settings.
Secondly, Belgium calls for the full implementation
of the commitments contained in resolution 2573 (2021)
to protect access to essential services. Parties to armed
conflict should further integrate concrete measures to
safeguard the humanitarian space and protect health
care and essential civilian facilities, including in
counter-terrorism and sanctions contexts.
Thirdly, concerning explosive weapons in populated
areas, additional measures such as the development of
urban-warfare-specific policies, the exchange of good
practices between armed forces and the training of
military personnel on the specific demands of the urban

22-2397215/21

S/PV.8953 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

environment could further contribute to improving
the implementation of international humanitarian
law. In that respect, Belgium welcomes the ongoing
consultation process led by Ireland aimed at developing
a political declaration to address the humanitarian
impact of explosive weapons.
Fourthly, turning to humanitarian access, Belgium
calls on parties to armed conflict to provide and facilitate
rapid and unimpeded access to humanitarian relief, and
we urge all parties to facilitate humanitarian access.
My country further calls on donors to provide flexible,
multi-year funding to humanitarian organizations
to ensure longer-term systemic support to civilian
populations and to strengthen the resilience of essential
service systems. The development of partnerships with
relevant actors, in particular local communities and
essential service providers, is also key.
Fifthly, the fight against impunity for the most
serious crimes remains one of Belgium’s priorities.
Belgium continues to support international justice
and accountability mechanisms for violations of
international law, and we urge all States Members of the
United Nations to do the same. In that regard, my country
is concerned about reports of a lack of accountability
for crimes against children in armed conflict. We call
for the systematic recognition of children as a category
of victims in their own right within judicial processes
so as to strengthen accountability for violations
affecting them.
Sixthly, my last but not least point is precisely
about children and armed conflict. Children are the
most vulnerable victims of conflicts and humanitarian
disasters. Belgium remains committed to addressing
their needs, facilitating access to education and
intensifying efforts to prevent and address grave
violations against them. My country calls on all parties
to particularly address the plight of children and calls
for the implementation of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, the implementation of the
Safe Schools Declaration and the implementation of the
Paris and Vancouver Principles.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): I join my colleagues
in thanking the Norwegian presidency for having
convened today’s debate.
16/21

25/01/2022

I wish also to align myself with the statement
made earlier today by the delegation of the European
Union, and in my national capacity I would like to add
the following.
We are deeply alarmed by the findings in the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2021/423) that
civilians continue to be dramatically affected by
armed conflicts.
My country has its own bitter experience of falling
victim to disproportionate attacks, not in the remote
past but in 2008, when Georgia became the subject
of full-scale military aggression from its neighbour
Russia, in gross violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Helsinki Final Act. More than 30 cities
and villages, including the capital, were shelled with
cluster bombs and other types of prohibited munitions.
As a result, more than 400 civilians and military
personnel were killed and more than 1,700 wounded;
thousands joined the half a million internally displaced
persons and refugees expelled during the previous
waves of ethnic cleansing; 53 villages in and around the
Tskhinvali region were fully cleansed and destroyed;
and 35,000 houses belonging to ethnic Georgians were
deliberately burnt and ruined.
The judgment of the European Court of Human
Rights of 21 January 2021, which attested to Russia’s
ongoing occupation and effective control of the Georgian
regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali, confirmed those
violations and the violations of the European-mediated
12 August 2008 ceasefire agreement and found Russia
responsible for human rights violations on the ground as
well as for ethnic cleansing of the Georgian population.
While no international human rights mechanisms
are allowed inside, and the European Union Monitoring
Mission is deprived of the possibility of entering
occupied regions to fully implement its mandate, Russia
is continuing to build a considerable military footprint
in Georgia’s Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions and is
taking steps towards their de facto annexation.
The aggression and occupation policy and hybrid
methods of warfare, well tested against my own country,
are now being used against Ukraine. After eight years
of armed aggression and the illegal annexation of
Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, we are witnessing an
unprecedented military build-up and further looming
military threats.
22-23972

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

It is imperative that the international community
remain committed to defending its principles. It is of
particular necessity that international organizations be
firm and vocal on Russia’s responsibility in terms of
both human rights violations and the denial of access
for international human rights mechanisms on the
ground. Russia needs to be strongly and continuously
reminded that threatening any country’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity is totally unacceptable. It must fulfil
its international obligations, including the European
Union-mediated 12 August 2008 ceasefire agreement
and the Minsk agreements, and withdraw its forces
from the territory of its sovereign neighbouring States.
For its part, my country reiterates its readiness
to contribute to the Secretary-General’s endeavour
to mobilize the international community’s political
will and commitment to prioritizing the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to sincerely thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this important meeting,
which addresses one of the most prominent issues
before the Security Council.
We would like to express our surprise at the
selection by the Security Council of the speaker from
Sana’a, whose briefing was biased and who failed,
unfortunately, to speak of the facts with integrity and
neutrality. She also failed to mention the horrendous
crimes and violations perpetrated by the Houthi militias
against civilians, displaced persons and civilian
objects, especially in Marib, Taiz, Al-Hudaydah and
other Yemeni areas.
We reject all allegations against the Yemeni
Government and the Coalition to Support Legitimacy
in Yemen, but we welcome the voices of civil society, as
they enrich discussions and highlight many important
issues. Nevertheless, we call on the Council to be
careful in its selection of civil society briefers, in order
to maintain objectivity, integrity and impartiality.
There is a dire need to protect civilians in conflict,
which requires the international community and the
Security Council to take effective measures that protect
civilians in their cities and displacement camps from
attacks and acts of aggression that they face in many
regions throughout the world, including crimes and

S/PV. 8953 (Resumption 1)

terrorist attacks that are perpetrated by the Houthi
militias against civilians and civilian objects in Yemen,
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates. Those crimes and terrorist attacks constitute
an egregious violation of international law and
international humanitarian law, and are a real threat
to vital civilian objects, including energy facilities,
in addition to the stability of the global economy,
thereby undermining international and regional peace
and security.
The Houthi attack against the city of Marib, which
has a population of 4 million people of whom there are
more than 2 million displaced persons, has been ongoing
for more than 11 months. It constitutes one of the most
prominent examples of the danger that threatens the life
and safety of civilians in conflict. Despite extensive
condemnation by the international community and the
Council’s numerous calls for the Houthis to stop their
massacres of Yemenis, the Houthi militias continue to
target civilians and civilian objects by using ballistic
missiles, drones and other heavy weaponry, leaving
hundreds dead and thousands injured, mostly women
and children, in addition to destroying schools, hospitals
and places of worship in violation of all international
laws and norms.
Houthi crimes against civilians have included
taking citizens as hostages within entire cities and
villages, using them as human shields while turning
schools into weapons warehouses, governmental
buildings into detention centres, and roofs of houses
into sniping positions for targeting civilians. The
ongoing siege of cities by these militias is depriving
citizens of the ability to move freely or to have access
to water and food. Indeed, starvation is being used as
a means of war. The most prominent examples of that
are the siege against the Abdiyyah district of Marib
and the plight of the city of Taiz, which has been under
siege for more than seven years, while the international
community has remained inexplicably silent.
Although, at the end of 2021, the Yemeni
Government appreciated the first visits of United
Nations officials in seven years, we nevertheless
reiterate that the international community must call
for the siege against Taiz and the other Yemeni cities
under attack be lifted, and it must call for ensuring the
delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need and for
stopping Houthi militias from obstructing the work of
international organizations and preventing aid from
reaching those who deserve it.

22-2397217/21

S/PV.8953 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

25/01/2022

The planting of internationally prohibited mines,
including antipersonnel mines, is one of the most
dangerous threats that face civilians in conflict areas.
In Yemen, which is a signatory of the 1997 Ottawa
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and
on Their Destruction, and which destroyed its stockpiles
of these vicious weapons, the Houthi militias have
made nearly 2 million mines and explosive devices and
planted them in many areas of Yemen that they once
controlled and then withdrew from, leaving hundreds
of civilian exposed, only to become victims, including
children and women.

and implement its resolutions, and it must take a
decisive stance to deter and hold accountable those
who violate its resolutions. It must stop the smuggling
of weapons, which prolongs the war and exacerbates
the humanitarian crisis in Yemen, leading to daily
civilian bloodshed in the country and obstructing any
progress in the United Nations-led peace process to
put an end to the Yemeni crisis and realize sustainable
and just peace on the basis of the terms of reference
of an agreed political solution — a peace to which all
Yemenis aspire.

Mines paralyse the movement of Yemenis and
threaten millions of civilians and internally displaced
persons who are stranded between the hammer of the
Houthi bombardment on cities and camps and the hard
rock of landmines planted near their homes, streets,
cities and pastures thereby affecting the livelihoods of
millions. Notwithstanding the significant efforts of the
National Army and the Masam mine-clearance project,
the density of and the indiscriminate way these mines
were planted — and the absence of maps — constitute
a staggering challenge, threatening the lives of
future generations.

Mr. Lam Padilla (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala thanks the Norwegian presidency of the
Security Council for convening today’s open debate
on “Wars in cities: protection of civilians in urban
settings”, as well as all the briefers for their briefings.

The most significant example of this phenomenon
is the Houthi militia militarization of Al-Hudaydah
and other cities on the west coast of the country,
transforming them into labyrinths of mines that
obstruct humanitarian organizations and threaten
civilian lives. Recently, two children were killed, and
yesterday another child was injured, as a result of
mines planted by the Houthi militias in the city of Hais
in Al-Hudaydah.
The war would not have gone on this long, and
thousands of lives could have been spared, were it not for
the military support provided to the Houthi militias by
the rogue Iranian regime and the Lebanese Hezbollah,
in order to target civilians and civilian objects. Indeed,
the Iranian regime’s supplying the Houthi militia with
weapons, including ballistic missiles, is an egregious
violation of relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 2216 (2015) and 2231 (2015).
It also shows Iran’s disdain for the efforts by the
international community to maintain international and
regional peace and security.
The Security Council must therefore make efforts
to protect civilians, especially in my country, Yemen,
18/21

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.

As a contributor to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, Guatemala believes that the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians, as well as
for the protection and promotion of human rights, lies
with the host State. The protection of civilians is an
effort complementary to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, the objective of which requires a
comprehensive and integrated approach among civilian,
police, military and prison components in coordination
with national authorities, as well as local communities
and relevant humanitarian organizations, in order
to create and maintain a protective environment
for civilians.
Guatemala is aware that the effective
implementation of mandates, including the protection of
civilians, is the responsibility of all parties and depends
on several critical factors, including, inter alia, welldefined, realistic and achievable mandates; political
will, leadership and performance, and accountability at
all levels; adequate resources and assets for mobility;
trained and properly equipped military, police and
civilian personnel; and capacities to assess threats
to civilians.
Guatemala expresses its concern about the increase
in the number of incidents taking place with improvised
explosive devices in the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Mali, as well
as the negative impact on the protection of civilians
and the security of peacekeeping forces, which leads to
the need to invest more in the mitigation of threats and
22-23972

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV. 8953 (Resumption 1)

this type of weaponry. On the other hand, Guatemala
considers that successful transitions in peace missions
require an integrated planning process that brings
together the actors of the United Nations system, the
State and civil society, as well as the international
community. In this regard, Guatemala notes with
concern the negative experience of the transition from
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti to the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti.
We believe that we must learn from experiences and
failures in previous peace missions.

the field and focused on prevention. We also recognize
the contributions of unarmed civilian protection in
peacekeeping operations.

Guatemala believes that the protection-ofcivilians mandate could be improved by recognizing
the main challenges of a country’s specific situation
and prioritizing political commitments, partnerships,
performance, accountability and adequate resources.
Guatemala will continue to provide special forces
and personnel in general to participate in United
Nations peacekeeping missions with mandates to
protect civilians with the highest level of effectiveness
and efficiency, thereby fulfilling our unqualified
commitment to actively contributing to maintaining
and sustaining international peace and security.

These modern weapons systems, in tandem with
a sound mitigation mechanism, should help minimize,
if not avoid, the loss of civilian lives during armed
conflicts. Nevertheless, the decision to employ weapons
to gain military advantage must fully take into account
domestic laws and international legal obligations.
The Philippines therefore supports the adoption of
a comprehensive civilian harm-mitigation approach
as a matter of international policy, with the strong,
unequivocal commitment of Member States.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Penaranda (Philippines): We congratulate
Norway for its presidency of the Security Council this
month, and thank you, Madam President, for convening
this important meeting today. We were honoured in
the Council this morning with the presence of His
Excellency Prime Minister Jonas Gahr Støre.
The protection of civilians is at the front and
centre of peacekeeping operations. As security threats,
whether conventional or asymmetric, continue to
evolve with operating environments in a pandemic
context, the risk they pose to the civilian population
cannot be overstated. One thing is clear — success in
peacekeeping operations must be measured by how
well we protect civilians.
I wish to highlight three points today.
First, we encourage troop- and police-contributing
countries to prioritize the protection of civilians under
threat of danger by using all the necessary means when
required, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, mission mandates and applicable international
law. Expectations regarding protection tasks must be
succinct and clear, connected to political strategies in

Secondly, modern warfare in an urban setting must
be approached with a more proactive stance, using
advanced weapons systems designed for effective and
responsible military operations. An advanced guided
munitions system, coupled with well-designed target
development capabilities, is an effective tool to respond
to the challenges of highly volatile and complex
urban warfare.

Thirdly, the Philippines adheres to the principles
of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence
in the provision of humanitarian assistance. We
respect and abide by the Geneva Conventions and their
Protocols Additional and reiterate the obligation of
parties to armed conflict to respect and ensure respect
for international humanitarian law in all circumstances.
Our own national laws highlight the Philippines strong
commitment to the implementation of the Geneva
Conventions at the national and local levels.
It is also important to reinforce close collaboration
between the United Nations and the host country on
contingency planning, information exchange and risk
assessment in relation to the security of United Nations
and associated personnel.
Learning the lessons of the 2017 Marawi siege, the
need for the protection of civilians in urban settings
compels us to pursue the right tactical choices in the
context of long-term political solutions.
In conclusion, the use of advanced weapons
systems, combined with an acute focus on humanitarian
assistance and respect for domestic and international
laws and sovereignty, should allow us to better protect
civilians in urban settings.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.

22-2397219/21

S/PV.8953 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Let me begin by thanking
the Permanent Mission of Norway for organizing this
important high-level debate on the theme “Protection of
civilians in armed conflict: War in cities — protection
of civilians in urban settings”. We also welcome the
participation of the Prime Minister of Norway in this
debate. We thank the Secretary-General, the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the other panellists for their insightful briefings.
Civilians have always been the main victims of
war, subjected to mass extermination, indiscriminate
attacks on their cities, deportation, hostage taking,
pillage and internment, which often takes a high toll on
civilian life. Protecting civilians during armed conflict
is therefore a cornerstone of international humanitarian
law and the Geneva Conventions. The question is how
to protect civilians when the suppression of civilians
is the very object of a military’s operations. That is
so when colonial and foreign occupation forces resort
to the forcible denial of the right of peoples to selfdetermination and attempt to perpetuate their own
illegal occupation.
That is vividly illustrated in Indian illegally
occupied Jammu and Kashmir. On 21 January 1989,
Indian occupation forces killed 52 Kashmiri civilians
in the infamous Gawkadal massacre in Srinagar. Since
then, in the subsequent decade, they killed 96,000
Kashmiris, widowed around 23,000 women, raped
more than 11,250 women and girls and destroyed over
100,000 dwellings, including schools and houses.
Since 5 August 2019, 900,000 Indian troops have
been stationed in Indian-occupied Kashmir — in every
city, town, village and neighbourhood — to impose
what India’s leaders have themselves ominously called
a “final solution” for Jammu and Kashmir. They have
resorted to cordon-and-search operations and fake
encounters to extrajudicially kill innocent Kashmiri
youth; imposed collective punishments to destroy and
burn entire Kashmiri neighbourhoods, urban centres
and villages; attacked peaceful protesters with live
ammunition, including pellet guns that have blinded
hundreds of Kashmiri children; arbitrarily detained
13,000 young Kashmiri boys, many of whom have
been tortured; and are in the process of changing the
demography of occupied Kashmir from a Muslimmajority State to a Hindu-majority territory.
Last year Pakistan released a comprehensive and
well-researched dossier covering accounts, corroborated
20/21

25/01/2022

by audio and video evidence, of 3,432 cases of war
crimes perpetrated by senior officers of the Indian
occupation forces since 1989. We call on the Security
Council to take cognizance of the compelling evidence
of those crimes and to hold accountable the Indian
officials and personnel responsible for such crimes and
grave breaches of international humanitarian law.
India is not a victim of terrorism; it is the mothership
of terrorism in South Asia. It is Pakistan that has suffered
from terrorism in operations conducted since 2014.
We have cleared our territory of terrorist groups. Our
major challenge has been the continued terrorist attacks
financed, sponsored and supported by our neighbour
India including from the territory of Afghanistan.
With the active support of Indian intelligence
agencies, the Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan and the Jamaatul-Ahrar terrorist groups were involved in over 1,000
cross-border terrorist attacks against Pakistani military
and civilian targets in 2020 alone. India has funded
and supported Security Council-listed terrorist entities
to carry out cross-border terrorist attacks against
Pakistani military and civilian targets, including on
the Karachi Stock Exchange on 29 June 2020 and
in Lahore on 23 June 2021, as well as the killing of
Chinese and Pakistani engineers at the Dasu Dam site
on 14 July 2021.
With regard to genocide, I would like to draw
attention to the anti-Muslim pogrom in New Deli in
February 2020, the almost daily cow lynching and
targeted killings of Muslims, the 400 at-tacks against
Christian churches last year and the open calls for
genocide against the Muslims of India issued by
extremist Hindutva priests two weeks ago.
The Security Council must heed Mr. Gregory
Stanton, the Chairman of Genocide Watch, who warned
last week, “Genocide can happen in India”.
The President: The representative of India has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Ravindran (India): I am constrained to take
the floor once again only because the representative of
Pakistan chose to sully the Security Council through his
Pavlovian and frivolous remarks against my country.
While his statement deserves our collective contempt,
it is important for me to set the record straight.
This is not the first time that the representative
of Pakistan has misused the platform provided by
the United Nations to propagate false and malicious
22-23972

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

propaganda against my country, seeking in vain to
divert the world’s attention from the sad state of his
country, where terrorists enjoy a free pass while the
lives of ordinary people, especially those belonging to
the minority, are turned upside down.
Member States are well aware that Pakistan has an
established history of harbouring, aiding and actively
supporting terrorists. That is a country that has been
globally recognized as a sponsor of terrorism and
holds the ignoble record of hosting the largest number
of terrorists proscribed by the Security Council, to
the extent that most of the terrorist attacks around the
world today have their origin in some form or another
in Pakistan. His Prime Minister and Foreign Minister
have been called out for being supporters of terrorists,
including Osama Bin Laden, but they continue to carry
on down the same path undeterred.
We are discussing the protection of civilians today.
The greatest threat to civilians comes from terrorists.
As we mentioned earlier, the perpetrators of the heinous
terror attack in Mumbai in 2008 continue to enjoy the
patronage of the State that he represents.
Let me be categorical about India’s position. The
entire Union Territories of Jammu and Kashmir and
Ladakh were, are and will always be an integral and
inalienable part of India, irrespective of what the
representative of Pakistan believes or covets. That
includes the areas that are under the illegal occupation
of Pakistan and we call on Pakistan to immediately
vacate all areas under its illegal occupation.
India desires normal neighbourly relations with
all countries, including Pakistan, and is com-mitted to
addressing outstanding issues, if any, bilaterally and
peacefully and in accordance with the Simla Agreement
and the Lahore Declaration.
However, any meaningful dialogue can be held only
in an atmosphere free of terror, hostility and violence.
The onus is on Pakistan to create such a conducive
atmosphere. Until then, India will continue to take firm
and decisive steps to respond to cross-border terrorism.
The President: The representative of Pakistan has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor

S/PV. 8953 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The representative of
India has repeated well-worn assertions. The fact of
the matter is that terrorism in South Asia originates in
India. They have sponsored terrorism in Bangladesh,
Sri Lanka, Pakistan and all other neighbours and
history will attest to that.
With regard to Jammu and Kashmir, it is a territory
the destiny of which, as the Security Council has stated,
should be decided by its people through a free and fair
plebiscite conducted un-der the auspices of the United
Nations. It is not an integral part of India. If one looks
at any United Nations map, it is stamped as “disputed
territory”. It is disputed territory and certainly not a
part of India.
I will conclude by asking the Indian representative
two questions.
First, does India prescribe and subscribe to
Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations,
which states,
“The Members of the United Nations agree to
accept and carry out the decisions of the Security
Council in accordance with the present Charter.”
Does India subscribe to that Article of the Charter?
Secondly, will India’s leaders condemn the call
for genocide against the Muslims that was issued
on 17 December 2021in Haridwar in the state of
Uttarakhand? Does the Indian Government condemn
that call for genocide?
Those are my two questions.
The President: Before concluding, I would like
to thank once again all the distinguished participants
who joined us today. I would also like to thank the
following Member States, which have so far submitted
written statements on the subject of today’s discussion:
Azerbaijan, Myanmar, the Republic of Korea, Rwanda
and San Marino. Statements that are received by the end
of today will form part of the compilation of statements
from this meeting.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

22-2397221/21
