A/64/PV.107

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

107th plenary meeting
Friday, 16 July 2010, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

In the absence of the President, Mrs. Aitimova
(Kazakhstan), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now turn to a note by the Secretary-General
contained in document A/64/105/Add.1, under
sub-item (e) of agenda item 112, concerning the
appointment of a member of the International Civil
Service Commission.
Members will recall that the General Assembly
concluded its consideration of sub-item (e) of agenda
item 112 at its 48th plenary meeting on 19 November
2009. In order to enable the General Assembly to
consider the note of the Secretary-General, it will be
necessary to reopen consideration of sub-item (e) of
agenda item 112. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item
(e) of agenda item 112?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Representatives will also
recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September
2009, the General Assembly allocated this sub-item to
the Fifth Committee. In order for the Assembly to
proceed expeditiously on this sub-item, may I take it

that the Assembly agrees to consider this sub-item
directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I further take it that
the Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of sub-item (e) of agenda item 112?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 112 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(e) Appointment of members of the International
Civil Service Commission
Note by the Secretary-General (A/64/105/Add.1)
The Acting President: In his note, the SecretaryGeneral informs the General Assembly that he has
received notification of the resignation of Mr. Vladimir
Morozov of the Russian Federation from the
International Civil Service Commission, effective
28 June 2010. The Assembly will therefore be required
to appoint, at its current session, a person to fill the
remaining portion of the term of office of
Mr. Morozov, that is, until 31 December 2012.
The Secretary-General also informs the General
Assembly that the Government of the Russian
Federation has nominated Mr. Yevgeny Vladimirovich
Afanasiev to fill the vacancy arising from the
resignation of Mr. Morozov. The note further states that
the Secretariat was informed by the Chair of the Group

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-45418 (E)

*1045418*

A/64/PV.107

of Eastern European States that the candidature of
Mr. Afanasiev has been endorsed by the Group.

of the Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.

May I, therefore, take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to appoint Mr. Yevgeny Vladimirovich
Afanasiev as a member of the International Civil
Service Commission for a term of office beginning on
16 July 2010 and ending on 31 December 2012?

By paragraphs (c), (d) and (e) of the draft
decision, the General Assembly would:

It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (e) of agenda item 112?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 127 (continued)
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31
December 1994
Identical letters dated 2 June 2010 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the General Assembly and the President of the
Security Council (A/64/814)
Letter dated 29 June 2010 from the President of
the Security Council addressed to the President
of the General Assembly (A/64/862)
Draft decision (A/64/L.60)
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft decision A/64/L.60.
In connection with draft decision A/64/L.60, I
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
decision A/64/L.60, entitled “International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994”, I wish to put on the record the
following statement on financial implications on behalf

2

“(c) [Decide] to extend the terms of office
of the following permanent judges at the
Tribunal, who are members of the Appeals
Chamber, until 31 December 2012 or until the
completion of the cases to which they are
assigned, if sooner:
Mehmet Güney (Turkey)
Andrésia Vaz (Senegal)
“(d) [Decide] to extend the terms of office
of the following permanent judges at the
International Tribunal, who are members of the
Trial Chambers, until 31 December 2011 or until
the completion of the cases to which they are
assigned, if sooner:
Charles Michael Dennis Byron (Saint Kitts
and Nevis)
Khalida Rachid Khan (Pakistan)
Arlette Ramaroson (Madagascar)
William H. Sekule (United Republic of
Tanzania)
Bakhtiyar Tuzmukhamedov (Russian
Federation)
“(e) [Decide] to extend the terms of office
of the following ad litem judges at the Tribunal,
who are members of the Trial Chambers, until
31 December 2011 or until the completion of the
cases to which they are assigned, if sooner:
Aydin Sefa Akay (Turkey)
Florence Rita Arrey (Cameroon)
Solomy Balungi Bossa (Uganda)
Vagn Joensen (Denmark)
Gberdao Gustave Kam (Burkina Faso)
Lee Gacuiga Muthoga (Kenya)
Seon Ki Park (Republic of Korea)
Mparany Mamy Richard Rajohnson
(Madagascar)
Emile Francis Short (Ghana)”.
On 28 May 2010, the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda provided
the Security Council with his assessment of the
implementation of the completion strategy of the
Tribunal (see S/2010/289). The President informed the

10-45418

A/64/PV.107

Council that, due to delays in certain trials and
judgement writing, the recent apprehension of fugitives
and staffing constraints have resulted in the revision of
projections related to the completion strategy.
Accordingly, the President requested that the terms of
office of the aforementioned judges be extended, as
outlined above. The cost associated with the extension
of the judges is estimated at $1,392,200 for the
biennium 2010-2011.
The delay in the completion strategy, for the
reasons I have just outlined, has a significant impact on
the functioning and overall resource requirements of
the Tribunal. Accordingly, the Secretary-General would
present at the main part of the sixty-fifth session of the
General Assembly the revised proposals relating to the
budget of the Tribunal for the biennium 2010-2011.
The additional resource requirements, inter alia, would
include the estimates related to the judges.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
the draft decision, details of the resource requirements
relating to the extension of the terms of office of the
judges would be provided by the Secretary-General to
the General Assembly at the main part of its sixty-fifth
session in the context of the report on the revised
estimates relating to the budget of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for the biennium 20102011.

Draft decision (A/64/L.59)
The Acting President: The Assembly shall now
proceed to consider draft decision A/64/L.59.
In connection with draft decision A/64/L.59, I
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
decision A/64/L.59, entitled “International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991”, I wish to put on record the following
statement of financial implications on behalf of the
Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
By paragraphs (c), (d) and (e) of the draft
decision, the General Assembly would:
“(c) [Decide] to extend the terms of office
of the following permanent judges at the
International Tribunal, who are members of the
Appeals Chamber, until 31 December 2012 or
until the completion of the cases to which they
are assigned or until the completion of their term
as members of the Appeals Chamber, if sooner:
Carmel Agius (Malta)
Liu Daqun (China)
Theodor Meron (United States of America)
Fausto Pocar (Italy)
Patrick Robinson (Jamaica)

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft decision A/64/L.60. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft decision?
Draft decision A/64/L.60 was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 127.
Agenda item 128 (continued)
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

“(d) [Decide] to extend the terms of office
of the following permanent judges at the
International Tribunal, who are members of the
Trial Chambers, until 31 December 2011 or until
the completion of the cases to which they are
assigned, if sooner:
Jean-Claude Antonetti (France)
Guy Delvoie (Belgium)
Burton Hall (Bahamas)
Christoph Flügge (Germany)
O-Gon Kwon (Republic of Korea)
Bakone Justice Moloto (South Africa)
Howard Morrison (United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland)
Alphons Orie (Netherlands)

Identical letters dated 18 June 2010 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the General Assembly and the President of the
Security Council (A/64/841)
Letter dated 29 June 2010 from the President of
the Security Council addressed to the President
of the General Assembly (A/64/861)

10-45418

of

“(e) [Decide] to extend the terms of office
the following ad litem judges at the

3

A/64/PV.107

International Tribunal, who are members of the
Trial Chambers, until 31 December 2011 or until
the completion of the cases to which they are
assigned, if sooner:
Melville Baird (Trinidad and Tobago)
Pedro David (Argentina)
Elizabeth Gwaunza (Zimbabwe)
Frederik Harhoff (Denmark)
Flavia Lattanzi (Italy)
Antoine Kesia-Mbe Mindua
(Democratic Republic of the Congo)
Prisca Matimba Nyambe (Zambia)
Michèle Picard (France)
Árpád Prandler (Hungary)
Stefan Trechsel (Switzerland)”.
On 31 May 2010, the President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
provided the Security Council with his assessment on
the implementation of the completion strategy of the
Tribunal (see S/2010/270). The President informed the
Council that unforeseeable factors beyond the
Tribunal’s control and staffing constraints had resulted
in the revision of projections related to the completion
strategy. Accordingly, the President requested that the
terms of office of the aforementioned judges be
extended, as just outlined.
The cost associated with the extension of the
terms of the judges is estimated at $2,975,400 for the
biennium 2010-2011. The delay in the completion
strategy, for reasons I just outlined, has a significant
impact on the functioning and overall resource
requirements of the Tribunal.
Accordingly, the Secretary-General will present,
during the main part of the sixty-fifth session of the
General Assembly, the revised proposals relating to the
budget of the Tribunal for the biennium 2010-2011.
The additional resource requirements would include,
inter alia, the estimates related to the judges.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
the draft decision, details on the resource requirements
relating to the extension of the terms of office of the
judges would be provided by the Secretary-General to
the General Assembly during the main part of its sixtyfifth session in the context of the report on the revised
estimates relating to the budget of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia for the biennium
2010-2011.

4

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft decision A/64/L.59. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft decision?
Draft decision A/64/L.59 was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 128.
Agenda items 48 and 114 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/64/L.61)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan to introduce draft resolution
A/64/L.61.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): On behalf of the
Government of Japan and the other sponsors, I have the
distinct honour to introduce draft resolution A/64/L.61,
entitled “Follow-up to paragraph 143 on human
security of the 2005 World Summit Outcome”.
The sponsors of this draft resolution are Armenia,
Austria, Australia, Afghanistan, Benin, Cambodia,
Canada, the Central African Republic, Chile, Congo,
Costa Rica, El Salvador, Fiji, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, India, Ireland, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, the
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, the Federated
States
of
Micronesia,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Palau, the Philippines, Papua New Guinea,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, Senegal, Slovenia, South Africa,
Switzerland, Thailand, Tonga, Tuvalu, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the United States of
America, Uzbekistan and Vanuatu.
Before presenting the elements of the draft
resolution, allow me to briefly touch upon the
background behind this first-ever draft resolution of
the General Assembly on human security.
Human security is mentioned in paragraph 143 of
the 2005 World Summit Outcome document (resolution
60/1), which was unanimously agreed by our political
leaders. That paragraph reads as follows:

10-45418

A/64/PV.107

“We stress the right of people to live in
freedom and dignity, free from poverty and
despair. We recognize that all individuals, in
particular vulnerable people, are entitled to
freedom from fear and freedom from want, with
an equal opportunity to enjoy all their rights and
fully develop their human potential. To this end,
we commit ourselves to discussing and defining
the notion of human security in the General
Assembly.”
To follow up on this important commitment made
by our heads of State and Government, Japan took the
initiative of organizing, in the United Nations, an
informal group called “Friends of Human Security” in
October 2006 and promoted the debate on human
security among Member States. Since the second
meeting, Japan, together with Mexico as Co-Chair, has
organized biannual meetings of the Friends of Human
Security, which has developed into an open-ended
forum for interested Member States and United Nations
organizations.
More than 140 Member States have participated
in the seven meetings held to date. The Friends of
Human Security agreed to promote the human security
approach — a human-centred and integrated
approach — in addressing United Nations agendas
including the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs),
peacebuilding, climate change, humanitarian assistance
and protection of women and children, among others. It
has done so in a practical manner, on the basis of a
working definition of human security: to protect the
vital core of all human lives in ways that enhance
human freedoms and human fulfilment.
Last year, the Friends of Human Security group
took the initiative to request the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to prepare a full report
on human security, which was issued as document
A/64/701. We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
his contribution, which was an important input for
consideration by the General Assembly. We are also
grateful to the President of the General Assembly, His
Excellency Mr. Ali Treki, for kindly organizing the
first formal debate on human security in plenary
meeting, held on 20 and 21 May.
As the initiator of the debate, we are pleased with
the positive, high-quality participation of so many and
with the strong support expressed for the significance
of the human security approach. I believe the

10-45418

constructive
debates
have
greatly
facilitated
broadening the common understanding of human
security among Member States and have faithfully
implemented the commitment of our leaders.
In the preambular paragraphs of the draft
resolution before us, the General Assembly recalls
paragraph 143 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome and
reaffirms its respect for all the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. Human security
will be promoted in the United Nations in conformity
with the Charter.
Article 1 of the Charter lists the
purposes of the United Nations, namely international
peace and security, friendly relations among nations,
cooperation in the economic, social, cultural and
humanitarian fields, and respect for human rights.
Article 2 lists the principles of the United Nations,
which include sovereign equality, peaceful settlement
of disputes, refraining from the threat or use of force
against territorial integrity, and non-intervention in
matters which are essentially within the domestic
jurisdiction of Member States.
In the operative part of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly takes note of the Assembly’s first
formal debate on human security, held in May, in
which Member States actively contributed actively to
forging a common understanding of the concept based
on the valuable inputs of the Secretary-General in his
report on human security.
In the resolution, the Assembly also takes note of
the ongoing efforts to define the notion of human
security, which have been led by many Governments at
the national level, as well as through international
initiatives at the regional and global levels. We are
fully cognizant of a number of worthwhile initiatives
taken in this regard. The draft resolution further
recognizes the need to continue discussions to achieve
an agreement on the definition of human security.
Finally, the draft resolution requests the
Secretary-General to seek the views of the Member
States on this important notion and to submit a report
to the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session. We
urge the Secretary-General to intensify his interaction
with Member States. The General Assembly also
decides to continue its consideration of this matter. We
look forward to continuing active discussions on
human security within the framework of the General
Assembly.

5

A/64/PV.107

Today’s multiple and interrelated threats affect
the lives of millions of people. Global issues such as
the economic and financial crisis, food insecurity,
global health problems, issues related to the
Millennium Development Goals, climate change,
conflict, refugees and internally displaced persons,
peacebuilding, drug trafficking, transnational organized
crime, gender equality and protection of women and
children, to name but a few, affect the security and
safety of each and every human being no matter where
he or she lives. Vulnerable people suffer most from
those global challenges. A country-level aggregated
approach will not suffice to effectively tackle these
broad and deeply interconnected global issues. We
need to address those issues in an integrated and
comprehensive manner and to focus not only on the
national level but also on the level of the individual. It
is within such a context that Governments are expected
to comprehensively support the survival, livelihood
and dignity of their peoples as a fundamental basis of
national security.
The United Nations system has been supporting
Member States in addressing human security
challenges, including through the United Nations Trust
Fund for Human Security, established by the SecretaryGeneral in 1999. The Trust Fund to date has supported
projects to enhance human security for vulnerable
people in over 80 countries in very concrete ways.
There is strong interest in and broad appreciation for
this Trust Fund. We urge Member States to make
generous contributions to the Fund. We should actively
promote and support practical measures aimed at
protecting and empowering people and communities, in
parallel with the continued discussion in New York
towards an agreement on definition.
The adoption of this draft resolution on human
security is an important milestone in implementing the
commitment set out in the World Summit Outcome and
in promoting a human security approach in United
Nations activities. I wish in particular to thank the
sponsors for their support and their commitment to this
initiative. I wish also to express my appreciation to all
representatives who participated actively in the
negotiations for their understanding. I sincerely hope
that the draft resolution will receive the full
endorsement of the General Assembly and be adopted
by consensus.
The Acting President: I should like to consult
the Assembly with a view to proceeding immediately

6

to consider the draft resolution contained in document
A/64/L.61. In this connection, since the draft resolution
was circulated only this morning, it would be necessary
to waive the relevant provision of rule 78 of the rules
of procedure, which reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objection, I will take it that the
Assembly agrees with this proposal.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/64/L.61, entitled
“Follow-up to paragraph 143 on human security of the
2005 World Summit Outcome”. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/64/L.61?
Draft resolution A/64/L.61
(resolution 64/291).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of position on the resolution
just adopted, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote or position are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Ms. Méndez Romero (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela expresses its most sincere
gratitude to the delegations of Japan and Jordan for the
constructive, open and flexible manner in which they
conducted the negotiations on draft resolution
A/64/L.61 and for their tireless efforts to accommodate
the concerns of all delegations in the text. Our
delegation has joined the consensus on the resolution
because we consider it necessary to continue the debate
on the notion of human security and to agree on a
consensus definition of the notion within the General
Assembly before promoting its implementation in
activities of the United Nations system.
Our delegation joined the consensus on the draft
resolution also based on the understanding that the
discussion on the notion of human security should focus
exclusively on the economic and social development of
our peoples and on seeking the well-being of human
beings through the full and effective exercise of the
right to development.

10-45418

A/64/PV.107

Here, it is our understanding that the notion of
human security and its future definition should be
aimed at eradicating poverty, hunger, marginalization
and social exclusion and at achieving social justice and
the full development of our peoples. In addition, my
delegation believes that the debate on the notion of
human security should be confined to the fundamental
principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter.
In this regard, it is our understanding that any future
definition of the notion of human security should be
based on unrestricted respect for the principles of
sovereignty, equality among States, territorial integrity,
non-interference in the internal affairs of States and
non-use of force.
Mr. Salsabili (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran joined the
consensus today on resolution 64/291, entitled
“Follow-up to paragraph 143 on human security of the
2005 World Summit Outcome”, with a view to
continuing consideration of the notion of human
security within the framework of the General Assembly
and in order to come up with a negotiated agreed
definition of this notion in a transparent and inclusive
manner. Such a definition must closely follow and be
in line with the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, including respect for the
sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of Member States, as well as non-interference
in the internal affairs of States Members of the United
Nations.

10-45418

My delegation takes this opportunity to commend
the delegations of Japan and Jordan for their
professional and transparent conduct of the
negotiations on the resolution at hand.
Mr. De Bassompierre (Belgium): I would like to
make a statement on behalf of the European Union.
The European Union would like to thank the
delegations of Japan and Jordan for their efforts to
reach consensus on resolution 64/291, on human
security. The European Union is well aware of the
added value of the concept of human security as a
means to empower people to address, holistically, the
multidimensional threats and challenges that we face
today. The concept should be considered in a balanced
way. There is no development without security, no
security without development, and neither without
respect for human rights.
We welcome the adoption of the resolution and
would like to reaffirm the European Union’s support of
Japan’s and Jordan’s efforts on human security.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position. The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda items 48 and 114.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

7
