A /70/PV.104

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

104th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 14 June 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Announcement regarding the results of the election
of the Chairpersons of the Main Committees
The President: I should like to inform members
that the following representatives have been elected
Chairpersons of the five Main Committees of the
General Assembly at its seventy-first session and are
accordingly members of the General Committee for
that session: First Committee, Mr. Sabri Boukadoum
of Algeria; Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee), Mr. Vladimir
Drobnjak of Croatia; Second Committee, Mr. Dian
Triansyah Djani of Indonesia; Third Committee,
Ms. María Emma Mejía Vélez of Colombia; and Sixth
Committee, Mr. Danny Danon of Israel.

circulated under agenda
“Sustainable development”.

item

20

and

entitled

Members will recall that at its 2nd plenary meeting,
on 18 September 2015, the General Assembly decided
to allocate agenda item 20 to the Second Committee.
To enable the General Assembly to take action
expeditiously on the document, may I take it that the
Assembly wishes to consider agenda item 20 directly
in plenary meeting and proceed immediately to its
consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 20 (continued)
Sustainable development
Draft resolution (A/70/L.53)

I congratulate the Chairpersons of the five Main
Committees at the seventy-first session of the General
Assembly on their election. The Assembly will be
informed after the election of the Chairperson of
the Fifth Committee at a later date, and the General
Committee of the General Assembly for the seventyfirst session will then be fully constituted in accordance
with rule 38 of the rules of procedure.

The President: The General Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/70/L.53, entitled
“International Day of the Tropics”.

Agenda item 7 (continued)

The idea that we can understand some challenges
and opportunities if we consider them through a tropics
lens is one that resonates strongly for Australia. The
tropics are home to 40 per cent of the world’s population
and host about 80 per cent of its terrestrial biodiversity.
Approximately 40 per cent of Australia is in the tropics.

Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I shall now invite the attention of
the General Assembly to draft resolution A/70/L.53,

16-17179 (E)

I now give the floor to the representative of
Australia to introduce draft resolution A/70/L.53.
Ms. Bird (Australia): I would first like to thank all
member States for their active engagement on resolution
A/70/L.53 and address special thanks to the sponsors.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1617179*

A/70/PV.104

Our tropical region includes some of our most beautiful
landscapes, enjoys unique biodiversity and is rich in
indigenous culture and heritage.
This region, like many tropical regions, attracts
tourism, yields innovation in agriculture and
aquaculture, and is home to other growth sectors.
We also share challenges familiar to others living
in tropical habitats around the globe: infrastructure
demands and service delivery in the face of extreme
climatic conditions; tropical health threats; and the
complexity of managing resources and protecting
fragile ecosystems.
However, where there are challenges we also see
opportunities. We are excited by the potential to learn
and collaborate with others in tropical countries and
regions to find ways for the tropics to prosper.
Much of the activity and investment in support of
the Sustainable Development Goals will take place in the
tropics, particularly in the areas of poverty eradication,
health, education, urbanization and the health of our
oceans. This means that success in the tropics is a
significant contribution to our global success.
Designating 29 June as International Day of the
Tropics will allow us to lift the profile of the tropics
around the globe. It will prompt us to consider global
data from a tropical perspective to ask the question: is
life in the tropics improving?
Deepening our understanding of the data tells us
that there is a bigger story for the tropics. The State of
the Tropics Project, supported by a network of academic
institutions from across the globe coordinated by
Australia’s James Cook University, is a prime example
of how much we can learn when we view the data we
already have through a tropics lens.
An International Day of the Tropics will help
crystallize the fact that tropical challenges need tropical
solutions. In finding these solutions, we might also find
innovations and contributions that are globally relevant.
We look forward to working with all to celebrate the
first International Day of the Tropics on 29 June.

14/06/2016

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/70/L.53, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Argentina,
Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Cameroon, Cyprus, Greece, Guyana,
Haiti, Maldives, Micronesia, Montenegro, Panama, San
Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt draft resolution A/70/L.53?
Draft resolution A/70/L.53 was adopted (resolution
70/267).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 20.
Agenda item 56 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/70/498/Add.1)
The President: If there is no proposal under rule 66
of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General
Assembly decides not to discuss the report of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) which is before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.

The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/70/L.53.

The President: Statements will therefore be limited
to explanations of vote. The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendations of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
have been made clear in the Committee and are
reflected in the relevant official records. May I remind
members that under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the
General Assembly agreed that

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/70/L.53, entitled “International Day of the
Tropics”.

“When the same draft resolution is considered in a
Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a delegation
should, as far as possible, explain its vote only once,

2/5

16-17179

14/06/2016

that is, either in the Committee or in plenary meeting,
unless that delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is
different from its vote in the Committee”.
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee), I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Committee, unless notified
otherwise in advance.
The Assembly will now consider the report
(A/70/498/Add.1) of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) on
agenda item 56, entitled “Comprehensive review of the
whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their
aspects”.
The General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) in
paragraph 6 of that report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
70/268).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
56.
Agenda item 112 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(b) Election of eighteen members of the Economic
and Social Council
The President: The General Assembly will now
proceed to the election of eighteen members of the
Economic and Social Council to replace those members
whose term of office expires on 31 December 2016.
The eighteen outgoing members are: Antigua and
Barbuda, Bangladesh, Botswana, China, the Congo, the

A/70/PV.104

Democratic Republic of the Congo, Finland, Georgia,
Guatemala, Kazakhstan, Panama, the Republic of
Korea, the Russian Federation, Serbia, Sweden,
Switzerland, Togo and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland. Pursuant to rule 146 of
the rules of procedure, these countries are eligible for
immediate re-election.
As of 1 January 2017, the following States will
be represented on the Economic and Social Council:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Belgium,
Brazil, Burkina Faso, Chile, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guyana,
Honduras, India, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Lebanon,
Mauritania, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Portugal, the
Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, Somalia, South Africa,
Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, the United States of
America, Viet Nam and Zimbabwe. The names of these
thirty-six States should therefore not appear on the
ballots.
In accordance with paragraph 4 of resolution 2847
(XXVI), of 20 December 1971, and taking into account
the number of States that will remain members of the
Council after 1 January 2017, the eighteen members
should be elected as follows: four from African States,
four from Asia-Pacific States, three from Eastern
European States, three from Latin American and
Caribbean States and four from Western European and
other States. The ballot papers reflect that pattern.
I should like to inform the Assembly that those
candidates, their number not exceeding the number of
seats to be filled, who receive a two-thirds majority and
the greatest number of votes by members present and
voting will be declared elected.
Also, consistent with past practice, in case, due
to a tied vote, it becomes necessary to determine the
candidate to be elected or that will proceed to the next
round of restricted balloting, there will be a special
restricted ballot limited to those candidates that have
obtained an equal number of votes. May I take it that
the General Assembly agrees to these procedures?
It was so decided.
The President: In accordance with rule 92 of the
rules of procedure, the election shall be held by secret
ballot, and there shall be no nominations.
Regarding candidatures for the respective regional
groups, the Secretariat has been informed that for the
four vacant seats from among the African States, the

16-171793/5

A/70/PV.104

Group has endorsed four candidates: Benin, Cameroon,
Chad and Swaziland. For the four vacant seats from
among the Asia-Pacific States, the Group has endorsed
four candidates: China, the Republic of Korea,
Tajikistan and the United Arab Emirates. For the three
vacant seats from among the Eastern European States,
the Group has endorsed three candidates: Azerbaijan,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Russian Federation.
For the three vacant seats from among the Latin
American and Caribbean States, the Group has
endorsed three candidates: Colombia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela. For the four vacant seats from among the
Western European and other States, the Group has
endorsed four candidates: Andorra, Norway, Sweden
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
we shall now proceed to the election by secret ballot.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order
on the actual conduct of the voting. In addition, ballot
papers will be given only to the representative seated
directly behind the country’s nameplate.
I should like to seek the usual cooperation of
representatives during the time of the conduct of the
election. Please be reminded that during the voting
process, all campaigning should cease in the General
Assembly Hall. This means in particular that once the
meeting has begun, no more campaign material can be
distributed inside the Hall.
All representatives are also requested to remain at
their seats so that the voting process can proceed in an
orderly manner. I thank them for their cooperation.
We shall now begin the voting process.
Ballot papers marked “A”, “B”, “C”, “D” and “E”
will now be distributed. I request representatives to use
only those ballot papers and to write on them the names
of the States for which they wish to vote. A ballot will
be declared invalid if it contains more names of Member
States from the relevant region than the number of seats
assigned to it. A ballot will also be declared invalid if
none of the names of the Member States on that ballot
belong to the relevant region.
4/5

14/06/2016

If a ballot paper of a region contains both the names
of the Member States that belong to and that are outside
of that region, the ballot remains valid, but only the
names of the Member States that belong to the relevant
region will be counted. The names of Member States
that do not belong to that region will not be counted.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Wanner
(Austria), Mrs. Vassil (El Salvador), Mrs. Le Diffard
(Hungary), Mr. Khoo (Singapore), Mr. Davidson
(South Africa) and Mr. Wickramarachchige (Sri
Lanka) acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 3.40 p.m. and
resumed at 4.55 p.m.
The President: The result of the voting is as
follows:
Group A – Group of African States (4 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Cameroon
Chad
Swaziland
Benin
Senegal
Congo
Botswana
Togo
Group B – Asia-Pacific States (4 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Tajikistan
China
United Arab Emirates
Republic of Korea
Cambodia
Yemen

185
0
185
2
183
122
183
175
173
163
1
1
1
1
185
0
185
0
185
124
183
182
180
179
3
1

16-17179

14/06/2016

Group C – Eastern European States (3 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
185
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
185
Abstentions:
1
Number of members voting:
184
Required two-thirds majority:
123
Number of votes obtained:
Azerbaijan
176
Bosnia and Herzegovina
173
Russian Federation
169
Romania
10
Croatia
1
Belarus
1
Group D – Latin American and Caribbean States
(3 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
185
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
185
Abstentions:
2
Number of members voting:
183
Required two-thirds majority:
122
Number of votes obtained:
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
179
Colombia
178
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
177
Group B – Western European and other States (1
seat)
Number of ballot papers:
185
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
185

A/70/PV.104

Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Norway
Sweden
Andorra
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
Finland
Switzerland

7
178
119
177
176
174
172
1
1

Having obtained the required two-thirds majority
of members present and voting, the following 18
States were elected members of the Economic and
Social Council for a three-year term beginning
on 1 January 2017: Andorra, Azerbaijan, Benin,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cameroon, Chad,
China, Colombia, Norway, the Republic of Korea,
the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Swaziland, Sweden, Tajikistan, the
United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
The President: I congratulate those States which
have been elected members of the Economic and Social
Council, and I thank the tellers for their assistance in
this election.
This concludes this stage of our consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 112.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

16-171795/5
