United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 2)
Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8649th meeting

Monday, 4 November 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Pierce/Mr. Allen/Mr. Clay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Bogaert
Mr. Cheng Lie
Mr. Fiegolo
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mrs. Mbana Makina
Mrs. Gueguen
Ms. Siegmann
Ms. Handaruningrum
Ms. Alzouman
Ms. Rodríguez
Ms. Ruminowicz
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Davies
Ms. Olsen

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Towards the successful implementation of the women, peace and security
agenda: moving from commitments to accomplishments in preparation for the
commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000)
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2019/800)
Letter dated 8 October 2019 from the Permanent Representative of South Africa
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/801)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-34980 (E)
*1934980*

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 2)

Women and peace and security

The meeting resumed at 3 p.m. on 4 November.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Towards the successful implementation of the
women, peace and security agenda: moving
from commitments to accomplishments in
preparation for the commemoration of the
twentieth anniversary of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000)
Report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2019/800)
Letter dated 8 October 2019 from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2019/801)
The President: I would like to ask all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes in
order to enable everyone who has asked to speak to be
able to do so. As members know, this is a continuation
of the debate held under the South African presidency.
We have only this afternoon to continue it, and we need
to finish by 6 p.m. We have divided 180 minutes by
42 speakers, which allows for speaking time of four
minutes each. I would ask colleagues to keep to that
time limit. I am afraid I will interrupt in the interest of
giving everyone a chance to speak. Delegations with
long statements are of course very welcome to circulate
them in the Chamber. The red light on the microphone
will begin to flash after four minutes. I would invite
those sitting behind colleagues who are speaking to
keep an eye out for that.
I now give the floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): I will refrain from offering
congratulations but you know, Madam President, that
we are very happy to see you preside over the Security
Council. You can be assured of our full support.
We fully associate ourselves with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union.
Resolution 1325 (2000), along with the subsequent
women and peace and security resolutions, affirms
the Security Council’s responsibility and commitment
to strengthening women’s meaningful participation,
2/35

04/11/2019

protection and rights across the span of the conflict
cycle. In the past almost two decades, this discourse
has shifted significantly. By abandoning the perception
of women as victims, the international community has
recognized their crucial role as first responders, agents
of change and rebuilders of shattered communities. The
root causes of women’s chronic under-representation
in peace talks, and, broadly, in the security sector,
include discriminatory laws and practices, institutional
obstacles, gender stereotyping and the existence of
predominantly masculine structures within the system.
Many positive developments in addressing those issues
have been achieved.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/800)
demonstrates that, despite many efforts, a significant
amount of work remains to be done. We have to focus
on cultivating women’s leadership and on working with
local actors, which is critical for ensuring a place for
women’s voices at the peace table. That is also why
the shrinking space for women’s non-governmental
organizations, grass root activists and human rights
defenders is such a worrisome trend.
Women remain the target of sexual and genderbased violence. Throughout history, rape has become a
tool to punish, terrorize and destroy populations. Sexual
violence serves as a weapon in some cases, while in
others it is a form of reward. During periods of genocide
and ethnic cleansing, sexual violence has been used
to systematically attack the lineage of a group — for
example, by impregnating or sterilizing women. Major
General Patrick Cammaert, former Force Commander
of United Nations peacekeeping forces in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, once said that
“[i]t has probably become more dangerous to be a
woman than a soldier in armed conflict”.
I would like to emphasize that the protection of women
from gender-based violence is inseparable from
women’s meaningful participation, bodily autonomy
and rights. Accountability for violations of fundamental
human rights and violent crimes is also necessary to
end the reign of impunity, ensure the rule of law and
prevent relapse into conflict.
The preparations for the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000) are timely, as an opportunity
for a national review of the efforts towards the full
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. Let me briefly mention our own national
action plan, which is currently being prepared. The
19-34980

04/11/2019

Women and peace and security

process culminated after extensive collaboration with
and within the various ministries, in partnership
with the relevant stakeholders. The core aim is to
make the national action plan actionable and promote
accountability for its implementation through a rigorous
system of indicators.
Slovakia also supports gender parity and the
United Nations effort to increase the number of women
peacekeepers in missions. After conducting the thirtyeighth rotation in the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus, Slovakia has exceeded the required
United Nations goal for 2019 of 5.25 per cent women
serving in military contingents; currently almost 11 per
cent of the personnel of the Slovak contingent are
women peacekeepers.
The increasingly complex and fractured contexts
reflecting the present security challenges require more
coherent action across the peace, humanitarian and
development nexus, including by providing support to
women acting as first responders. In our foreign policy
strategies, we aim to increasingly foster those links
and mainstream gender in a more systematic way. To
illustrate, we fund humanitarian projects with a focus on
women affected by conflict, including access to critical
health care, in Syria and neighbouring countries.
In conclusion, I would like to once again assure you,
Madam President, of Slovakia’s strong commitment
to the full, effective and meaningful participation
of women in United Nations peace operations and
peace processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 2)

gender dimension into the work of the Security Council.
However, major discrepancies remain between rhetoric
and reality. It is inconceivable that in 2019 divisions with
regard to women’s rights and gender equality remain.
For Mexico, gender equality and the empowerment of
women and girls are essential, not only for achieving
international peace and security but also for achieving
sustainable development.
Next year, we will mark the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing Platform for
Action. Against that backdrop, Mexico and France, with
the support of UN-Women, will sponsor the Generation
Equality Forum — a civil society-led process aimed at
reviewing the progress made by the Platform for Action,
identify gaps in its implementation and speed up the
pace towards substantive equality. Forty-five years
will also have elapsed since the first World Conference
on Women, held in Mexico under the auspices of the
United Nations in 1975.
Neither the United Nations as a whole nor the
Security Council itself can forgo the participation of
women in conflict prevention or conflict resolution.
As key pillars in all societies and communities, their
right to equal participation in power structures of
the decision-making process at all levels must be
guaranteed. In that regard, we welcome the inclusion
of approximately 30 per cent women in the meetings
of the Syrian Constitutional Committee, whose work
began in Geneva on 30 October. We believe that their
participation will play a key role in the peace process,
as has already occurred in other processes.

Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, we would like to thank South Africa for
convening this debate on the issue of women and peace
and security. We also thank the United Kingdom for
continuing it and enabling delegations inscribed on
the list of speakers to deliver statements on a crucial
subject. We congratulate South Africa on its very
successful presidency and wish the United Kingdom an
equally productive one.

In times of armed conflict, it is unquestionable
that women and girls are afflicted disproportionately
by many types of violence and at greater risk of
exploitation, abuse and sexual violence. This is a
reflection of the asymmetric power relations that
continue between women and men today. Such forms
of violence are even more outrageous when attributed
to United Nations officials. We therefore fully endorse
the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy aimed
at eradicating sexual exploitation and abuse in the
Organization’s missions.

My Government’s foreign policy has been openly
declared a feminist policy. Mexico’s Congress features
equal representation for women and men, while our
presidential Cabinet is equally balanced. Almost 20
years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we
acknowledge the progress made in incorporating the

Ensuring access to justice and that perpetrators
are punished are essential for the prevention of such
crimes. Such access must include effective victimcentred care that meets their biopsychosocial needs
and, in a clear and committed way, to their needs
related to their sexual and reproductive health. In that

19-349803/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 2)

Women and peace and security

regard, while we welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2493 (2019), we would have preferred more
progressive language.
Mexico recognizes the leadership of civil society
organizations, and especially women human rights
defenders, who risk their lives in promoting peace and
security in their communities and still face unacceptable
misogynistic and sexist narratives, which have driven
an increase in violence against them.
We thank the Secretary-General for his latest
report (S/2019/800) on this subject. Accountability,
financing, work with civil society, conflict analysis
with a gender perspective, the appointment of women
mediators and negotiators in peace processes and the
ratification of the Arms Trade Treaty are crucial steps
in the implementation of the resolution.
Mexico promotes the participation of women in
peacekeeping operations. Women now account for
15 per cent of contingents. This is obviously not enough.
We want to make further progress and have plans for
doing so. We hope to participate actively in the Elsie
Initiative Fund, promoted by the Canadian Government
and UN-Women.
Gender equality is one of the priority issues that my
country, if elected to the Security Council, will promote
during its membership during the period 2021 to 2022.
Women’s rights are non-negotiable human rights, and
their full realization is an essential precondition for
sustainable development in a peaceful world.
The President: I must ask that speakers respect the
time limit of four minutes per statement. I will have to
interrupt. Otherwise, I am afraid, not everyone, all 42
on the list, will be able to speak.
I now give the floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Amayo (Kenya): I commend South Africa
for this initiative and the United Kingdom for further
continuing this important discussion to reflect on
the achievements and challenges in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) and its subsequent related
resolutions in the lead-up to the former’s twentieth
anniversary. There are still important gaps that need to
be addressed, in particular those between rhetoric and
actual political and financial investments.
Kenya aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the African Union and UN-Women during
29 October. We also look forward to the Peacebuilding
4/35

04/11/2019

Commission briefing the Security Council on this
important agenda item.
Kenya also takes this opportunity to commend
the Security Council for its sustained engagement
over the past 19 years on the women and peace and
security agenda. We fully subscribe to the theme for
this meeting, which calls on all of us positively to move
from mere rhetoric to actual accomplishments towards
the successful implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda.
It was a great honour for Kenya to host the first-ever
African Women Leaders Network Intergenerational
Retreat on Leadership in Africa, held in Nairobi from
16 to 19 August, organized by the African Union,
specifically the African Women Leaders Network, and
the Office of the African Union Youth Envoy.
Through the various interventions and many
reports, including that of the Secretary-General, we
have heard of the persistent challenges that continue to
inhibit the full implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. Despite that, it is particularly
important to recognize that, although the process has
been slow, many countries and regional organizations
are dedicated and committed on delivering on this
groundbreaking resolution.
Beyond reaffirming the significant role of women
in the peace and security agenda, we Member States
and the United Nations system need to demonstrate
support and invest in this agenda, including its linkages
to sustainable peace and sustainable development.
Kenya has just finalized the implementation of
the first national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000)
and is currently drafting the second edition based on
the experiences gained and lessons learned from 2016
to 2018. Our mantra continues to be, in Kiswahili,
“Kuhusisha Wanawake ni Kudumisha Amani”, which
means “to involve women is to sustain peace”. Kenya is
proud to be one of the many African countries to have
developed a national action plan on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), and among the 42 per cent of
countries around the world having such a plan.
Our own assessment of implementation phase noted
that the national action plan has resulted in more genderresponsive language and messaging among leaders and
law enforcement personnel when it comes to matters
pertaining to women and peace and security, including
women and girl survivors of sexual and gender-based
19-34980

04/11/2019

Women and peace and security

violence. We also learned the importance of inclusivity
in the development and implementation of the national
action plan. The women and peace and security agenda
must be a whole-of-society enterprise and not just left
to women. Partnership with the private sector and civil
society has also proved critical in moving this agenda
forward. For example, Kenya has endorsed the Safe
Schools Declaration to ensure safe education for our
women and girls.
In conclusion, we have also noted that it is important
to build trust, identify champions, localize national
action plans, including in the allocation of resources
both locally and through all relevant ministries, and
strengthen monitoring and evaluation systems.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of the Holy See.
Monsignor Charters (Holy See): My delegation
would like to thank the presidency of the United
Kingdom for reconvening this important open debate
on women and peace and security.
Next year will mark the twentieth anniversary of
the landmark resolution 1325 (2000). Progress has been
made during the years since its adoption. Women’s
voices are increasingly heard and, in many places, more
space is being given to their unique contributions in
the pursuit of peace and reconciliation. However, much
remains to be done to increase women’s representation
in this important area. Pope Francis recently
commented on the great differences that still mark the
condition of women in the world, which flow mainly
from sociocultural factors.
In situations of conflict, women, who are seldom the
cause or the perpetrators of violence, are often the first
to be victimized. They bear the brunt of the negative
effects of conflict. This has a detrimental effect on
their health and well-being and that of those in their
care. They also find themselves frequently excluded
from the conversations and programmes that seek to
work out solutions that serve the cause of lasting peace.
We know of the impact of armed conflict on
women and girls. Sadly, our attention is all too often
drawn to the problem of sexual violence used as a
weapon of war. This must be, at all times and in all
places, firmly condemned. More effective efforts must
be made to ensure that such heinous crimes are not
committed. Perpetrators must be brought to justice.
Widespread impunity for such actions, as is still the

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 2)

case in situations of conflict, must be addressed if such
crimes are to decrease.
In situations of conflict and tension around the
world, however, we must never forget that women are
not only victims; women also have an essential and
irreplaceable role as protagonists in the promotion
of peace and reconciliation at the grass-roots level,
especially within the family and local community.
Their uniquely feminine sense for the pulse of difficult
situations makes them capable of expressing the
concerns and aspirations of those communities. It also is
important that their irreplaceable genius and expertise
be harnessed in national, regional and international
decision-making. To exclude the full participation of
women at every stage and in every aspect of the peace
processes would be to fail on the commitments made
since resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted. In that regard,
the Holy See takes note of the decision to make United
Nations peacekeeping operations more sensitive to the
needs of women and girls, both to ensure the protection
of those who find themselves in situations of conflict as
well as to facilitate the presence of uniformed women
within peacekeeping missions.
It has been 40 years since Mother Teresa of Calcutta
won the Nobel Prize for Peace. She was known for her
selfless work and for her tireless commitment to the
poorest of the poor, the abandoned, the unborn, the
dying and others whom society leaves behind today.
Each day, often in very hidden and humble ways,
all around the world, thousands of Catholic women
religious work to promote the dignity and advancement
of women and girls — an important, albeit unsung,
element of building and maintaining peaceful societies.
The work of the women in those religious institutes
also answers the needs and challenges of the horror of
human trafficking and the other abuses that women,
men, boys and girls endure. Amid very complex and
tragic situations, these women of peace and solidarity,
inside and outside of situations of conflict, race to
assist those who suffer the consequences of wars and
underdevelopment and serve as an example to the entire
international community of grappling with the root
causes of conflict and inequality.
In fulfilling its critical responsibility to promote
and maintain international peace and security, the
Security Council must ensure that the women and
peace and security agenda receives more than verbal
commitments, and that policies and programmes are
founded and implemented at all levels so as to foster the

19-349805/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 2)

Women and peace and security

incorporation of women into peace processes, and thus
bring about deeper, more profound and lasting results
for the good of all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Czech Republic.
Mrs. Chatardová (Czech Republic): We align
ourselves with the statements delivered by the observer
of the European Union and on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Let me start by commending South Africa for the
apt choice of the full and effective implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda as the
theme for today’s debate. Taking the step from general
proclamations to the practical everyday implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda abroad as
well as in our own countries is crucial to achieving a
real-life change.
The Czech Republic is currently working on our
second national action plan for the years 2021 to 2025.
In the process, we are building on accomplishments
of the first national action plan. For example, in 2018,
37 per cent of our military personnel deployed in
United Nations peacekeeping missions were women.
On the other hand, we are also keeping in mind the
lessons learned from the implementation of the first
national action plan. That is why we pledged to include
specific targets and indicators in the new impact-driven
national action plan to strengthen accountability and
monitoring of progress. The accomplishment of the
women and peace and security agenda remains one of
my country’s priorities.
Furthermore, we would also like to sincerely
thank today’s briefers for sharing their insights and
the Secretary-General for his latest report on women
and peace and security (S/2019/800). Both serve as a
timely reminder that, with the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000) fast approaching, serious gaps
remain in its implementation. The report includes two
especially worrisome findings.
First, we share the concern about the record-high
levels of political violence targeting women with
killings and assaults, sexual violence, harassment,
abductions and forced disappearances. The physical
security of women politicians, civic leaders and human
rights defenders is crucial for their full and meaningful
participation in political processes, and therefore also
6/35

04/11/2019

for progress of the women and peace and security
agenda as a whole.
Secondly, the report concludes that, out of nearly
132 million people in need of humanitarian aid and
protection, an estimated 35 million women and girls
require life-saving sexual and reproductive health
services and interventions to prevent gender-based
violence and respond to the needs of survivors. Sexual
and reproductive health and rights are at the core of the
women and peace and security protection dimension,
and therefore have to be translated into concrete actions
on the ground.
In conclusion, we would like to once again urge all
States that have not yet done so to join us and the more
than 80 other Member States in adopting and acting
upon their national action plans on women and peace
and security. The time to act is now.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.
Mrs. González López (El Salvador) (spoke
in Spanish): El Salvador thanks the South African
delegation for its presidency of the Security Council
during the month of October and the delegation of the
United Kingdom for its presidency during the month of
November for convening this open debate.
My delegation endorses and associates itself with
the statement made by the representative of Canada
on 29 October on behalf of the Group of Friends of
Women, Peace and Security, of which we are a member.
I stress my country’s commitment to the
development and implementation of this agenda. I
reaffirm our conviction that women are active agents
of peace and key players in the prevention of conflicts
and in the search for effective and efficient responses
to current crises.
Resolution 1325 (2000) calls for the full participation
of women in peace processes so that they can contribute
significantly to the maintenance and consolidation of
international peace and security. As one of the lessons
learned from our peace process, we are convinced that,
in order to achieve truly meaningful participation by
women, we must go beyond the simple presence of
women and young women in peace processes. Not only
must their presence be assured, but their voices must be
heard and their suggestions included. That is the only
way to make peace processes transformative, inclusive
and sustainable.
19-34980

04/11/2019

Women and peace and security

El Salvador has developed a national action plan
on women and peace and security for the years 2017
to 2022, thereby reflecting our readiness to fulfil our
commitments and define objectives in accordance with
the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions. The plan highlights the role of women in
different social spheres, especially in the consolidation
of peace and human security. It also seeks to integrate
a gender perspective into El Salvador’s participation
in peacekeeping operations through gender training
for members of the security forces and measures to
increase the representation of women in national and
international security.
As a result of the change in our Government’s
leadership and in consideration of current efforts to
combat violence and insecurity, we will conduct an
inclusive dialogue process to update our national action
plan, through which we hope to intensify efforts to
create a more democratic society.
We believe it is important to create more spaces
at the United Nations for countries that have an action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) to
share their experiences and lessons learned, which will
allow us to not only learn what other States have done
to that end but also to establish cooperation initiatives
to help promote the women and peace and security
agenda at the regional and international levels.
El Salvador has a historic commitment to
peacekeeping operations and has this year increased by
40 per cent the participation of women from our armed
forces and national civilian police. Those women have
specialized training in piloting and crewing helicopters,
institutional strengthening, health activities as
specialized doctors, to name but a few areas. Recently,
we also deployed our very first female military
observer, to the South Sudan mission. We welcome the
creation of different mechanisms to continue increasing
the participation of women in peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, we welcome the innovative leadership of
the Canadian Government’s Elsie Initiative for Women
in Peace Operations.
With regard to the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/800), we wish to highlight the progress
made in advancing the women and peace and security
agenda. However, we are very concerned about the
increase in sexual and gender-based violence, the
exclusion of women from political and mediation

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 2)

processes, as well as the number of attacks against
women peacekeepers.
Our full statement will be made available online.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Mr. Prasad (Fiji): I thank you, Madam President,
for convening this resumed debate.
The Secretary-General calls for bold and urgent
action in his report (S/2019/800). He has also reminds
Member States that commitments have not been
matched by action. In his briefing to the Security
Council on 29 October, the Secretary-General noted
alarming increases in political violence targeting
women in conflict-affected zones. He reported an
alarming increase in conflict-related sexual violence.
The Secretary-General reminded us that deep-seated
inequalities meant that women are far less likely to
access education, health and economic opportunities
than men in conflict-affected areas. The rhetoric and
implementation gap is heart-wrenching. The SecretaryGeneral’s report confirms that we are facing a growing
implementation deficit, the United Nations is facing
a trust deficit and both of those trends are fuelling
cynicism in our commitment to the women and peace
and security agenda. We shall ignore them at our
own peril.
There is one aspect of the United Nations women
and peace and security agenda related to United Nations
peacekeeping that I want to especially highlight. More
and more of the peacekeeping interventions are in
areas exposed to the climate crisis, whereas more and
more conflicts are triggered or intensified by it. Water
stress, desertification, depletion of food resources and
extreme weather events all fuel and intensify conflict.
The Pacific Islands Forum’s Boe Declaration of 2018
recognized climate change as the single greatest threat
faced by our people and countries — a perspective
increasingly shared by many other countries.
Globally, we know that the vast majority of the
United Nations peacekeeping operations today, its
political missions and its policing missions are in regions
severely affected by the climate crisis. One or another
expression of the crisis may have fuelled or contributed
to a worsening of the levels of conflict. The women and
peace and security framework will increasingly need
to be a climate crisis-informed one. It is not so today.
Food is weaponized in conflicts, water is weaponized

19-349807/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 2)

Women and peace and security

in conflicts, health and education are weaponized in
conflicts and gender is weaponized in conflicts. All of
those affect women harshly, severely and with greater
brutality. United Nations peace operations and the
Organizations political interventions in conflict zones
will increasingly need to respond to that. There are still
far too many steps to take.
The need for the equal participation of women in
peace processes, mediation, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding cannot be overstated. Peace is more
likely to survive stresses if women are centre-stage.
We also know that fragile regions are likely to return
to conflict and that women suffer disproportionately
when they do. When women are brought into the heart
of peacebuilding, we find far better integration of
humanitarian, development and security interventions.
The result is the durability of peace. The chances of
sliding back into conflict are reduced as a result.
Remarkably, men benefit a lot more when security
is returned.
The United Nations is also paying more attention
to the role of women in United Nations policing. United
Nations policing — this week especially — is already
playing important roles in mediating climate-induced
conflicts, such as around livestock grazing rights
and access to water. That role will only become more
pronounced. The increased participation of women in
policing is a very important part of the solution, but
it is only a starting point. Fiji is proud that women
make up over 40 per cent of Fijian police officers
deployed in United Nations policing operations today
in South Sudan and Darfur. We are close to achieving
the 18 per cent target for women in all United Nations
peace operations. Those commitments respond to the
women and peace and security agenda as well as the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Far more important,
however, they respond to our own insights derived
from 40 years of peacekeeping. Women peacekeepers
are better at diffusing tensions and identifying early
signs of conflict-related sexual violence. Women are
always more insightful in identifying early-warning
conflict stressors.
The full version of our statement will be
circulated promptly.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank you, Madam President,
8/35

04/11/2019

for resuming this open debate on such an important
issue as the women and peace and security agenda. I
would also like to thank the briefers for their testimony
and the important elements provided.
Today’s debate is highly symbolic, as it paves the
way for the celebration of the twentieth anniversary
of historic resolution 1325 (2000). Almost 20 years
after its adoption, a considerable gap remains
between the announced commitments on gender
mainstreaming — in peacekeeping, conflict resolution
and prevention — and concrete implementation on the
ground due to the multiple hurdles that have developed
over the decades. That raises the question of the
reasons, which are innumerable and multidimensional,
that explain the persistent distance between the stated
objectives on the one hand and their implementation on
the other. In response to that question, let me highlight
a few points.
First, decisive action is needed to prevent conflicts
and avoid crises. Conflict prevention is a central pillar
of the women and peace and security agenda, but also
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It is
not just about ending war and violence; the aim is to
address the root causes, predictive factors and warning
signs of conflict, and to systematically integrate a
gender approach into peace processes. Secondly,
gender equality must be promoted and the rights of
women and girls, which are essential for international
peace and security, must be respected. Thirdly, there
is a need to fight impunity and strengthen access to
justice for victims of sexual violence. Fourthly, a gender
perspective must be included in the United Nations
architecture for sustainability and peacebuilding.
In order to promote the women and peace and
security agenda in accordance with resolution 1325
(2000), the Kingdom of Morocco has launched and
actively participates in a significant number of
initiatives, including the network of focal points
on the theme of women and peace and security,
the Mediterranean Women Mediators Network,
the FemWise-Africa network and the Arab Women
Mediators Network, as well as the Global Alliance
of Women Mediator Networks. Moreover, Morocco
organized an international conference on the theme
of women, peace, security and development under
resolution 1325 (2000), which examined the issues of
the role of women in mediation, conflict prevention and
the issue of deradicalization.
19-34980

04/11/2019

Women and peace and security

In addition, Morocco also organized the training of
imams and preachers from several African, European
and Arab countries, to give guidelines on the true,
peaceful principles of religion, based on tolerance and
acceptance of others.
Moroccan female personnel are regularly deployed
within Royal Armed Forces contingents. Currently, 37
Moroccan women are deployed in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is important to note that the
number of women deployed by the end of 2017 stood
at only eight, whereas in 2016 there were none. The
rapid deployment force in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo today includes a specific unit made up of
female personnel. Similarly, Morocco has achieved the
15 per cent of mission experts and military observers
target in that category. Morocco also deploys female
military observers in the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan.
In the context of child protection and conflict
prevention, the Kingdom of Morocco recently acceded
to the Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers.
Finally, I am pleased to announce that the Kingdom
of Morocco is at advanced stage of developing its
national action Plan on women and peace and security
for the period 2020 to 2022, as part of an inclusive
process involving all relevant ministerial departments,
representatives of civil society and United Nations
agencies, including UN-Women.
The President: I suggest to colleagues that they go
straight into the substance of their statements. Neither
South Africa nor we will mind if they do not pay thanks
and tribute to us, as nice as that is.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Republic of Croatia.
Mr. Dogan (Croatia): With all protocols observed,
Croatia aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security. I take this
opportunity to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 2)

Owing to the specific experience of having
undergone war and post-conflict recovery in the
1990s, Croatia can attest that women not only bear a
disproportionate burden during a conflict but that they
also have an indispensable role to play in ending wars,
peacebuilding and post-conflict management.
At the national level, Croatia has taken steps to
promote women’s participation and leadership and to
ensure that the guiding principles of the women and
peace and security agenda are integrated into our
national policies and practice through the national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The plan’s implementation contributed to
increased participation and leadership by women in the
national security forces and in international missions
and operations. Croatia currently exceeds United
Nations recommendations on women’s participation in
peacekeeping operations, having deployed contingents
consisting of almost 20 per cent women. In addition,
Croatia contributes to the active implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda through
the implementation of a United Nations integrated
international course for foreign women police officers.
Furthermore, Croatia has adopted the 2015 Law on the
Rights of Victims of Sexual Violence in the Homeland
War, providing victims with support, recognition and
compensation, which is considered a State responsibility
even if the perpetrators are never found or brought
to justice.
On the eve of observing the twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), we see an opportunity to
reflect on what has been achieved and what still needs
to be done. As the Secretary-General’s newest report
makes clear (S/2019/800), we still live in a world where
women are excluded from peace and political processes,
while grave abuses and violence against women and
girls, including sexual violence, continue. Protecting
women in armed conflict, in parallel with enhancing
their contribution to peace processes and the rebuilding
of their communities, remains a crucial challenge.
We strongly believe that the prevention of
widespread or systematic sexual and gender-based
violence begins in times of peace, when national
laws should prevent permissive attitudes in wartime.
General recommendation No. 30 of the Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
states that protecting women’s human rights at all times,
advancing substantive gender equality before, during
and after conflict and ensuring that women’s diverse

19-349809/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 2)

Women and peace and security

experiences are fully integrated into all peacebuilding,
peacemaking and reconstruction processes should be
important objectives for all countries. Therefore, we
need to improve cooperation, as well as coordination
between the women and peace and security agenda
and various United Nations mandate holders, including
special procedures dealing with the protection and
empowerment of women.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to draw
participant’s attention to the powerful monument
overlooking the East River, which, in addition to
being the tallest on the grounds of the United Nations,
epitomizes the essence of our women and peace and
security agenda. It represents a woman riding a horse,
with an olive branch in one hand and a globe in the
other, leading peoples of the world towards peace. We
have to join forces — civil society and Member States,
women and men — to follow her symbolic lead.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Panama.
Ms. Quiel Murcia (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me begin by welcoming South Africa’s leadership
in convening this timely debate, as well as the readiness
of the presidency of the United Kingdom to conclude it.
Nearly two decades since the unanimous adoption
of landmark resolution 1325 (2000), we have certainly
made significant progress in the participation of
women and girls, but that progress is still uneven
and remaining challenges are not inconsequential.
Systematic violence against women and girls continues
to disproportionately violate their most basic rights,
placing them at a disadvantage and leaving them behind.
In the face of that situation, States and society in general
cannot be lax, let alone indifferent. We welcome the
recommendations contained in the Secretary’s report
(S/2019/800) and his call for concrete measures to bring
about genuine changes.
The unavoidable link between the women and
peace and security agenda and the achievement of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development requires the
participatory role and leadership of women be enhanced
as a basis for peacebuilding and conflict prevention.
The ever-increasing number of social conflicts requires
women’s participation in particular because maintaining
spaces for women’s voices is essential to strengthen
and keep open the channels of any democratic process.
The scope of the development to which we aspire
enshrines inclusion and equality as fundamental
10/35

04/11/2019

values of the process. That is why it is necessary to
reverse this ongoing exclusion and recognize the
prominent role women play as agents of change, whose
full participation in the design, development and
implementation of decisions is indisputably positive
and conducive to peaceful and constructive processes.
It is also necessary and urgent to increase resources
for the protection of human rights, so that they are not
ultimately insufficient for the situation of vulnerability
in which women have been kept.
We have witnessed in different regions of the world
how conflicts serve as a context for rape and other
forms of sexual violence against women, which are
even worse in the case of women rights defenders. It
is urgent that we eliminate discriminatory legislation,
cultural and attitudinal barriers and gender stereotypes,
among other aspects that tend to lessen the rights and
value of women in all participatory spaces in society.
As we have pointed out before, violent extremism
has intensified and degenerated into the worst forms
of violence against women, using sexual violence as a
weapon of war. The obligation incumbent upon States
to strengthen collective action and national plans and
strategies takes on greater meaning when harm and
loss are measured in human lives. The empowerment
of women will be possible only if we as a society
manage to overcome the damage of exclusion and take
action to address human rights violations flowing from
xenophobia, racism, intolerance and other attitudes that
erode any conflict resolution process.
At the present juncture, it is unacceptable to continue
debating and questioning neither the leadership of
women and their right to hold high-level positions nor
the equal participation of 100 per cent of the population
in any sphere of political, social and economic life/
In conclusion, my delegation is of the view that
progress in the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda does not necessarily entail the
adoption of new measures by the Security Council, but,
rather, the ability to require full compliance, without
exception, with existing provisions, including with
regard to accountability for perpetrators of sexual
violence in conflict situations.
The full text of Panama’s statement will be available
on the PaperSmart portal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
19-34980

04/11/2019

Women and peace and security

Mr. Khandakar (Bangladesh): The delegation of
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Our thanks go to the delegation of South Africa
for originating this debate and for highlighting the
issue of women and peace and security at the Security
Council once again by proposing a new resolution
(resolution 2493 (2019)), which, what is more, was
adopted unanimously.
In October 2000, as a non-permanent member of
the Council, Bangladesh played a leading role in the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security. The resolution was followed by
several others designed to strengthen the process,
create consensus about women’s extreme vulnerability
in conflict situations and promote women’s ability
to participate in peace negotiations, peacebuilding
and peacekeeping.
The Secretary-General’s report this month on
women and peace and security (S/2019/800) reflects
some progress. But many challenges remain, particularly
with regard to women’s participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and the increasing political
violence targeting women. All of us, the States
Members of the United Nations and the Security
Council, can facilitate the actions recommended in
the report with regard to areas such as accountability,
the meaningful participation of women — particularly
in decision-making processes — and human
rights violations.
The Declaration and Programme of Action on
a Culture of Peace calls for the empowerment of
people, particularly women and young people, which
is a major element in strengthening international
peace and security. That is clearly complementary
to the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
Bangladesh’s growing contribution of female
peacekeepers is consistent with its commitment to the
United Nations. We strongly support the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative and laud
his efforts towards ensuring gender parity in senior
appointments under his system-wide strategy on
gender parity.
One particular situation in Bangladesh that is
directly relevant to the women and peace and security

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 2)

agenda and which bears mentioning is that of the
devastating accounts of rape, sexual violence and abuse
perpetrated against women and girls of the Rohingya
community when they fled Myanmar’s Rakhine state
in August 2017. We thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, for keeping the Council informed
on issues of sexual violence against Rohingya women
and girls. Members of the Council should take decisive
action in response to the various reports on justice
and accountability in that regard. That should feature
prominently in the Council’s future deliberations.
Bangladesh is working to prepare its first national
action plan on resolution 1325 (2000). The proposed
plan recognizes the adverse effects of conflict on
women and girls, prioritizes women’s human rights
and gender equality in all aspects and ensures
women’s equal participation and leadership roles in all
peacebuilding processes. In preparing their national
action plans, many countries face gaps, challenges
and limitations. That process could be helped by firm
political commitments to transform rhetoric into reality
and strong stakeholder partnerships to implement the
Secretary-General’s report. Commitments in those
areas could also form part of the overarching objectives
for the twentieth anniversary of the women and peace
and security agenda.
Despite our continued best efforts to enhance
women’s empowerment and participation in all spheres
of our lives, much more needs to be done. The increased,
sustained and coordinated mobilization of financial
resources, including through earmarking, remains of
key importance to the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): Romania aligns itself with
the statement delivered on 29 October on behalf of the
European Union. I would like to make a few remarks in
my national capacity.
Next year will mark the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of the resolution 1325 (2000) and the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action. The eve of these significant
milestones provides an opportunity to reflect on what
we have done to place women at the heart of conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding
efforts and on what remains to be done. While we

19-3498011/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 2)

Women and peace and security

recognize the advancements that have been made over
the past two decades, we remain deeply concerned
about the rising levels of violent misogyny, the use of
sexual and gender-based violence as a weapon of war
and the lack of justice and support for the survivors of
such violence.
Romania integrates gender considerations into
all aspects of its national security and stability. Our
allocation of 2 per cent of our gross domestic product
to defence and our support for women’s representation
at all levels of decision-making, both locally and
internationally, are some of the measures that my
country has undertaken to implement the women and
peace and security agenda. We promote fair access
for men and women — both military and civilian
personnel — to all hierarchical levels, including
both leadership and executive positions, while also
observing compliance with performance selection
criteria. The Romanian Ministry of National Defence
has taken the lead in promoting and implementing the
women and peace and security agenda at the national
level by creating a gender management office, a
structure responsible for coordinating with all relevant
stakeholders towards the development of the national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). In that regard, we have established a national
implementation group consisting of representatives
from different Government ministries and civil
society representatives. The group concluded the
elaboration of the national action plan in September,
and the Government is expected to adopt it by the end
of December.
Women peacekeepers play an indispensable role in
laying the foundations for sustaining peace in conflict
zones, and it has been proven that the presence of
women in United Nations peacekeeping missions has
a positive effect on local populations. As women and
children are the most vulnerable to becoming victims
of violence, it is easier for female peacekeepers to
overcome social and cultural boundaries and provide
victims and local communities with a more reliable
sense of security and trust. My country is a strong
promoter of integrating women into the contingents
deployed to peace missions. We have a successful
example from Afghanistan, where Romania provided
female engagement teams, which managed to regularly
interact with local women, building trust and confidence
in a very complex environment.
12/35

04/11/2019

During
Romania’s
chairmanship
of
the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in 2018, listening to
the voices of women was high on our agenda. In that
regard, the topic of financing the gender dimension of
peacebuilding was included in the PBC annual session.
In addition, during the working visits I paid last year to
the Sahel and West Africa as PBC Chair, I met women’s
civil society groups and women leaders, which gave me
the privilege of better understanding how essential it is
to include women in all peace processes and ensure their
participation at all levels of society in order to achieve
lasting peace. This year, with Colombia as its Chair, the
PBC has continued to use its convening and advisory
role to provide a platform for women peacebuilders.
Romania strongly supports the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. I am proud to
announce that Romania has already surpassed the
16 per cent target for women’s participation in peace
operations in 2019. In fact, 17 per cent of Romania’s
military observers and staff officers, as well as 21 per
cent of our police contingents, currently deployed in
peacekeeping operations are women. Romania is also
increasing the number of security personnel trained
to prevent and respond to sexual and gender-based
violence and is supporting the Office of the Special
Coordinator on Improving the United Nations Response
to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by providing it with
an expert on military law.
I conclude by saying that there is an urgent need for
more action and fewer words. I look forward to taking
stock of all our efforts in 2020. Romania remains fully
engaged on this issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mrs. Tripathi (India): We thank South Africa for
convening this open debate, and we thank the United
Kingdom for continuing it.
Women’s participation is critical to the success
of all efforts to build sustainable peace. It is not only
about the realization of women’s rights, but also about
building peaceful societies. There is sufficient evidence
that establishes that peace processes are more likely to
succeed when women are fully engaged. Yet nearly
after two decades of the formalization of the women
and peace and security agenda, women continue to
face exclusion and their concerns are neglected in
peace processes. It is time to walk the talk. Regional
initiatives, such as the African Women Leaders
19-34980

04/11/2019

Women and peace and security

Network, are ensuring that women are at the forefront
of building peaceful societies.
The valiant leadership of Afghan women in bringing
peace to their communities and to the country needs
to be supported. We also need to address challenges
with regard to the implementation of gender provisions
in peace agreements. Violence against women and
girls perpetrated by terrorists remains rampant. The
subjugation of women in public and in private spheres
continues across situations that are on the agenda of the
Security Council. It is important that the Council strive
to effectively integrate women and peace and security
considerations into sanctions regimes, including by
listing terrorist entities involved in violence against
women in armed conflicts.
As everyone today discusses our collective
action, one delegation has been regurgitating rhetoric
about women’s rights in my country. That delegation
represents a system that has been exporting terrorism
and regressive extremist ideologies and stifling women’s
voices for narrow political gains. That has devastated
the lives of generations of women and their families
in our region and beyond. Habitually making baseless
allegations without any relevance to the agenda under
consideration has become a staple for that delegation.
That has happened not only earlier during this debate,
but also during the open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question, that
took place on October 28 during the 8648th meeting
of the Council (see S/PV.8648). We firmly reject
these baseless allegations. The Council has not paid
attention to such deceitful narratives in the past and
we are confident that it will continue not to do so in
order to ensure that this agenda is not used as a ploy for
furthering interterritorial ambitions.
The positive impacts of the greater participation
of women in United Nations peacekeeping are well
recognized in the women and peace and security
agenda. Through the Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
Member States are committed to implementing the
women and peace and security agenda by increasing
the number of civilian and uniformed women in
peacekeeping. This has been complemented by the
uniformed gender-parity strategy. Yet, women make
up only 4.2 per cent of military personnel in United
Nations peacekeeping missions. We ought to encourage
the participation of all women units in order to achieve
the set targets in this regard.

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 2)

However, we note that, in order to accommodate
those who cannot fulfil their commitment to providing
all-women units, mixed units are being given preference
by diluting policy frameworks. If this continues, we
cannot possibly achieve our set targets. India remains
committed to increasing the number of women
peacekeepers and deployed a female engagement
team to the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
earlier this year.
We will continue to work for the meaningful
participation of women in peace and security issues.
The normative work done outside the Council and
India’s experience of mainstreaming women’s
leadership and political participation will continue to
inspire our actions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): Greece aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union and the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security, and wishes to add the following.
Greece acknowledges that there is an urgent need
to consolidate a gender perspective in shaping and
implementing the international peace and security
agenda, which treats women and girls not only as victims
of armed conflict but, first and foremost, as empowered
agents of peaceful and democratic change. In this vein,
my country reiterates its commitment to enhancing
international efforts for the effective implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda at all levels
and in a coherent and results-oriented way. Greece is
currently drafting its national action plan on women
and peace and security. The development of the action
plan entails a participatory process and is expected to
focus mainly on the following priority sectors.
First, due to the unprecedented migratory and
refugee crisis by which my country is still affected, it
is expected to build on the national policy on refugee
and asylum-seeking women and girls who have fled
their homes due to armed conflicts raging in their
countries of origin. Secondly, it is aimed at enhancing
the equal participation of women in decision-making
and leadership. Thirdly, being the first national policy
instrument of its kind, it endeavours to spread the
word on the women and peace and security agenda by
educating, training, building capacity and raising the
awareness of policymakers and public administration

19-3498013/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 2)

Women and peace and security

officials, as well as the general public, on the holistic
nature and various aspects thereof.
Furthermore, with a view to enhancing policy
coherence, Greece continues to focus on the protection
of media freedom from violations and abuses, placing
particular emphasis on the safety of women media
professionals working in conflict environments. This
aspect is reflected in the Third Committee resolution
on the safety of journalists and the issue of impunity
(A/C.3/74/L.45), to be submitted once again this year by
my country, along with Argentina, Austria, Costa Rica,
France and Tunisia. In addition, as a strong supporter
of multilateralism, Greece continues to address issues
related to gender equality, women’s empowerment and
the women and peace and security agenda at the United
Nations and other regional forums.
In conclusion, allow me to underline the fact
that conflict prevention, sustainable peace and the
consolidation of inclusive, resilient, just and genderequal democratic societies are the ultimate goal.
Therefore, it is only by giving women and girls a
voice and enhancing their meaningful participation in
decision-making that we can make sure they are not
left behind.
The President: I wish to thank the representative
of Greece in particular for keeping to the time limit
because, as some delegations will have heard before,
we are limited to four minutes per speaker. If we do
not do that, then not every country and organization
will be able to speak today. I remind representatives
that their microphone will flash after four minutes and
it would be great if their colleagues could bring it to
their attention should they not see it. I will have to ask
representatives to bring their remarks to a close if they
do not.

04/11/2019

women and peace and security agenda. We take note of
his recommendations at the end of the report.
(spoke in English)
Long before the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
Djiboutian women, as well as many other African
women across the continent, had demonstrated great
political leadership and powerfully articulated a
vision for women’s rights and gender equality. We
deem it important to memorialize and document their
meaningful contributions to peace in Africa for the
benefit of future generations.
The participation of women in peace processes
was crucial to the Somalia National Peace Conference,
or the Djibouti Conference, which was held in Arta,
a resort city in the south of Djibouti, six months
before the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). At the
initiative of His Excellency Mr. Ismaël Omar Guelleh,
President of the Republic of Djibouti, and in contrast
to previous reconciliation conferences on Somalia, the
Arta Conference included the extensive participation
of Somali women. The inclusion of women concerned
was likely to further the outcome of the Conference.
In fact, the Arta declaration enabled the formation of
the transitional Government and then the rebirth of the
Somali Government in 1991, which allowed Somalia
to reoccupy its seat at the United Nations and in
regional bodies.

Mr. Moussa (Djibouti) (spoke in French): At the
outset, the Djiboutian delegation joins previous speakers
in congratulating the United Kingdom delegation on
having quickly organized the resumption of the debate
on the women and peace and security agenda so early
on in its presidency. This demonstrates the United
Kingdom’s deep commitment to the matter.

In the Horn of Africa, we pride ourselves on being
a Member State active in the inclusion of women in
political leadership through reforms to eradicate the
obstacles that women face. This year began with the
enactment of a bill increasing the quota of Djiboutian
women from 10 to 25 per cent in the National Assembly.
Quotas make questions of inclusion more visible and
constitute an effective and meaningful way of ensuring
that equality is taken seriously within political
institutions. Today, women represent 3 per cent of
Djiboutian military personnel deployed in peacekeeping
operations in Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Darfur. We are cognizant of the fact that it
is a modest number, but we are committed to further
implementing the agenda and measures to increase the
number of women in future peacekeeping operations
are being considered.

We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2493 (2019). We also express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his annual report on resolution
1325 (2000) (S/2019/800) and for his keen interest in the

We welcome the recent joint United NationsAfrican Union (AU) women and peace and security
solidarity mission to Djibouti, led by Deputy SecretaryGeneral Ms. Amina Mohammed and the AU Special

I now give the floor to the representative of Djibouti.

14/35

19-34980

04/11/2019

Women and peace and security

Envoy for Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Bineta
Diop, which took stock of achievements in the area
of women’s empowerment. The tenth AU high-level
retreat on the promotion of peace, security and stability
in Africa also took place in Djibouti last month. It
was focused on identifying concrete actions to ensure
good governance in the security sector and its effective
reforms, which are critical to the achievement of peace
and security in Africa and to the women and peace and
security agenda.
Conflict in Africa has been one of the main drivers
of forced displacement overall. Women are the main
victims of human smuggling and trafficking as a result
of these movements. A recent publication by the Africa
Center for Strategic Studies raises concerns about
the fact that violent extremist groups and criminal
networks have sought to control these trafficking routes
and revenues, estimated at $765 million annually for
the trans-Sahara route.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Montenegro.
Mrs.
Pejanović
Đurišić
(Montenegro):
Montenegro aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union (EU). In addition,
as a member of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security, Montenegro joins in the statement made
by the representative Canada on behalf of the group of
56 States. I would, however, like to make a few remarks
in my national capacity.
Next year we will mark the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of the landmark resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security. Although
numerous activities have been undertaken, they
have not translated into real changes on the ground.
Practical and institutional barriers continue to prevent
women from fully and meaningfully participating in
all peace processes. In today’s globalized world, with
very complex and fast-changing security threats and
strategic challenges, the active and equal participation
of women and men is a prerequisite for overall security,
lasting peace and stability.
As emphasized in the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/800), this is a critical time for bold and
urgent action to ensure that next year’s anniversary
gives rise to concrete commitments and impactful action
rather than empty rhetoric. We must reinvigorate our
efforts to address persistent obstacles causing failures
with multigenerational consequences. In that regard,

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 2)

Montenegro supports the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General and calls upon all
stakeholders to take steps towards accelerating progress
in implementing that important agenda.
Montenegro is strongly devoted to the
implementation of all resolutions derived from the
women and peace and security agenda. Greater
attention has been paid to ensuring women’s full and
meaningful participation in the security sector. As
a result of numerous reforms in that area, the overall
strategic framework has been improved, for example
by bringing the army into closer proportion with the
younger female population.
Last August, the Government of Montenegro
adopted its second plan of action for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) for the period 2019-2022. The
action plan clearly defines measures and actions for
achieving three priorities: increasing the participation
of women in decision-making and peacekeeping
processes, the protection of women and girls in conflict
zones and the integration of gender perspectives and
gender education in peacekeeping operations, as well as
mechanisms for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and its accompanying resolutions. In addition,
the Government of Montenegro adopted its third action
plan for achieving gender equality for the period 20172021; it defines additional integration of resolution
1325 (2000) into the security sector.
An informative page on women in the armed forces
has been established on the website of the Ministry of
Defence, containing all activities on achieving gender
equality. In addition, media campaigns and open-door
events, including school visits for making the armed
forces more visible to young men and women, have been
conducted. Those activities have resulted in increasing
interest among young female candidates in military
academies and voluntary military services.
At the level of the defence sector, the total number
of women employed is 12.82 per cent. At the Ministry
of Defence, that number is 42.48 per cent, while 9.19 per
cent of the members of the armed forces are women.
Those numbers are not sufficient, but they reaffirm
our strong commitment to addressing societal gender
stereotypes and the low interest of women in military
professions, on the one hand, and to fulfilling United
Nations, NATO and EU standards and pursuing overall
reforms and transformational changes of the defence
sector, on the other.

19-3498015/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 2)

Women and peace and security

In the coming period, a multisectoral approach will
be strengthened in order to ensure the realization of
defined goals by addressing societal gender stereotypes
that are not exclusively related to the security and
defence sector but affect all professions. That is
above all our moral and human obligation, apart from
implementing international standards and successfully
conducting military operations.
As we approach a landmark year for the women and
peace and security agenda, let me once again confirm
our readiness to fully implement the agenda, thereby
ensuring women’s meaningful participation in peace
and security processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself
with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General and
all the briefers for their contributions. We welcome the
focus of our discussion on the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its related resolutions.
The issue of women and peace and security was
brought to the Council’s attention 19 years ago, owing
to the concrete realization that women needed to be
included and addressed if its objective of ensuring
peace and security was to be effectively achieved.
Since then, the Council, together with all stakeholders,
has continued to develop the normative framework for
the consideration of the women and peace and security
agenda, improving data collection and identifying
tools to implement resolution 1325 (2000). Yet, as the
Secretary-General notes, the divide between rhetoric
and reality remains stark. The approaching twentieth
anniversary of the women and peace and security agenda
is therefore the moment to focus on further action and
continue to build on what we have established to date.
In marking the anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we also need to keep in mind
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action, which addressed women and
armed conflict as one of its 12 critical areas. We should
aim to achieve greater synergies among those agendas.
After all, the realization of all human rights for women
and girls and ensuring gender equality are also the
cornerstones of the full and effective implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, including
16/35

04/11/2019

the full and meaningful participation of women in peace
processes and ending gender-based violence, including
conflict-related sexual violence.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/800)
summarizes in detail our achievements and
shortcomings, as well as a number of concerning
trends. Those include record levels of political violence
targeting women, persistent patterns of sexual violence
and continuing violence against women peacemakers
and human rights defenders.
As an incoming member of the Security Council,
Estonia will continue to pay special attention to the
women and peace and security agenda. We welcome the
recommendations of the Secretary-General addressed
to various stakeholders, as laid out in his latest
report. We need to ensure the continued systematic
implementation of Security Council resolutions, and we
need to ensure the availability of gender-disaggregated
data, gender analysis, gender expertise, leadership and
accountability in implementing resolution 1325 (2000).
We need to be able to better monitor and track progress.
We welcome the work of the Informal Expert Group
on Women and Peace and Security in support of the
integration of the women and peace and security agenda
in specific country contexts and thank UN-Women for
its support in that regard.
Perpetrators of sexual violence need to be held to
account. Support to the survivors of violence, including
by ensuring comprehensive health services relating
to sexual and reproductive health and rights, as well
as psychosocial support, are crucial in that regard.
Sexual violence needs to be consistently established
as a stand-alone designation criterion for sanctions.
We should continue to strengthen the participation of
gender advisers and women’s protection advisers in
United Nations missions. Estonia is currently preparing
its third action plan on women and peace and security.
We believe that it is a key tool to guide and accelerate
action to implement resolution 1325 (2000).
The overarching aim of the twentieth anniversary
in 2020 should be the full and effective political
commitment to action. The inclusion of all stakeholders,
in particular women, human rights defenders and
grassroots organizations, is crucial in that respect.
While all of us can provide critical support, the main
difference in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) will, in large part, be made by dedicated people
working in the field, who often face risks and threats
19-34980

04/11/2019

Women and peace and security

to their security. We remain ready to work with the
Council and all partners to bridge the gap between
rhetoric and reality and to implement the objectives that
we jointly set in 2000.
The President: May I ask all colleagues to excise
a couple of paragraphs from what they are planning to
say? Otherwise, countries will not be able to speak at
this debate.
I now give the floor to the representative of Israel.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): Women and girls around the
world are often those who suffer most from conflicts
but are among the last to be included in peace processes
and decision-making. They make up half of the world’s
population, they are also proven catalysts of change and
still they are not yet equal partners in the pursuit of
their own peace and security.
Peace and security is not an isolated issue. Conflict
prevention and peacebuilding are greatly influenced
by the advancement of sustainable development, and
we cannot hope to achieve sustainable peace without
due regard for Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 5.
Young women and girls, elderly women, women with
disabilities and lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
women must all have a voice if we are to effect longterm change.
My country has been striving for peace and security
since its inception, with women playing a vital role.
Israel has demonstrated repeatedly its commitment to
the women and peace and security agenda and, although
we have not yet achieved full gender equality in that
regard, we have been working towards it on many fronts.
In fact, we were among the first to integrate part of
resolution 1325 (2000) into our national legislation and
a number of our civil society organizations have been
at the forefront of efforts to implement the resolution
in Israel.
Promoting women and girls into leadership roles
begins with an investment in education, promoting
involvement in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, prioritizing women’s political and
economic empowerment and changing harmful societal
norms and perceptions. The Israeli Authority for
the Advancement of the Status of Women has been
increasingly active in promoting the participation of
women of all backgrounds in education, the economy
and political processes.

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 2)

Israel welcomes the steps taken by the SecretaryGeneral to promote gender equality, gender parity and
the inclusion of women, not only in the context of peace
and security but in the leadership of the United Nations
system as a whole. As an international role model, it
is imperative that the United Nations conduct itself in
accordance with the SDG 5 and the women and peace
and security agenda.
As we work together to reform the United Nations
system and improve its ability to live up to its mandates,
we are encouraged to see initiatives such as the creation
of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs new women, peace and security policy, the
Department of Peace Operations new policy on gender
responsive peacekeeping operations and the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative, last year.
We are also heartened by the reported achievement of
gender parity among resident coordinators.
However, while we welcome those positive
developments, we also recognize that many challenges
still remain. As stated by the Secretary-General in
his latest report (S/2019/800), gender expertise has
to be strengthened across the United Nations system
and gender perspectives need to be taken into account
more consistently.
An integral part of promoting the women and peace
and security agenda is creating a safe and encouraging
environment for women and men everywhere to work
together towards peace. Implementing the agenda
without addressing the challenges posed by a culture
of sexual harassment and sexual abuse is like trying to
build a building in the middle of an earthquake. As long
as women are the targets of violence and harassment,
they cannot freely participate in public or political life.
As part of our efforts to assist in that matter, Israel,
along with other Member States and the Secretariat
have been working to eliminate those practices. We
are encouraged to see that the United Nations Member
States and civil society alike are increasingly aware of
those issues and working to confine them to the pages
of history.
We cannot expect to achieve true peace and
security as long as women and girls are excluded from
the process and their abilities to influence the outcomes
are limited. Until the day comes when the full and equal
participation of women in decision-making is a given,
we must all commit to come together to advance the
women and peace and security agenda.

19-3498017/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 2)

Women and peace and security

Mr. President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mrs. Villalobos Brenes (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): The full text of our statement is available
on PaperSmart.
We are very concerned by the findings of the
independent evaluation contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2019/800), which reflects the fact that with respect
to resolution 1325 (2000), we have achieved only half of
the proposals. For 40 per cent of the recommendations,
further work needs to be done, while 10 per cent have
not progressed or have even regressed.
We recall that in 2000, we recognized the importance
of women’s participation in all conflict-related
processes, ranging from prevention to peacekeeping.
Costa Rica wishes to highlight the following aspects on
which we must focus efforts in areas that are lagging,
as per the report of the Secretary-General.
First is the issue of the protection of women. Just
as our discussions on peace and security emphasize the
importance of the protection of civilians, we must insist
that the protection of women and girls is always taken
into account, both in its the humanitarian aspect and
with regard to the use of sexual aggression and sexual
violence as weapons of war.
The second aspect is the participation of women in
peace negotiations. The inclusion of gender perspectives
is new but it is no excuse for doing nothing. The
Secretary-General notes the new challenges posed by
conflict, such as the proliferation of non-State actors
and, specifically, the challenge of gender inequality as
an objective of conflict itself. To that end, Costa Rica
believes that we must redouble our efforts to empower
women so as to ensure that they are fully involved in
the restoration of peace and reconstruction processes.
A third aspect is related to impunity. Bringing
culprits to justice helps to prevent the resurgence of
atrocity crimes against women. Costa Rica is concerned
by references in the report of the Secretary-General
on deficiencies in responses to sexual violence and
the lack of access to security and justice institutions
women face because of their gender.
The fourth aspect is inclusiveness in special
political operations and peacekeeping operations. The
specific needs of girls and women must be included
in the strategies of those missions. Missions must
18/35

04/11/2019

incorporate women as a way of building trust, ensuring
understanding and facilitating rapprochement during
reconciliation and reintegration processes.
Fifth is compliance with conventions on human
rights and international humanitarian law. So long as
the universally recognized rights of women continue to
be denied, the women and peace and security agenda
cannot be fulfilled. All recommendations will become
dead letter until inclusive policies are adopted.
It is necessary to put an end to gender-based
violence and to discrimination against women and
girls, which impede their right to express themselves,
socialize, learn, enjoy freedom of movement and the
possibility of exercising their political rights, among
others, so that they can be part of the agenda.
Costa Rica hopes that in 2020, the commemoration
of 20 years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
will focus on practical and concrete actions that will
result in gender parity, where the voices of women and
girls will be heard.
Mr. President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Chidiac (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the United Kingdom presidency for
reconvening the open debate on women and peace and
security. and to take this opportunity to the adoption
of resolution 2493 (2019) last week. It is the latest in
a series of related resolutions, starting with resolution
1325 (2000) and resolution 2467 (2019), on conflictrelated sexual violence.
In that respect, we reiterate the importance of
all resolutions on women and peace and security
and emphasize Lebanon’s commitment to the
implementation of all their provisions without selectivity
and in their entirety. Those resolutions consecrate the
concept of social equality and seek to establish more
just societies enjoying stability and the prospects
of peace and security, where rights are secured and
equal and women are ensured fair opportunities to
become partners to men at all levels. We see women
starting revolutions everywhere today, standing up for
their freedom and the security of their society, while
demanding their rights and dictating to Governments
their duty to ensure peace, stability and a decent life.
In September, the Lebanese Government adopted
the first national action plan on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). The plan was drawn up by
19-34980

04/11/2019

Women and peace and security

the National Commission for Lebanese Women, in
consultation with governmental and non-governmental
parties, including non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and civil society, to ensure the broadest and
most effective participation in its implementation. We
note the constructive and effective role of civil society
in all its components, particularly with respect to
human rights defenders, both male and female, along
with NGOs.
The operationalization and integration of
partnerships between the Governments and civil society
are crucial and necessary to developing the plan’s
mechanisms, as well as its implementation. Lebanon
reiterates through the national plan its commitment
to actively involving women in peacebuilding efforts,
conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction,
as well as maintaining security by encouraging their
participation and representation in local and national
governance structures.
In recent weeks, Lebanon has witnessed a peaceful
and democratic movement, led by women who have
taken to the streets to defend their living, social, civil,
political and personal rights. They have taken to the
streets to safeguard a democratic society that believes
in individual and social freedoms, gender equality,
pluralism and all human rights for all human beings.
They have taken to the streets to create a barrier
between security forces and protesters with a view
to maintaining peace and security. They have taken
to the streets because they believe in equal and fair
participation in decision-making. Theirs is the most
beautiful voice, reflecting with courage, care and
sincerity the concerns, aspirations and dreams of the
entire society. They have taken to the streets so as not
to miss their date with destiny.
Only women can determine their own future. Only
women can chart their own path. Only women can write
their own destiny. Only women can create their own
objectives. Only women can forge their own agendas in
all areas. Women are entrusted with ensuring peace and
security. They must be able to determine for themselves
what is possible and what is not. Women everywhere
will be granted their rights, not because of someone’s
choice, but because no one should have that choice.
The President: We are halfway through our list of
speakers and halfway through our time. I am grateful
to all delegations for limiting their statements to a
maximum of four minutes.

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 2)

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): Ensuring
the security of women in armed conflict and promoting
their role in conflict prevention and resolution are
indeed noble objectives. The realization of those
goals requires a comprehensive approach as well as
realistic and pragmatic solutions. Principally, the most
effective way to ensure the security of women in armed
conflict is to prevent the occurrence of those conflicts
in the first place. That is of essential importance
to our region — the Middle East — where women
and girls continue to suffer from the vicious cycle of
armed conflict.
The most severe case is the situation in Palestine,
where women bear the brunt of foreign occupation. The
Council’s inability to protect Palestinian women and
girls has resulted in their death, detention, torture and
displacement and the systematic violation of their basic
rights. No institution can end the suffering of women in
armed conflict if its resolutions and decisions remain
unimplemented. Terrorism and violent extremism
also have serious adverse effects on women’s lives.
Genuine efforts are therefore needed to protect women
against such menacing issues. Similarly, women
are the main victims of sexual violence as a tactic
of war and terrorism. In order to end that brutal and
atrocious crime, accountability must be seriously and
strongly promoted.
In all cases, we must not ignore the importance of
women’s empowerment as an essential factor in conflict
prevention and resolution, as well as in our broader
efforts to maintain international peace and security. In
that context, we must not lose sight of the devastating
effects of unilateral coercive measures, which make
no distinction between men and women, violating the
basic human rights of both and ultimately undermining
the constructive role that women can play in promoting
peace and security. As a victim of aggression, foreign
military invasion, terrorism and unilateral coercive
measures, we attach great importance to the role
that women can play in building a secure, stable and
prosperous society.
In conclusion, women are active partners in the
social, economic and political life of our societies
and have made great achievements so far. With that
in mind, my Government is determined to ensure the
empowerment of women and girls in all walks of life.

19-3498019/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 2)

Women and peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Ms. Bassols Delgado (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
The women and peace and security agenda has been
and remains a priority for Spain. We are committed to
advancing towards a sustainable peace, convinced of
the fact that a lasting peace will be possible only with
the effective participation and leadership of women.
We have made progress on this matter since the
year 2000. However, data and the recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/800) both concur in
indicating that we are still far from the full and effective
implementation of this agenda. Secretary-General
Guterres refers in his report to the “stark contrast
between rhetoric and reality” (ibid., para. 5) on this
issue. Much remains to be done. If we really want to
ensure progress, we are obliged to take concrete and
measurable steps. Therefore, Spain and Finland jointly
launched the Commitment 2025 initiative in September.
It contains concrete and ambitious commitments to
accelerating the effective participation of women in
peace and mediation processes. Our aim is to submit,
in 2022, a follow-up report on our commitments, in
line with the Secretary-General’s recommendations, in
order to reduce the rift between rhetoric and reality. In
brief, we are seeking very concrete results to ensure
that we move forward.
Through the Women, Peace and Security Focal
Points Network — a Spanish initiative in operation
since 2016 — 11 countries have so far joined the 2025
Commitment, while others are expected to do so soon.
All States Members of the United Nations are invited to
join. The implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda crucially requires regional, national
and local policies. Therefore, strategic instruments
such as national action plans represent a fundamental
mechanism. Spain is currently reviewing its second
action plan. From the lessons learned through its
implementation, we hope to glean a set of good practices
to share with all Member States and the Organization.
We are facing a challenge that requires a transformative
and sustained effort over time.
Before I conclude, allow me to refer to
education — a fundamental tool for the political,
economic and social empowerment of women. Spain
this year hosted the third International Conference on
Safe Schools, which, among other issues, addressed
the impact of attacks against education on women and
20/35

04/11/2019

girls. The 87 participants agreed that it is essential to
forge synergies between the safe schools agenda and
the women and peace and security agenda. I encourage
other States represented here to adopt the Safe Schools
Declaration as an instrument to prevent attacks on
access to education.
Today’s debate is the last major event on this issue
in this forum before 2020, when we will commemorate
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). There is still a long way to go. There are
still rights to be defended in the face of attacks and
even in the face of inaction. Spain will remain heavily
involved in pursuing a change that guarantees genuine
equality in the exercise of women’s rights and in their
participation in all decision-making and peacebuilding
processes. We will engage at the national level, we will
cooperate with those who wish to cooperate and we will
share the lessons learned to the benefit of peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Woldeyes (Ethiopia): Over the years, we have
heard a number of pronouncements from the United
Nations and the African Union and seen various
regional and national policies, strategies and action
plans, all aimed at mainstreaming gender issues. There
has been some progress registered, but despite all those
efforts, there is still a significant gap between our
aims and ambitions and the actual political support
and financial commitment provided to the women and
peace and security agenda. Much more work and real
and practical commitments are needed to bridge the
gaps in implementation and to support countries in
developing policies and strategies that align with the
agenda. We can deliver on those commitments only if
we place the prevention of violence against women, the
protection of women’s rights and the full participation
of women in decision-making at the centre of national
policies. Neither peace nor prosperity can be achieved
or sustained without the equal, active and meaningful
involvement of women throughout society.
Let me take this opportunity to reaffirm Ethiopia’s
commitment to promoting the women and peace and
security agenda, and to illustrate it if I may. Over the
past 18 months, Ethiopia has taken a number of bold
steps to increase the participation and representation
of women in decision-making. The Administration of
Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed has attained gender parity
in the Cabinet, appointed our first woman Head of State
19-34980

04/11/2019

Women and peace and security

and assigned women as heads of the Supreme Court and
the National Election Board. We have also set up a new
ministry, led by a woman, with a specific mandate for
peacebuilding and oversight of the country’s security
sector. In addition, we have significantly increased the
numbers of women in leadership and decision-making
positions at different levels of Government and across
public institutions. Our Constitution guarantees rights
to land use and equal rights to property acquired
during marriage.

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 2)

for convening this open debate on women and peace
and security under the theme “Towards the successful
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda”. I would also like to thank all the briefers.

As a leading troop-contributing country,
Ethiopia fully understands the importance of women
peacekeepers in overcoming social and cultural barriers
to build trust in the communities they serve. They
provide victims and local communities — specifically
those women and children most vulnerable to conflict
and violence — with a sense of security and confidence.
Women peacekeepers play a critical role in helping
refugees and others who have been subjected to violence
in the absence of justice. Victims of sexual and genderbased violence respond more positively to their support,
which facilitates rehabilitation, justice and reparations.
In Ethiopia, we have been seeing grass-roots self-help
women’s groups provide the essential support in the
national response to recent internal displacement and
resettlement, as well as in reconciliation efforts.

Sudanese women have played an important role
in the glorious December revolution that has swept
the country since the beginning of this year and
have been an integral part of it. Women have been
actively participating in protests and demonstrations,
galvanizing and ensuring their peaceful nature. Women
also genuinely participated in the negotiations on the
Constitutional Declaration signed in August, as well
as the negotiations to establish the structures of the
new transitional Government. Four Sudanese women
are currently ministers in the new Government.
They are the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Social
Development and Labour, Youth and Sports and Higher
Education. There are also two women in the Sovereign
Council — the highest authority in the country — one
of whom is a Sudanese Christian Copt. The Sudan has
also set a quota of 40 per cent women in the transitional
legislative council, in a clear sign of the political will
to empower women and to ensure their participation in
high positions, taking into consideration geographical
and religious diversity in the Sudan, and in the
development and reconstruction process.

As we look forward to marking the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), it is high time that we recommit
ourselves to fully implementing the resolutions we have
adopted and the declarations we have made in the past.
Women must be central to policy-making, political
participation and conflict prevention. We call upon
members of the Council to use the commemoration of
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) to mobilize support and resources so as
to fully implement the women and peace and security
agenda in its entirety.

The current transitional period in the Sudan has
genuinely and tangibly transformed the situation of
women. The Constitutional Declaration calls on the
State to promote the rights of women, including their
social, economic and political rights, as well as the
right to equal wages and other benefits. The Declaration
also commits the State to combating all forms of
discrimination against women while considering
provisional preferential measures in peace and war.
Such benefits are necessary to ensuring women’s
participation in public life and maintaining peace and
security in the country.

This was a shortened version of our statement. Our
full statement will be available online.

Addressing violence against women is a priority for
the new Government, as it is one of the main obstacles
to the empowerment and advancement of women.
Efforts are being made to revoke all laws that restrict
women’s freedoms, rights and participation in political
and economic life, especially in rural areas and those
areas affected by the conflict in Darfur. We note that
women played a significant role as arbiters in Darfur,
thereby contributing effectively to achieving peace and
participating in the disarmament campaign.

The President: I thank the representative of
Ethiopia also for reminding colleagues that a fuller
statement can be placed on websites and circulated.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Sudan.
Ms. Elsheikh (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank South Africa and the United Kingdom

19-3498021/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 2)

Women and peace and security

Since coming to power in early September, the
new transitional Government has sought to promote
human rights. On the margins of the General Assembly
at its seventy-fourth session, the Government signed
an agreement to open a new office on human rights
in the Sudan under Law No. 74 of 25 September. The
aim is to improve the situation of human rights and
to provide the necessary technical assistance in this
regard. That step is important to supporting the rights
of Sudanese women and their participation in peace and
security efforts.
The Sudan is committed to implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) by adopting a national action
plan for women, security and peacebuilding. It is
currently under review to bring it in line with recent
developments in the country so that it can be adopted
by the end of this year.
The delegation of my country seizes this opportunity
to thank Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the
African Union (AU) Commission, for instructing the
AU Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security to
lead a solidarity mission to the Sudan during the period
26-30 August to ensure the commitment of the new
Government to addressing the concerns of Sudanese
women with respect to peace and security and to ensure
that their voices are heard, their rights are guaranteed
and their participation in decision-making is ensured,
in order to enable them to lead on an equal footing
with men.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank the United Kingdom presidency for organizing
this resumed open debate under the theme, “Towards
the successful implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda: moving from commitments to
accomplishments in preparation for the commemoration
of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)”.
I would also like to sincerely thank the SecretaryGeneral and the Executive Director of UN-Women, as
well as the African Union Special Envoy on Women,
Peace and Security, for their informative briefings.
I appreciate the contents of the annual report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/800) on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), including its commitments
and recommendations, which Tunisia supports and is
keen to implement.
22/35

04/11/2019

I also thank the representatives of civil society
for their important contributions to discussing
this topic. We agree with them that now is the time
to act and effectively implement the texts of the
adopted resolutions.
The empowerment of women and their participation
in decision-making are pillars of Tunisia’s policy, as they
are important to social cohesion and society’s ability to
meet security, economic and development challenges.
Based on our belief in the important role that women play
in times of peace, conflict or war, Tunisia has therefore
sought to engage constructively in all international
efforts to consolidate peace and security, including by
participating in peacekeeping operations throughout
the world and ensuring women’s participation in them.
We also played a role in the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) during our non-permanent membership of the
Council in 2000.
On 8 August 2018, Tunisia adopted a comprehensive
national action plan on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent relevant resolutions.
That was the culmination of efforts that began in
2016 with the establishment of a national committee
made up of Government, constitutional and civil
society representatives, and more than 50 per cent
representation of women.
Conflicts directly affect women and girls, who are
exposed to abuse, violations and inequality. Tunisia
has therefore participated effectively in initiatives and
efforts to settle conflicts and contain their devastating
effects on women and girls. We are also committed
to implementing international and regional laws on
gender equality.
Tunisia is currently sparing no effort to implement
the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, especially Goal
5 on gender equality in duties and rights, pursuant
to our national action plan, which promotes women’s
participation at all decision-making levels. Tunisia
attaches particular importance to programmes for
the training and capacity-building of women in order
to prevent and resolve conflicts, achieve sustainable
peace, safeguard society from extremism and terrorism
and ensure human rights in practice and in culture.
In conclusion, the national action plan and
the aforementioned sectorial plans are part of a
comprehensive approach that Tunisia adopted following
its independence. Those efforts have seen renewed
19-34980

04/11/2019

Women and peace and security

momentum since 2011 in ensuring gender equality, the
empowerment of women and the rejection of all forms
of gender-based violence and discrimination.
The full version of my statement will be made
available online.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mrs. Koçyiğit Grba (Turkey): At the outset, I
would like to express our appreciation to the South
African presidency for convening the annual Security
Council open debate focusing on the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. I
would also like to thank the presidency of the United
Kingdom for the resumption of the open debate today.
Our appreciation also goes to the Secretary-General
for his latest annual report (S/2019/800), which
provides a valuable assessment on the implementation
of the relevant resolutions, as well as pertinent
recommendations to further advance the women and
peace and security agenda.
As we prepare to mark the twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), which laid the foundation
for the women and peace and security agenda, we
need to reflect on our achievements and address the
remaining gaps and challenges in realizing our overall
objective in a unified manner. In that understanding,
Turkey co-sponsored resolution 2493 (2019) adopted on
29 October.
Turkey has placed gender equality at the heart of
its foreign policy and therefore considers the increased
use of the women and peace and security agenda
across all its four pillars as a critical tool for conflict
prevention and resolution, as well as for peacebuilding
and sustaining peace. Through resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent related Security Council resolutions, a
solid normative framework has been established to that
end. We also welcomed the adoption of resolution 2467
(2019), on sexual violence in conflict, in April and see
it as a further concrete enhancement of the framework.
We are pleased to see that these resolutions have
encouraged the United Nations system and Member
States to step up their efforts and develop programmes
to increase women’s participation as leaders in the
military and law enforcement and as peacebuilders
in treaty and peace agreement negotiations. There
has also been deeper awareness of and more serious

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 2)

attention afforded to the asymmetric impact of conflict
on women and their vulnerability.
In that context, Turkey considers the work of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security, as well as the development of the
Secretary-General’s uniformed gender parity strategy
2018-2028, as important steps towards strengthening
the role of women in maintaining peace and security.
Turkey remains committed to contributing to the
advancement of the women and peace and security
agenda by taking into account the specific protection
needs of women as a result of armed conflicts. We
continue to provide assistance and psychosocial
support for women and girls affected by armed conflict
in our region. As such, Turkey deploys multifaceted
services to offer dignified living conditions to more
than 3.5 million Syrians who have taken refuge in
Turkey, fleeing the conflict in Syria. Of those people,
1.6 million are women.
Women’s health centres established by the
Turkish Ministry of Family, in cooperation with the
Ministry of Health and the United Nations Population
Fund, offer health training, comprehensive support
and empowerment programmes for those women
and girls. Since 2014, the programme has delivered
multidimensional support to almost 400,000 refugees
in and outside temporary refugee centres. For the years
2020 and 2021, we will further strengthen the service
capacity and expand the coverage of that project.
While we work hard to mitigate the countless
negative effects of displacement on women affected
by armed conflict, we regret that earlier in this open
debate, this platform was abused to disseminate
falsehoods about my country’s limited cross-border
counter-terrorism operation. Turkey’s views on that
issue were amply presented to the Security Council
on 24 October (see S/PV.8645). We flatly reject and
condemn any misrepresentation of Turkey’s counterterrorism efforts. It is clear that we do not have any
moral lessons to learn from those who have refrained
from doing their part in shouldering responsibilities
related to the refugee crisis.
Despite measurable progress, much work remains
to be done to fully translate the women and peace and
security agenda into action. That requires additional
concerted efforts by not only Member States, but
also United Nations entities, as well as regional

19-3498023/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 2)

Women and peace and security

organizations and civil society. It is imperative to
directly address the root causes of conflicts, including
through the promotion of gender equality and the
greater and meaningful participation of women in
all forms of mediation, conflict prevention, United
Nations peace operations, post-conflict recovery and
peacebuilding processes.
Needless to say, further efforts are required to
see more women assume positions of leadership at the
negotiating table, thereby enhancing their engagement
in political and economic decision-making. As we look
forward to the twentieth anniversary of resolution 2325
(2000), Turkey stands ready to play its role.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Rutikanga (Rwanda): This open debate comes
at an opportune time to reflect on the achievements,
challenges and remaining work ahead on issues related
to the women and peace and security agenda, as we
mark 10 years since the establishment of the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and nearly 20 years since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
The issues related to women, peace and security
are a core foundation of lasting peace. The full
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda involves the meaningful participation in the full
spectrum of conflict mediation, conflict resolution and
the negotiation of peace agreements and peacebuilding.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2000,
19 related resolutions have been adopted, similarly
highlighting the suffering that women face as a result
of armed conflict and recognizing that women carry
the heaviest burdens related to conflicts.
Unfortunately, despite all those resolutions,
atrocities against women and girls in armed conflicts
have continued. Today’s wars continue to be fought
on women’s bodies in acts of terror with the aim of
destroying beyond recovery the social fabric of targeted
communities. There remains a great deal of work for us
to advance women’s empowerment in the area of peace
and security. In that respect, I would like to make the
following recommendations.
The political will of Member States, the United
Nations Secretariat and the commitment of all parties
to a conflict are critical to creating the necessary
environment for meaningful women’s participation. It is
24/35

04/11/2019

particularly hard to understand the absence of women
in negotiations for peace agreements supported by the
United Nations, as was reported earlier by the Executive
Director of UN-Women in her briefing (see S/PV.8649).
The women and peace and security agenda should
be central in all peacekeeping missions with a protection
of civilian mandate. Effective implementation calls
for increased investment in women and peace and
security advisers in peacekeeping missions and regular
reporting. The protection of civilians is and will
continue to be the driver of Rwanda’s engagement in
United Nations peacekeeping. As the third top troopcontributing country, we are fully committed to
the women and peace and security agenda in United
Nations peace operations.
It is essential to raise awareness and build the
capacities of local communities, as they are the first
line of response to conflict-related sexual violence.
During Rwanda’s reconstruction period, the role of
local communities was central to effective prevention,
timely reporting and accountability.
Turning to the focus on a survivor-centred
approach, there is a need to reinforce the protection
and rehabilitation of victims of sexual abuse in armed
conflicts by providing services, including medical
care, psychological support, the protection of victims
and legal aid. In that regard, we commend Ms. Pramila
Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for putting the focus on
survivors during last week’s event to commemorate the
tenth anniversary of the mandate on sexual violence in
conflict. We welcome the launch of the Global Fund for
Survivors of conflict-related violence by Nobel Peace
Prize laureates Dr. Denis Mukwege and Ms. Nadia
Murad and encourage more members to support
the Fund.
Supporting countries in need by strengthening
the legal and policy framework that advances the
rights of women and children is vital. Prevention of
sexual violence starts with strong institutions and
comprehensive legal frameworks during times of peace.
Holding perpetrators of sexual violence to account is
crucial to delivering justice to victims and to deterring
future crimes.
At the national level, it is vital to adopt and
implement national policies and national actions
plans and to make efforts within regional frameworks
aimed at raising public awareness of women’s rights
19-34980

04/11/2019

Women and peace and security

and the importance of their role and participation in
peace processes.
Regarding all the aspects I have mentioned,
including others in my written statement, Rwanda
will hold the 2019 Global Gender Summit from 25 to
27 November under the theme “Unpacking constraints
to gender equality”. All Member States are welcome.
The President: As we are a little behind time, I
once again urge speakers to limit their statements
to four minutes. I remind them that the collar of the
microphone will begin to flash after four minutes has
elapsed, at which time one of my colleagues will come
around to encourage the speaker to finish. Otherwise, I
regret that I will be forced to cut the speaker off.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): Since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), remarkable progress has been
made in the women and peace and security agenda.
However, gender inequality and discrimination against
women remain major challenges of our time. To allow
women to be agents of change and to contribute to a more
peaceful, sustainable and prosperous world, we need to
ensure that they can fully enjoy their rights and realize
their potentials. We need to create an environment
that is enabling, inclusive and free of discrimination
and unfair social norms and attitudes. Only then can
we hear the voices of women human rights defenders,
women political leaders, women justice and security
sector actors, women peacekeepers and mediators,
women journalists, activists and civil society leaders,
and these voices are indispensable to sustaining peace
and security.
We call upon the Security Council to invite
more female briefers, including from civil society.
We welcome efforts to integrate gender perspectives
and promote women’s meaningful participation and
representation in the United Nations work on conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and sustaining peace,
including the Secretary-General’s Uniformed Gender
Parity Strategy 2018-2028. As part of our pledges for
the upcoming twentieth anniversary of the women and
peace and security agenda, Liechtenstein will sustain
the strong focus on the participation, prevention and
protection pillars in the context of its international
humanitarian and development cooperation.

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 2)

Gender inequality, including harmful gender
stereotypes and abusive power dynamics, is at the root
of sexual and gender-based violence. While women and
girls are disproportionately affected, there are also men
and boys among the victims. The annual report of the
Special Representative of Sexual Violence in Conflict
(S/2019/280) and reports by the Liechtenstein-based
non-governmental organization All Survivors Project
document rape, gang rape, forced nudity and other
forms of inhumane and degrading treatment of men in
Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, Sri Lanka and the
Syrian Arab Republic, primarily in detention settings.
The most recent report by the Secretary-General on
children in armed conflict in Afghanistan (S/2019/727)
documents that the majority of reported cases of sexual
violence affected boys.
Among the most recent achievements of the women
and peace and security agenda is resolution 2467 (2019)
and its survivor-centred approach. It focuses on groups
that are particularly vulnerable or may be specifically
targeted in conflict-related sexual violence. It requests
that the monitoring, analysis and reporting focus more
consistently on the gender-specific nature of sexual
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations against
all affected populations in all situations of concern,
including men and boys. That is of utmost relevance,
as sexual violence against men and boys continues to
be underreported owing to a lack of legal frameworks,
cultural taboos and fear of stigmatization. In addition
to implementing resolution 2467 (2019) and the
resolutions it builds upon, we call for the inclusion
of conflict-related sexual violence as a designation
criterion in sanction regimes.
Accountability is an essential part of the fight against
conflict-related sexual violence. The international
criminal justice system has done groundbreaking
work in that regard. Earlier this year, the International
Criminal Court (ICC) found the warlord Bosco
Ntaganda, of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
guilty of 18 counts of war crimes and crimes against
humanity. It is a milestone verdict, as sexual violence
crimes committed against men were held to the same
standards as those committed against women. It clearly
affirms that such crimes constitute acts of rape and
were not classified under labels of lesser severity.
While the verdict brought justice to survivors in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in other countries
affected by conflict, including Syria and Myanmar,

19-3498025/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 2)

Women and peace and security

perpetrators of sexual violence continue to enjoy
impunity and victims and survivors are left alone. We
call upon the Security Council to refer these situations
to the ICC and we will continue our strong support for
the accountability mechanisms created by the General
Assembly and the Human Rights Council, respectively.
We remain committed to strengthening criminal justice
and accountability for sexual and gender-based violence
in conflict, including by supporting the important work
done by UN-Women and Justice Rapid Response.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Rai (Nepal): The adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) was a watershed moment, which established
women and peace and security as an important security
agenda and clearly recognized the importance of
women’s role in conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
Since then, some progress has been achieved both
on the part of the United Nations and of Member States.
Yet even today the world faces the deliberate exclusion
of women from different walks of life, and the recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/800) stated that
grim fact.
We need to do more to reverse that situation. It is
egregious that sexual exploitation and abuse are used
as a tactic of war to destroy the dignity of women,
confidence of families and fabric of society.
Let me share what Nepal has been doing to
implement resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).
In 2011 Nepal adopted its first national action plan,
for five years. It was the first country in South Asia
and the second in Asia to do so. Nepal has recently
finalized a second such plan for three years, and we
are committed to adopting that second plan as early
as possible.
Nepal has its own unique experience of making and
building peace in a sustained manner, as it went from
armed conflict to peaceful transformation. Women
have played a significant role in our peace process, and
Nepal stands ready to share its experiences and lessons
learned through the constructive engagement of women
in conflict prevention and resolution, post-conflict
restructuring and rebuilding, all geared towards the
timely achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs).
26/35

04/11/2019

Our Constitution was given a new trajectory by the
mandatory 33 per cent representation of women at the
federal, provincial and local levels. It guarantees the
empowerment of women in all walks of national life
and has created an independent and powerful National
Women’s Commission to monitor and safeguard
the rights and interests of women in the country.
Nepal’s Constitution requires that the President and
Vice-President of the country be of different genders or
communities; similarly, either the Speaker or the Deputy
Speaker of the Lower House and Chair or Vice-Chair of
the upper house must be a woman. To ensure women’s
participation in Government machinery, 33 per cent of
positions under reservation in Government services,
including in the security forces, have been reserved
for women.
Nepal, as the fifth-largest troop-contributing
country, is committed to increasing the number of
female peacekeepers on the ground. As a responsible
Member State, we are committed to taking action in
that respect to fulfil our responsibility.
To conclude, peace cannot be achieved and sustained
without the equal and effective participation of women
in the making, keeping and building of peace. Nepal
is committed to accelerating its journey to ensuring
women’s effective participation in all walks of life
and will join hands with the international community
to make this twenty-first century world safer and
prosperous through women’s dignified participation
in society.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta.
Mr. Sacco (Malta): Malta aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having resumed this meeting today to discuss the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, which contributes to the preparations for
the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000),
next year.
We are aware that much remains to be done in the
area of the participation of women and girls in matters
related to peace and security, such as their involvement
in decision-making and in terms of the prevention of
and protection from conflict-related violence.
19-34980

04/11/2019

Women and peace and security

Violence against women and girls in conflict
situations continues and is exacerbated by the peace and
security challenges that the international community
faces, including mass migration and displacement,
rising violent extremism and terrorism, conflict and
the proliferation of arms. Our efforts to change this
must continue.
Since Malta announced its commitment to adopt
our first national action plan on women and peace
and security in April, work has been well under way.
We remain convinced that it is important to ensure
that women and girls in conflict, post-conflict and
fragile situations can, on an equal basis, participate in
all political, economic, security and social aspects of
their societies. This is a prerequisite for the creation
of inclusive and peaceful societies, sustainable
development and peace. By embarking on our women
and peace and security journey, Malta is doing its part
to close the implementation gap. We fully support the
United Nations in its work on this agenda.
The twentieth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) will provide us all with an
opportunity to take stock of not only the achievements
made but also the challenges facing us as we look ahead
to the women and peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the 10 States members of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam and my own
country, the Philippines.
ASEAN Member States share the view that women’s
equal, full, effective and meaningful participation is
of great importance at all stages of the peace process
given their indispensable role in the prevention and
resolution of conflict, peacebuilding and peacekeeping,
as embodied in resolution 1325 (2000) and many
subsequent resolutions. Pursuant to that conviction, in
November 2017 ASEAN leaders issued a joint statement
on promoting women and peace and security in ASEAN
that encourages the inclusion of the women and peace
and security agenda in policies and programmes for the
protection of women and girls, among others.

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 2)

In August, another ASEAN joint statement was
issued on the women and peace and security agenda
under the ASEAN Regional Forum. Last September
ASEAN held the Senior Officials Conference in Gender
Mainstreaming in the ASEAN Political-Security
Community. The conference is the third in a series of
conferences organized to mainstream gender across all
three ASEAN community pillars. The first conference
was held in June 2018 for the ASEAN Socio-Cultural
community, while the second was held in December
2018 for the ASEAN Economic Community. Among
the issues discussed at the latest conferences was the
promotion of women’s empowerment and participation
in post-conflict situation and the implementation of
the joint statement in promoting women and peace and
security in ASEAN.
Also in 2018, in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the ASEAN Charter and pursuant to
the functions of the ASEAN Institute for Peace and
Reconciliation, ASEAN established the ASEAN Women
and Peace Registry. The Registry is a compendium
of women leaders in ASEAN with expertise in the
various aspects of peace processes and reconciliation,
including as negotiators, mediators, facilitators and
researchers. The establishment of the Registry is in
line with the objective of strengthening the capacity of
women as peacebuilders, encouraging a more genderbalanced approach to peace and conflict and harnessing
the capacities of ASEAN women experts in the field of
peace and reconciliation.
ASEAN believes that increasing women’s
participation in decision-making with respect to
conflict management and resolution will help to
overcome the societal divide while enabling women to
work in creating a sustained dialogue that builds links
to peace and stability.
ASEAN believes that peace and security are
essential to the achievement of sustainable development.
To that end, ASEAN recognizes and promotes the
indispensable role of women at all stages of the peace
process, including in peacebuilding efforts and conflict
prevention. ASEAN reiterates its commitment to the
women and peace and security agenda and will continue
to work closely with other Member States, the United
Nations and regional organizations to implement and
realize its goals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.

19-3498027/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 2)

Women and peace and security

Mrs. Sulimani (Sierra Leone): Owing to time
constraints, I will just say all protocols observed;
permit me to cut the opening courtesies. That said, we
will submit our detailed statement to PaperSmart.
Since the adoption of the ground-breaking resolution
1325 (2000), country has remained committed to the
implementation of the spirit and letter of this and other
relevant resolutions, including the one that was adopted
six days ago, resolution 2493 (2019). As we resume
discussions today to assess the progress made so far,
ahead of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), my delegation is pleased to
update Member States on how far we have come on the
road to implementation.
Soon after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
Sierra Leone joined Member States that were ready to
take the lead in implementing that forward-looking
resolution. We were the fourth country in West
Africa, the seventh in Africa and the seventeenth
globally to adopt a national action plan for the full
implementation of the resolution. Our first national
action plan highlighted our commitment to, as well as
accountability in, ensuring the security of women and
girls and enhancing their direct participation in conflict
prevention, resolution and peacebuilding efforts in
the country.
Building on those gains and in keeping with the
commitment we made to UN-Women in April this year,
we have developed and adopted a second-generation
national action plan, which underscores the core values
of the prevention of violence, protection, participation
and recovery. The plan deals with issues ranging from
the prevention of conflict in communities to addressing
its root causes at all levels.

04/11/2019

We recently enacted the Sexual Offences Act 2019,
which is an amendment to the Sexual Offences Act
2012, to include elements of deterrent penalties against
the perpetrators of rape and other forms of sexual and
gender-based violence.
As a country that experienced a civil war, during
which sexual violence was extensively and systematically
used against defenceless women and girls, the issue of
protection from abuse, exploitation and violence will
remain a top priority on our development agenda. The
Government of Sierra Leone will continue to give the
issue the attention it deserves. The Parliament of Sierra
Leone, for instance, adopted the women and peace and
security agenda on 14 February, which is an important
milestone in moving the women and peace and security
agenda forward in Sierra Leone.
We believe that violence against women and girls
has no place in our society and will do our utmost to
intensify efforts to build prevention and response
mechanisms. The official declaration of a national
emergency on rape and sexual violence made by our
President, His Excellency Mr. Julius Maada Bio, on
7 February, is one such major prevention mechanism,
with various elements, including life imprisonment for
the sexual penetration of minors and the creation of
a special division for the rape and sexual penetration
of minors.
The role of women in peacebuilding cannot be
overemphasized in our contemporary world. The
Government of Sierra Leone values their contribution
to nation-building, especially in peacemaking and
peacebuilding initiatives. Our women will therefore
continue to play critical roles in the attainment of peace
and sustainable development.

Cognizant of our reporting obligations under
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), we have
developed and finalized our seventh periodic report. We
await its submission to the CEDAW Committee. As part
of our commitment to the promotion of gender equality
and women’s empowerment, we have dedicated cluster
5 of our medium-term national development plan for
the period 2019-2023 to empowering women, children
and persons with disabilities.

My delegation is delighted to note that much has
been achieved by our individual countries, the United
Nations and other relevant institutions towards the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Our army
recently recruited all-female military personnel. The
recruitment of females in the police and other law
enforcement agencies has also increased over the years.
That, we believe, will increase female participation
in peacekeeping missions around the world where we
have personnel.

Sierra Leone will continue to provide the policy
and legal environment for the protection of women
and girls and their inclusion in decision-making,
peacebuilding and development processes at all levels.

We will continue to support the Council’s call in
resolution 2242 (2015) for the doubling of the number
of women in the military and police contingents of
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

28/35

19-34980

04/11/2019

Women and peace and security

Let me conclude by saying that resolution 1325
(2000) was adopted three years before the civil war
Sierra Leone was officially declared over. We therefore
believe in the core tenets of that and other relevant
resolutions and will continue to consolidate the
gains made by ensuring the inclusive participation of
all stakeholders.
The President: I would like to remind delegations
to stick to four minutes if they can, so that all speakers
will have a chance to speak before 6 p.m.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to deliver a statement on
the theme “Towards the successful implementation of
the women, peace and security agenda: moving from
commitments to accomplishments in preparation for
the commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)”. That was a
landmark resolution, as it was the first time that the
Council addressed the disproportionate and unique
impact of armed conflict on women; acknowledged
the undervalued and underutilized contributions that
women make to conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding; and stressed the
importance of women’s equal and full participation as
active agents in peace and security.
The State of Ecuador has a solid legal framework
that guarantees the validity, exercise and enforceability
of women’s rights, based on two fundamental pillars: the
Constitution, which makes explicit provision for gender
equality, and binding international instruments ratified
by Ecuador. In September 2018, Ecuador became
the fifth country in the world to ratify the 18 United
Nations conventions on the protection of human rights.
In the same vein, the country has signed and ratified all
international conventions concerning the promotion and
protection of women’s rights, such as the Convention
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women,
in October 1981, and the Inter-American Convention
on the Prevention, Punishment, and Eradication of
Violence against Women, also known as the Convention
of Belém do Pará, in June 1995.
Ecuador has gradually shouldered its responsibilities,
not only through the periodic submission of reports to
the committees established under those international
instruments, but also through the formal and tangible
implementation of the recommendations of those
committees. We are also committed to the 2030 Agenda

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 2)

for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable
Development Goals and promote compliance with Goal
5 on gender equality.
We welcome the progress made in securing the
rights of women and girls in various fields around the
world. However, we are aware that women continue to
face multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination.
In Ecuador, we are aware that, with regard to equal
rights for women and men and the eradication of
discrimination, much remains to be done, but we
redouble our efforts day by day.
Ecuador is committed to the political and economic
empowerment of women and acknowledges their
contributions to conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding, as well as the
importance of meaningful and active participation in
the quest for peace. The Constitution of the Republic
of Ecuador establishes that Ecuador is a constitutional
State of rights, which will adopt affirmative action
measures that promote genuine equality for rights
holders who face inequality and establish priority
protection in the public and private spheres for the
victims of sexual violence.
The Constitution also establishes that the armed
forces are an institution for the protection of citizens’
rights, freedoms and guarantees. The incorporation of
women into the armed forces has grown since 2009,
when female soldiers accounted for 1.1 per cent of the
total. By 2012, that percentage had doubled to 2.11 per
cent and by 2018, it was 3.5 per cent. Ecuador currently
contributes female officers as observers in the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
and is in the process of incorporating women into our
national police force and United Nations peace missions.
The Ministry of National Defence incorporates the
concept of defence as a public good and, within that
framework, the gender perspective is included in its
defence policy agenda. The defence policy focuses on
human rights and promotes gender equality, practices
for peaceful coexistence and respect for the cultural
identity of the various members of the armed forces, as
well as the effective implementation of resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1889 (2009).
In conclusion, we welcome forums where we
can discuss the achievements and goals to be met
with respect to recognizing women’s contributions to
conflict prevention, peacekeeping, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding. We express our sincere desire to join

19-3498029/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 2)

Women and peace and security

efforts towards a productive and successful dialogue
that promotes gender equality and the advancement of
women, in all areas, as essential elements for honouring
the commitment to leaving no one behind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Ms. Mehdiyeva (Azerbaijan): At the outset, we
would like to thank the United Kingdom presidency
for reconvening today’s open debate on women and
peace and security, whose significance cannot be
overemphasized as we move collectively towards a
number of important milestones next year.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his annual
report on the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 2122 (2013) (S/2019/800).
At this juncture, converting commitment into
action should be an obvious choice and all women and
girls, regardless of their situations, must be guaranteed
equality and inclusion. Societal norms and stereotypes
that underpin gender inequalities must be countered
through education, dialogue, participation and other
effective measures. As conflicts around the world
become more complex, with record levels of forced
displacement and the lack of durable solutions, the
challenges women face and their vulnerabilities are
further exacerbated. We support the participation
of women at all stages of conflict prevention and
conflict resolution.
As a country with a large part of its territory
under military occupation, with ethnic cleansing and
other grave crimes committed against its population,
we consider the safety of civilians to be of the utmost
importance. One million Azerbaijani refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs), half of them
women, have been displaced from their homes and have
continued to experience uncertainty for more than three
decades. The international community cannot remain
silent in the face of atrocity and blatant violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
As we push for concrete actions to be taken in order
to advance the women, peace and security agenda of the
Security Council, we would like to highlight the fact that
respect for international law and the implementation of
the ensuing obligations, including those contained in
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, are
30/35

04/11/2019

prerequisites for effectively upholding the rights of
internally displaced women in Azerbaijan.
Azerbaijan has taken extensive measures to improve
the situation of refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs). In 2018 alone, 156,000 IDPs were
provided with new housing. The State Committee for
Family, Women’s and Children’s Affairs, together with
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
has carried out two projects over the past five years to
prevent and eliminate gender-based violence among
refugees and IDPs.
The most effective strategy to empower women
and girls is to pre-emptively address barriers limiting
their ability to reach full their potential. In this regard,
enacting gender-responsive policies and mechanisms
can create an environment that is supportive and
conducive to women’s success. We concur with the
Secretary-General that the economic empowerment of
women as a prevention strategy in conflict and postconflict phases and as a prerequisite for sustainable
development must be prioritized. Women are critical to
economic growth and community stability.
Azerbaijan attaches great importance to the
empowerment of women. By identifying barriers
through improved data collection in recent years, we
have been able to implement policies and programmes
tailored to the specific needs of women and girls.
In 2016 and 2017, the State Committee for Family,
Women’s and Children’s Affairs, together with the
United Nations Population Fund, carried out a project
on the elaboration of the national action plan on women,
peace and security. A working group on women,
peace and security, representing various stakeholders,
was established for this purpose and oversaw the
preparation of the draft national action plan. The draft
plan is currently under consideration.
In May 2018, the State Committee held the fifth
Women’s Forum, dedicated to the 100th anniversary
of women’s suffrage in Azerbaijan. This event marked
one of the most important milestones in the history
of Azerbaijan, which granted women the right to vote
in 1918.
Women account for 48.2 per cent of the workforce.
We have made great strides in achieving gender
parity in State institutions. The proportion of women
appointed to key Government positions has significantly
increased in recent years. The representation of women
in the National Assembly grew from 11 per cent in 2005
19-34980

04/11/2019

Women and peace and security

to 17 per cent in 2015. At the municipal level, women
represent 35 per cent of elected candidates.
Azerbaijan is a party to all major international
agreements in the field of women’s empowerment and
gender equality. We remain committed to advancing the
rights of women and ensuring their full and effective
participation in the decision-making processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): We thank the United
Kingdom for agreeing to resume this debate and South
Africa for having highlighting the women and peace
and security agenda.
As we approach the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), introduced by
the delegation of Namibia, we need to take stock of
the progress made in the development of policies and
strategies for the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. It is a well-known fact that
women rarely initiate violent conflicts, yet they suffer
its worst consequences, on multiple fronts —physically,
psychologically, economically, socially and politically.
Often, women fall victim to predatory warlords who
systematically use rape and sexual violence as weapon
of wars. Their suffering is compounded by their
exclusion from key decision-making process that might
lead to peace and stability.
In this regard, it is our expectation that this debate
will reflect on the achievements and challenges in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and its followup resolutions, as well as offer suggestions to address
the prevailing challenges and gaps in acquiring the
necessary resources to advance the role of women in
the context of the global peace and security architecture
and in the lead-up to the twentieth anniversary.
We acknowledge that the Security Council has
provided the necessary leadership to give impetus to
involving women in the peace and security agenda,
beginning with resolution 1325 (2000), which set up
the framework for subsequent Council resolutions. In
Africa, the African Union has been a useful platform
for the advancement of women in the peace and security
agenda by placing emphasis on the engagement of
women and youth in the continent’s development. This
is clearly reflected in Agenda 2063 of the African
Union. The African Union currently has more than 14
instruments relating to women, peace and security.

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 2)

At the subregional level in West Africa, the
Economic Community of West African States, in
collaboration with the United Nations Office for West
Africa, in September 2010 developed an integrated
plan of action for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The plan of action emphasizes the importance of
the role of women in conflict prevention and resolution,
mediation and peacebuilding efforts, as well as the
rebuilding of post-conflict societies.
Building on regional and subregional efforts,
in 2013 Nigeria launched a national action plan to
fully implement the relevant provisions of resolution
1325 (2000). The plan was relaunched in 2017 to
re-emphasize the Government’s commitment to
ensuring the security of women and girls during armed
conflicts and to enhancing their active and direct
participation in conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
The objectives of both plans were prevention and
disaster preparedness; protection and prosecution;
participation and representation; crisis management;
and partnerships, coordination and management.
We are already familiar with Boko Haram’s activities
in north-eastern Nigeria. Within the framework of the
Multinational Joint Task Force, Nigeria, in partnership
with Cameroon, Chad and the Niger, is collaborating
to take out the remnants of the Boko Haram terrorist
group, which has been targeting women and girls. Our
experience in the Lake Chad region today is evidence
that, with determined international collaboration, much
can be achieved.
It noteworthy that 80 per cent of the internally
displaced persons in the north-east of Nigeria are
women and girls. We are taking concrete steps to
meet their humanitarian needs and establishing the
conditions necessary for the voluntary return of
many displaced persons to their places of origin in
safety and dignity. We are also catering to the needs
of the victims of Boko Haram — including victims of
rape and other sexual violence against children, the
abduction of children and other grave violations — by
putting in motion several legal and social remedies,
such as the diligent prosecution of many of the detained
Boko Haram terrorists in competent courts of law, as
well as reintegration, reorientation and rehabilitation
programmes designed to meet the needs of each victim
of sexual violence. Some of the victims are also back at
school in Nigeria and across the globe.

19-3498031/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 2)

Women and peace and security

04/11/2019

In conclusion, it is my delegation’s belief that to
achieve the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
Member States, regional organizations, the media, civil
society, women and young people all have important
roles to play in working together to implement the
women and peace and security agenda and holding one
another accountable with regard to their commitments.
While inclusivity remains the key, there is also a need to
focus on not only processes but also on the establishment
of mechanisms for accountability and budgets for the
real implementation of national action plans. Nigeria
remains firmly committed to promoting and protecting
the rights of women and girls in conflict and postconflict situations. In this regard, we will continue to
work assiduously to enhance the participation of women
in peace and security initiatives.

virulent. Daily acts of violence gravely impact women
and girls, impairing their rights, lives and livelihoods
in countless devastating ways.

The President: I now give the floor to the Permanent
Observer of the of the Observer State of Palestine.

Peaceful women demonstrators in the weekly
protests of the Great March of Return in the Gaza Strip
also continue to be targeted by the occupying forces.
Of the more than 300 Palestinians killed and more
than 30,000 injured by the Israeli occupying forces,
one in four have been women or children. We call once
more on the international community, and particularly
the Security Council, to assume its obligations to
bring an end to these violations and this prolonged
conflict, underscoring, inter alia, the clear provisions
of resolution 1325 (2000) on the responsibilities for
resolving and preventing conflicts.

Ms.
Abdelhady-Nasser(Palestine):
As
we
approach 2020, a year of significant benchmarks and
anniversaries — 75 years since the creation of the
United nations, 25 years since the adoption of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and 20
years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) — we
must reflect on progress made and commitments yet
unfulfilled. Despite many strides, there remains a
considerable gap between promises and pledges, and
their faithful implementation.
Informed by the facts, years of research experience
and lessons learned on the indispensable role of women
in all aspects of society, whether political, security,
economic or social, we must invest all possible efforts
in implementation, knowing that it is vital for the
genuine advancement of our nations and for the peace,
stability and prosperity we all seek.
Alongside the rest of the international community,
Palestine continues its efforts to implement resolution
1325 (2000) despite many obstacles, none more fierce
than the 52-year illegal foreign occupation imposed
on the Palestinian people, depriving them of their
most fundamental human rights and affecting every
dimension of life, with women disproportionately
affected. While resolution 1325 (2000) emphasized
the need to ensure the safety of women and girls in
conflict, Palestinian women continue to be exposed to
all forms of violence and human rights violations under
occupation, measures of colonization, dispossession,
collective punishment and blockade being the most
32/35

Since the start of the occupation, an estimated
10,000 Palestinian women have been arrested and/or
detained under Israeli military orders. As of September
2019, 43 women remained among the thousands of
Palestinians imprisoned or detained by the occupying
Power. The majority of women prisoners report being
subjected to some form of ill treatment and even
torture, including sexual, physical and psychological
harassment, intimidation and assault. Palestinian
women continue to be targeted by the occupying forces
and extremist settlers, who continue to cause death
and injury to our civilians, destroying homes and other
properties and terrorizing Palestinian families.

Despite that dismal backdrop, Palestinian women’s
resilience and resourcefulness have also been well
documented, underscoring their capacity and the pivotal
roles they play, not only in the daily functioning of our
society, but also in the long-running building of our
nation and the struggle for freedom and a just, peaceful
solution to the conflict. Their many contributions
must be recognized, along with specific initiatives
undertaken by women civil society groups, leaders and
activists to implement resolution 1325 (2000).
At the same time, women continue to mobilize
to address the challenges posed by gender inequality,
gender-based domestic violence, patriarchal societal
norms and the need for legal reforms. As shown in
recent protests by Palestinian women, while demanding
liberation from occupation, they are also demanding
liberation from patriarchy, racism and sexism, seeking
full justice and equality.
Serious Government efforts are also ongoing to
reform and repeal laws that discriminate against women.
19-34980

04/11/2019

Women and peace and security

The State of Palestine is committed to empowering
women and girls and implementing resolution 1325
(2000), and we remain committed to making such
strides hand in hand with the rest of the international
community, imploring all , including the Security
Council, to uphold their respective obligations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank the delegations of the United Kingdom and
South Africa for resuming this important open debate
on women, peace and security. Our meeting today is
being held as we approach a number of anniversaries,
including the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, adopted at the
fourth World Conference on Women, and the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
which calls for the central participation of women in
conflict resolution and prevention.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/800) on women and peace and security.
We also welcome its important recommendations,
including concerning the adoption of national action
plans on women and peace and security, coupled
with the necessary resources, the monitoring of their
implementation, their localization and the appointment
of women as mediators and negotiators in all formal
peace processes.
The Kingdom of Bahrain is committed to
strengthening cooperation with the United Nations
and its agencies in supporting women and achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals. In 2017, we
inaugurated the UN-Women office in the Kingdom
as part of our cooperation between UN-Women and
the Supreme Council for Women. The Kingdom of
Bahrain has sought to promote the leadership role
and participation of women in national structures and
legislation, pursuant to one of the priorities of the
national action plan adopted in 2005. That is part of the
reform approach launched by His Majesty King Hamad
bin Isa Al Khalifa of the Kingdom of Bahrain.
We have seen many achievements by Bahraini
women, including the election of Ms. Fawzia Zainal
as the First Speaker of Parliament. In 2017, Her Royal
Highness the King’s wife launched the Princess
Sabeeka bint Ibrahim Al Khalifa International Award
for Women Empowerment. Her Royal Highness chairs

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 2)

the Supreme Council for Women in Bahrain. This is
the first award of its kind in the world. It recognizes
institutional and individual efforts to promote women’s
advancement and contribution to development. In
2014, the Kingdom of Bahrain established a gender
parity committee to ensure that women are given equal
opportunities in the labour market.
In line with our belief in the importance of
education for empowering women and girls, especially
those affected by conflict, the Kingdom of Bahrain has
established a number of schools in Syrian refugee camps
in Jordan, as well as in Gaza. The Kingdom of Bahrain
is committed to combating all practices that prevent the
empowerment of women, including human trafficking.
For the second year in a row, the Kingdom of Bahrain
has been ranked in the top category, according to the
United States Department of State report on trafficking
in persons, as one of the leading countries in combating
this illegal practice.
In conclusion, we stress the importance of all efforts
aimed at promoting the empowerment of women and
their advancement in all areas as an effective partner
for maintaining international peace and security as
well as achieving prosperity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): Having co-sponsored
resolution 2493 (2019), Portugal welcomes its adoption.
We are pleased with the achievements identified in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/800). But, as
the report also underlines, the women and peace and
security agenda is still held up by many challenges,
including the growth of violent misogyny and the
persistence of sexual and gender-based violence as
a weapon of war and terror. In that respect, Portugal
will continue to fight the threats against women’s and
girls’ human rights worldwide and to support efforts
to strengthen them, especially in conflict and postconflict areas. We will continue to push back against
the pushback on women’s rights.
We cannot forget that conflict also adversely affects
the education of millions of children. In countries
affected by conflict, the situation is extremely hard for
all children, but girls are often left even further behind.
For the majority of them, that means the end of school.
Empowering women and girls through education is the
best way to guarantee equal rights and full participation
in society. Portugal reiterates the importance of the Safe

19-3498033/35

S/PV.8649 (Resumption 2)

Women and peace and security

Schools Declaration as a fundamental tool to prevent
sexual violence and encourages more Member States
to adhere to it.
In the beginning of this year, we adopted our third
national action plan to implement resolution 1325 (2000).
The strategic objectives of the action plan include,
among others, promoting equality between women and
men in matters of security and development, protecting
women’s and girls’ human rights and combating all
forms of violence and sexual violence, increasing
the number of women participating in international
missions and supporting the work of civil society
organizations in women, peace and security matters.
In conclusion, sustainable development cannot
be achieved without safeguarding women’s and
girls’ human rights. We cannot leave one half of
humankind behind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, we
thank the Security Council presidencies of South Africa
and the United Kingdom for providing the opportunity
to assess the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The League of Arab States welcomes the new
policy adopted by the United Nations Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs on promoting the
political analysis of conflicts, taking into account
gender perspectives and encouraging the participation
of women in all stages of peace operations, including
field operations. The League of Arab States also
commends the tireless and relentless efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoys to promote
the presence and participation of women in mediation
work and peace operations. The results of that work have
been seen in various regions throughout the Arab world,
including the establishment of the Yemeni Women’s
Technical Advisory Group, whose advice can be used
to support peace operations, and the establishment of
the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board and the Syrian
Civil Society Support Room for reaching a permanent
political settlement in Syria, which contributed to
reaching an agreement on the participation of women in
the Constitutional Committee’s membership at nearly
30 per cent. We also note the effective participation
of women parliamentarians, representatives and
ministers in the Libyan delegations that attended the
Palermo conference in November 2018, along with
the establishment of the Women’s Advisory Group
34/35

04/11/2019

on reconciliation and political affairs in Iraq, among
other activities.
Significant gaps remain with respect to genderequality, however, as explained in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2019/800), despite the Organization’s
progress in terms of implementing the resolution. There
are still significant challenges within the Arab world
that undermine the effective participation of women in
peace and security activities. In order to address such
challenges, it is important to ensure the integrated and
simultaneous implementation of the recommendations
of the 2015 review and to strengthen cooperation
between the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, and regional organizations and Member States.
At the regional level, the Ministerial Council of
the League of Arab States adopted the Strategy for
the Protection of Arab Women in 2015 as a regional
strategy and an implementation action plan for the
protection of Arab women, and as a significant step
towards raising the awareness of officials and actors in
connection with regional and international resolutions
with a view to implementing them through the provision
of protection for women and girls in the Arab region.
The strategy includes four pillars for supporting the
effective participation of women and girls: promoting
their roles in leadership, ensuring conflict prevention,
protecting against conflict and all forms of violence
against women and guaranteeing that all women and
girls in the Arab region have their relief needs met.
The League of Arab States has also maintained
constructive cooperation with the United Nations, as
epitomized by the outcome of the first Arab Ministerial
Council on Women, Peace and Security in the Arab
region, which was held by the League of Arab States
in late 2018. In March 2019, the conference adopted
important recommendations at the ministerial level on
implementing the agenda, including the establishment
of an emergency committee for protecting women in
armed conflict in the Arab region and the creation
of the Arab Women Mediators Network as one of the
mechanisms of the aforementioned committee. Within
that intensive campaign, Iraq, Palestine, Jordan,
Tunisia and Lebanon reiterated their commitments to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) by declaring and
carrying out their national action plans. Other Arab
States will follow suit in coordination with the League
of Arab States.
19-34980

04/11/2019

Women and peace and security

In conclusion, and in the context of commemorating
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the League of Arab States reiterates the
need to optimize the use of presidential statement
S/PRST/2019/5 of 13 June, on the promotion of
cooperation between the Security Council and the
League of Arab States. That included areas such as
early warning, preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping

S/PV. 8649 (Resumption 2)

operations and the sustainability of peace. We can
be successful in none of those areas without the
participation of Arab women in the maintenance of
peace and security. The League of Arab States looks
forward to the consultations that will take place with
the United Nations towards reaching a consultative
framework in that regard.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

19-3498035/35
