S/PV.7638

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7638th meeting

Wednesday, 2 March 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gaspar Martins. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Angola)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-05775 (E)
*1605775*

S/PV.7638

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first formal meeting
of the Security Council in the month of March, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Rafael Darío Ramírez
Carreño, Permanent Representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, for his service as President of
the Council for the month of February 2016. I am sure
I speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Ramírez Carreño and
his delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Albania, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Norway, Palau,
the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Turkey
and Vanuatu to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2016/202, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Senegal, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Ukraine,
the United Kingdom, the United States, Uruguay
and Vanuatu.
2/14

02/03/2016

The Council is ready to proceed to a vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2270 (2016).
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Ms. Power (United States of America): In looking
at North Korea, it can at times feel as though one is
seeing two entirely different realities. One is the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that is expending
tremendous resources in pursuing advanced technology
to build an intercontinental ballistic missile capable of
carrying out a nuclear strike a continent away. The other
is the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in which,
according to a joint assessment conducted by the World
Food Programme and the North Korean Government,
25 per cent of children under the age of 5 suffer from
stunted growth as a result of chronic malnutrition. One
is the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in which
the Government brags about carrying out nuclear tests
proscribed by the Security Council, such as the test
carried out on 6 January. The other is the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in which individuals must
endure the searing pain of seeing generations of their
loved ones starve to death, such as the North Korean
defector who joined us in the Council Chamber just
a few months ago, whose grandmother, father and
two brothers had all died because they could not find
enough food.
On the surface, it can seem as though those distinct
North Korean realities have nothing to do with one
another; yet, as we all know, they have everything to
do with one another — part of the perverse reality that
has no equal in this world. The chronic suffering of the
people of North Korea is the direct result of the choices
made by the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, a Government that has consistently
16-05775

02/03/2016

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

prioritized its nuclear weapons and ballistic missile
programmes over providing for the most basic needs
of its own people. As underscored in resolution 2270
(2016), which we have adopted today, virtually all of
the resources of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea are channelled into its reckless and relentless
pursuit of weapons of mass destruction. The North
Korean Government would rather grow its nuclear
weapons programme than grow its own children. That
is the reality that we are facing.
Of course, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s obsessive pursuit of weapons of mass
destruction not only causes profound suffering
for the people of North Korea, but also poses an
extraordinary and growing threat to peace and security
on the peninsula and in the region and the world. With
each nuclear test and launch using ballistic-missile
technology, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
improves its capability to carry out a nuclear-missile
attack not only in the region, but also a continent away.
That means having the ability to strike most of the
countries represented in the Council. Think about that.
North Korea is the only country in the entire world
that has conducted a nuclear test in the twenty-first
century. In fact, it has conducted not one nuclear test
but four — in 2006, 2009, 2013 and now 2016. It is also
the only United Nations Member State that routinely
threatens other countries with nuclear annihilation,
including multiple members of the Council on
different occasions.
Our collective security demands that we stop
North Korea from continuing along this destructive
and destabilizing course. Yet we have to be honest that
while previous multilateral efforts, including the four
previous sanctions resolutions adopted by the Council,
have undoubtedly made it more difficult for North
Korea to advance its weapons programmes, the regime
continues to plough ahead, as it has demonstrated over
the past two months. That is why the resolution we have
just adopted is so much tougher than any prior North
Korea resolution and why it goes further than any
sanctions regime in two decades. We have studied the
ways that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has been able to exploit gaps and evade measures aimed
at impeding its nuclear-weapons and ballistic-missile
programmes, and we have put in place new measures
to fill those gaps, one by one. Let me give just a few
of many examples of how the resolution adopted today
does this.

S/PV.7638

North Korea generates a significant share of
the money it uses to fuel its nuclear and ballisticmissile programmes by mining natural resources,
often exploiting workers in slave-like conditions and
selling those resources abroad. For example, it is
estimated that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea brings in approximately $1 billion a year in coal
exports — roughly one-third of the revenue it earns
from exports — and at least $200 million a year in iron
ore exports. That is why the resolution we have adopted
today limits and, in some instances, bans outright North
Korea’s exports of specific natural resources, making it
tougher for the Government to get the money it needs to
keep funding its illicit weapons programmes.
Until today, in many countries around the world
inspectors required information providing reasonable
grounds to inspect cargo coming into and going out
of North Korea. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea therefore took the ballistic-missile parts, nuclear
technology and other illicit items it needed to build
weapons of mass destruction and buried them deep
in otherwise unsuspicious loads on airplanes, ships
and trucks coming into the country. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea used similar tactics to hide
the illegal items it was exporting, such as weapons,
drugs and counterfeit goods, which it used to generate
a significant amount of additional income. That is why,
under resolution 2270 (2016), cargo going into and
coming out of North Korea will be treated as suspicious,
and countries will be required to inspect it whether it
goes by air, land or sea. This is hugely significant.
North Korea used to be able to import aviation fuel,
which included rocket fuel used to launch proscribed
ballistic missiles. It can no longer do so. The resolution
adopted today bans all imports of aviation fuel, including
rocket fuel. For years, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea deployed arms dealers, smugglers, financiers
and other enablers of its illicit weapons programmes,
and claimed that they were diplomats and Government
representatives around the world. Abusing diplomatic
protections, these individuals cut illicit deals, set up
shell companies and procured banned items to aid
North Korea’s weapons programme. The resolution
adopted today obligates countries to expel any North
Korean who carries out such acts, including diplomats
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Despite previous financial sanctions that constrain
North Korea’s access to the international financial
system, North Korean banks were still able to do

16-057753/14

S/PV.7638

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

business on foreign territory, allowing the Government
to fund its illicit programmes. Under the resolution
adopted today, States around the world will have to
shut down the financial institutions of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in their territory.
North Korean scientists have used specialized
trainings at academic institutions and international
research centres to obtain technical expertise that
they then put to use to advance the nuclear-weapons
and ballistic-missile programmes of the Government
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The
resolution adopted today prohibits the specialized
training of any Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
national in fields that could be used to advance these
programmes, including nuclear- and space-related
technical exchanges.
As these measures make abundantly clear, the
purpose of the resolution is not to inflict greater
hardship on the people of North Korea, who endure
immeasurable suffering under one of the most repressive
Governments the modern world has ever seen. The
United States has repeatedly urged the Council to
address the human rights violations committed by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which
the United Nations commission of inquiry on human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
in its comprehensive 2014 report, concluded were
widespread and systematic and had been committed
“pursuant to policies established at the highest level of
the State” (A/HRC/25/63, para. 75). These violations
include detaining between 80,000 and 120,000 people
in prison camps where, according to the commission’s
report, they have for generations been
“gradually eliminated through deliberate starvation,
forced labour, executions, torture, rape and the
denial of reproductive rights” (ibid., para. 60).
The Government has carried out enforced
disappearances for decades with no accountability,
including of citizens from neighbouring countries,
whose families continue to suffer from not knowing the
fate of their loved ones.
The scale and gravity of such abuses are what led
us to push, along with our partners, to make the human
rights situation in North Korea a permanent item on the
Security Council’s agenda, as it now is. North Korea
continues to show, as we have repeatedly said in the
Council, that Governments that flagrantly violate the
human rights of their own people almost always show
4/14

02/03/2016

similar disdain for the international norms that help
ensure our shared security. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s abysmal human rights record is
another reason why we have taken steps to ensure that
the sanctions laid out in the resolution specifically
target the Government, which carries out these grave
abuses with impunity.
It is deeply important that today’s resolution and
all the tough measures it includes have been adopted
with the support of all 15 members of the Security
Council. In particular, the United States would like to
recognize the leadership of China, which has worked
closely with us in negotiating this extremely rigorous
resolution. Beyond the Council, it is worth noting
the unanimity among and leadership of the countries
of the region — China, Japan and the Republic of
Korea — which understand so clearly the threat to
our shared security posed by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s actions. The fact that the resolution
has been sponsored by 50 Member States, drawn
from every region of the world, demonstrates both the
recognition of the global threat posed by North Korea
and the international community’s commitment to
working together to address that threat.
We are clear-eyed about the nature of this regime.
We are under no illusions that, following the adoption
of resolution 2270 (2016), the Government of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will abruptly
abandon its prohibited weapons programme due to a
sudden realization that the international community
is united in its determination to stop North Korea’s
dangerous pursuit of nuclear weapons. Were that to be
the case, North Korea would have given up its nuclearweapons and ballistic-missile programmes long ago.
On the contrary, the North Korean Government has
shown that it is determined to evade every obstacle put
in the way of its singular pursuit of weapons of mass
destruction, no matter the consequences for its people.
Yet, at the same time, we have seen how the strategy
of increasing multilateral pressure can be effective,
and that is what we are doing here. Even as we find
new ways to impede North Korea’s efforts to advance
its nuclear-weapons and ballistic-missile programmes,
as our collective security and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s track record demand that we do,
we must not lose sight of the ultimate goal of bringing
North Korea back to the table for serious and credible
diplomatic negotiations on denuclearization. Achieving
that goal will require sustained unity on the part of the
16-05775

02/03/2016

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Council and the unwavering commitment of all Member
States to implementing in full the comprehensive,
robust and unprecedented sanctions that we have put
in place today.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Since this is the first time
that I address the Council under your presidency, Sir,
let me congratulate you on Angola’s assumption of the
Council presidency for the month of March, and express
my full support to you and your mission.
(spoke in Spanish)
I also wish to express my deep gratitude to
Ambassador Ramírez Carreño and his team for
their outstanding work in the Council presidency
for February.
(spoke in English)
Japan welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2270 (2016), which is comprehensive and
ground-breaking. We would like to express our sincere
appreciation to the United States for taking the lead.
Our appreciation also goes to China for its efforts. I
also want to thank the 50 Member States, including 10
members of the Security Council, that co-sponsored
this important resolution. Japan also contributed to and
co-sponsored the resolution, because it sends a strong
and unprecedented message to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Sanctions are important tools for
finding a comprehensive solution to a problem, and,
to that end, there has to be dialogue. In order for the
dialogue to be effective, there has to be pressure at the
same time. That is the very reason that we now have
this robust resolution.
Japan, together with the international community,
strongly condemns the repeated violations of Security
Council resolutions by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We urge the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to fully comply with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including the one we just
adopted, as well as to honour its other international
commitments. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea must realize that this message does not only
come from the members of the Security Council, but
from the international community as a whole. Let us
be very clear: no single country in the world supports
the nuclear test or ballistic missile launch by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
This resolution includes many important measures,
but I want to highlight only some of them. It bans the

S/PV.7638

importation from the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea of natural resources such as coal, iron, gold and
rare earth minerals. It bans supplying the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea with aviation fuel, including
rocket fuel. And it calls for mandatory inspection of all
cargo coming into and out of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. I will not go into further details,
simply because the robustness of the resolution speaks
for itself.
Resolutions and sanctions are effective only when
implemented. Therefore, what we have achieved today
is not the end, only the beginning. Now we must fully
implement the measures set out in the resolution. I
take this opportunity to call on all Member States
to fulfil their own obligations under the relevant
Security Council resolutions. I wish to confirm that
Japan will fully implement the resolution. In that
connection, I would like to propose that the Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006) — the Permanent Representative of
Spain, Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi — arrange an
open briefing to go through the provisions of the new
resolution with all United Nations Members.
Sanctions are not the final objective. I would like
to draw the attention of Member States, especially
that of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, to
paragraph 51 of the resolution, which affirms that the
Council
“shall keep the DPRK’s actions under continuous
review and is prepared to strengthen, modify,
suspend or lift measures as may be needed in light
of the DPRK’s compliance”.
Depending on the behaviour and attitude of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the Security
Council is prepared to suspend or lift sanctions.
Before concluding my statement, I would like
to make clear that these sanctions are not meant to
target the ordinary citizens in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We must not forget that the nuclear
and ballistic programmes of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea are being pursued at the expense of
the welfare of the people of that country. We therefore
welcome the fact that a stronger emphasis was made
in the resolution on humanitarian and human rights
concerns, which include the abductions issue, one
of Japan’s most greatest concerns with regard to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. In order to
bring a comprehensive solution to the problems related

16-057755/14

S/PV.7638

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, it is
essential that the Security Council remain seized of
the situation in that country in all relevant aspects.
We will continue to closely cooperate with our fellow
partners in the Council and all Member States of the
United Nations.
Mr. Delattre (France): (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by thanking Venezuela for its presidency
during the month of February and by wishing every
success to the presidency of Angola. I also thank the
United States for having presented resolution 2270
(2016), which we have just adopted unanimously.
In carrying out its fourth nuclear test, on 6 January,
and a long-range launch using ballistic technology, on
7 February, North Korea once again decided to defy
the international community. Those two acts, which
are seriously destabilizing in effect and in flagrant
violation of Security Council resolutions, not only pose
a threat to international and regional peace security,
but also defy the non-proliferation regime, which is the
backbone of our collective security.
It was up to the Security Council to challenge that
defiance and act decisively by adopting resolution 2270
(2016). Now it is done. Our adoption of this resolution
significantly strengthens the sanctions regime and
represents a turning point in the Council’s approach to
the North Korean proliferation crisis. Several elements
are worth highlighting.
First, the resolution decides to put in place
unprecedented sanctions against North Korea and
sends a united and unambiguous message on the part
of the Security Council to Pyongyang, namely, that
there is a price to pay for the provocations and the
irresponsible and destabilizing headlong rush by the
Pyongyang regime.
Moreover, the sanctions adopted today have targeted
goals. They aim, on the one hand, at hindering and
putting an end to the North Korean nuclear and ballistic
missile programmes in a concrete manner. On the other
hand, the sanctions target the diverted revenue of the
North Korean regime to fuel the illicit programmes at
the expense of the North Korean people, who continue
to suffer under the yoke of totalitarianism.
Finally, the resolution keeps the door open for
dialogue and insists on the need to resume the SixParty Talks. Our final objective is not sanctions, but
6/14

02/03/2016

rather denuclearization and peace and stability on the
peninsula through a negotiated solution.
It is up to North Korea to show in a sincere way
and through concrete gestures that it is ready to resume
dialogue with a view to giving up its nuclear and
ballistic missile programmes. The spiral of provocation
leads us to an impasse and offers us no other option than
to strengthen sanctions, as a means and not as an end of
themselves. Dialogue and negotiations, based on a very
firm position, are the only viable option to ensure the
full and verifiable denuclearization of the peninsula.
Owing to all of those reasons, France voted for the
adoption of this resolution, co-sponsored it along with
approximately 50 Member States and will continue to
be mobilized to ensure its full implementation.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): On
6 January, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in
defiance of the universal opposition of the international
community, once again conducted a nuclear test, and
on 7 February used ballistic technology to launch a
satellite in a series of violations of the relevant Security
Council resolutions. China has expressed its explicit
opposition to those actions.
China has always insisted on the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula, insisted on the maintenance
of peace and stability on the peninsula and insisted
on resolving problems through dialogue and
consultations. Resolution 2270 (2016), adopted by the
Council today, embodies the principles inherent in
those three “insists”. The resolution demonstrates the
international community’s seriousness in opposing
the further development of the nuclear and missile
capacity of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and safeguarding the international non-proliferation
regime and reaffirms the commitment to seeking a
solution to the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula
through dialogue and consultations and to supporting
the resumption of the Six-Party Talks and the Joint
Statement of 19 September 2005, thus facilitating the
effort to seek a peaceful solution to the nuclear issue on
the Korean peninsula.
China has always advocated for the peaceful
settlement of international disputes and hot-spot
issues through political and diplomatic means such as
dialogue and negotiations. Sanctions are not an end in
themselves, and Security Council resolutions cannot
fundamentally resolve the nuclear issue on the Korean
peninsula. Today’s resolution should be a new starting
16-05775

02/03/2016

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV.7638

point, paving the way for a political settlement of the
nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula.

active and constructive role for an early realization of
lasting stability and peace on the Korean peninsula.

History has demonstrated repeatedly that dialogue
and negotiations represent the only right way to address
the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula if we are to
achieve an early improvement of the situation on the
ground and explore viable ways to resolve the matter.
China urges the parties concerned to push forward in
parallel the negotiations to advance denuclearization
and replace the peace armistice mechanism with a
peace mechanism. While keeping the general direction
of denuclearization, this approach accommodates in a
balanced way the main concerns of the parties involved,
helps find a way towards the resumption of talks and is
practicable. China is willing to work with the parties
concerned to explore in depth specific steps to put this
idea into practice and hopes that all parties concerned
will work together to this end.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Security Council has just unanimously
adopted a new resolution that tightens the international
sanctions regime against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea (resolution 2270 (2016)). This
resolution resulted from the fact that over the past two
months the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
has undertaken banned military activity in the form
of conducting a nuclear-weapons test and launching
a ballistic missile, thereby raising tensions on the
Korean peninsula and in the region as a whole. The
Russian Federation strongly condemns the violation by
Pyongyang of resolutions of the Security Council.

As a close neighbour to the Korean peninsula and a
State that bears an important responsibility for stability
there, China has always insisted on the overall goal of
denuclearization of the peninsula, opposed conflicts
and chaos in that area and worked to safeguard the
legitimate security interests of itself and other countries
of the region. At this moment, all the parties concerned
should avoid actions that will further aggravate the
tensions on the ground. China opposes the deployment
of the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense anti-missile
system on the Korean peninsula because such an action
harms the strategic security interests of China and
other countries of the region, goes against the goal
of maintaining peace, security and stability of the
peninsula and will seriously undermine the efforts of
the international community to find a political solution
to the question of the Korean peninsula.
Currently, the situation on the Korean peninsula is
highly complex and sensitive, which makes it all the
more necessary for us to keep calm and use diplomatic
wisdom. China hopes that the parties concerned will
meet China half way, always keeping in mind the overall
need to maintain the peace and stability of the Korean
peninsula and North-East Asia, make determined
efforts to the dispel the dark cloud of war, pool our
wisdom and actively seek common understanding
and work together for the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. China will continue to take a
responsible approach to enhancing communication and
coordination with the parties concerned and play an

Today it is important to focus on what happens
after the adoption of the resolution. The set of sanctions
envisioned is quite harsh. However, the document does
leave open the possibility for the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to return to the Six-Party process,
which should be urgently resumed. Sanctions in this
case are not an end in themselves, but rather a means.
By shutting down the financing of nuclear and ballisticmissile programmes as much as possible, we intend to
ensure a return to the negotiating table to take up all
issues of concern to all the interested parties.
The Russian Federation remains convinced that
there is no alternative to a political and diplomatic
solution to the issue of the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. Russia is very seriously worried
about the negative trends and the way the situation in
North-East Asia has been developing. We are concerned
about attempts to use the actions of Pyongyang as
a justification for military build-up in the region,
including of offensive weapons and the Terminal High
Altitude Area Defence anti-missile system.
The resolution we have adopted today should not
be used to choke off the North Korean economy. In that
regard, we are concerned about the hasty introduction,
even before today’s resolution was adopted, of unilateral
sanctions against the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, which could have very negative humanitarian
consequences for the many millions of inhabitants of
the country, especially those who are most vulnerable.
The international community, and first and foremost
those humanitarian organizations that are providing
assistance and technical support to Pyongyang, should
pay special attention to this aspect.

16-057757/14

S/PV.7638

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The events of the past year show that even the most
complex international crisis situations can be resolved
through cooperation and dialogue and when there is
political will by all parties to find mutually acceptable
solutions. We call on all participants of the Six-Party
Talks to resume the talks as soon as possible. Russia is
ready to engage in this kind of cooperation.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom strongly supports the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2270 (2016). I join my colleagues in
welcoming the robust new measures that it brings
into force, thanks to strong and united action by the
Security Council.
This resolution is a step change. It contains some
of the toughest measures the Security Council has
ever taken. It addresses the will of the Council as we
expressed in our press statement of 6 January 2016
(SC/12191), the day that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea announced it had conducted its
fourth nuclear test. Since then, on 7 February, we saw
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea conduct
a satellite launch using ballistic-missile technology.
Those events were clear and deliberate violations of
previous Security Council resolutions. We could not
allow them to pass without a robust response. We must
deter and impede the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea from continuing to pursue such illegal actions.
We remain deeply concerned by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s continued development
of nuclear and missile programmes. It is in flagrant
defiance of the Security Council’s resolutions and flies
in the face of international condemnation, and it means
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea regime
has even fewer national resources available for the
health and welfare of its people.
Resolution 2270 (2016) is not intended to have
adverse humanitarian consequences for the country’s
civilian population. The resolution is not intended to
negatively affect activities not prohibited by this or
previous Security Council resolutions. The resolution
is not intended to negatively affect the work of
international organizations or non-governmental
organizations carrying out assistance and relief
activities in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Taking this intention into account, it is clear that
the resolution’s provisions, including on the export
of aviation fuel, are not intended to curtail legitimate
humanitarian and diplomatic activities in the country.
8/14

02/03/2016

The Council will need to be vigilant in that regard.
Additionally, we note for clarification that the new
provisions on cargo inspection are consistent with
the obligations set out in the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations.
Finally, we again welcome the resolve of the
Council in expediting this robust new resolution.
We strongly encourage all States to implement its
provisions in full. And above all, we continue to urge
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to return to
credible and authentic multilateral talks on its nuclear
programme, to abide by its obligations under the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and
to commit to full access by the International Atomic
Energy Agency.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain had no doubts about co-sponsoring resolution
2270 (2016), for three reasons.
First, in recent years the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has, on various occasions — probably
too many — shown an unequivocal determination to
develop its nuclear programme as well as its missile
technology, thereby breaching the international
non-proliferation regime and repeatedly violating
Security Council sanctions.
The Council, as a consequence, is obliged to react
for two very important reasons: first, because this
implies the practical development by North Korea of a
military capacity, which is very seriously threatening
peace and stability on the peninsula and in the region;
and, secondly, because resolution 2094 (2013) states
clearly the Council’s determination to adopt further
significant measures if the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea carries out a new missile launch or
a nuclear test. We therefore had no other choice than
to comply with what is established and to adopt these
further significant measures.
Secondly, as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006), Spain has a special responsibility to ensure that
Security Council decisions are complied with with due
effectiveness, transparency and rigour. That is why we
will be providing an open briefing to the membership
over the next few days.
Member States have concentrated their efforts in
this area, but we must be honest and acknowledge that
the previous sanctions regime was not as effective as
16-05775

02/03/2016

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

it could have been in that it was not able to prevent
the North Korean regime from continuing with its
arms-development programme. We believe that this
new resolution will be a useful tool for achieving
this efficiency and, of course, as Chair we will work
closely with other members to ensure the practical
implementation of measures that will ensure the
achievement of the ultimate goal of these measures:
that North Korea once again becomes part of the
non-proliferation regime, thereby guaranteeing peace
and stability on the peninsula.
Finally, I should like to touch on what may be a very
important idea with regard to the future, and I should
like to stress that this idea was already mentioned by
certain speakers: namely, that the sanctions are not
a goal but a means of achieving lasting peace and
stability. Nor are they in any way a punishment of
the population. The sanctions are designed to have an
effect on the elites of the regime, not its citizens. We are
convinced that only a radical change of attitude on the
part of the Government of Pyongyang can offer people
the opportunity that they deserve: nothing more than
the ability to live a normal life.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I should like at the outset
to take this opportunity to wish you every success, Sir,
in your functions as President of the Security Council
during the month of March and reiterate to you our full
support for all of your initiatives and endeavours.
Resolution 2270 (2016), which the Security Council
has just adopted, condemns the nuclear test and the
launching of a rocket with ballistic-missile technology
carried out by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
in January and February, respectively. It stresses the
concern of the international community at the negative
consequences of these acts for international peace
and security, in particular on the Korean peninsula,
which increases the risk of a possible confrontation.
The seriousness of these events requires the Security
Council to redouble its efforts to promote dialogue and
negotiation between the parties in order to contribute to
a negotiated solution to this crisis.
In this context, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, committed as we are to non-proliferation,
nuclear disarmament and the need to focus on the
consensus reached among the countries of the region,
voted in favour of the resolution because we believe
that the implementation of the measures set out in the

S/PV.7638

resolution and in other Security Council resolutions
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea should
have the single objective of helping to find a political
peaceful solution to the issue of the denuclearization
of the Korean Peninsula, with the aim of strengthening
peace and stability in the region.
The measures set out in the resolution must be
applied in a responsible and transparent manner, with
a view to achieving specific goals, in keeping with
the principles of international law and with clear
benchmarks for their lifting if the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea complies with the demand that it
put an end to its nuclear programme. This is not about
undermining a Government or punishing its people, but
about making progress in the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. We therefore need to ensure that the
measures emanating from this resolution do not have
negative humanitarian consequences for the civilian
population and do not affect their human rights or the
well-being of the North Korean people.
In this regard, we are concerned that the restrictions
imposed on imports of raw materials into the country
could have an impact on the population. We also believe
that these exceptional measures on this issue must not
serve as a precedent to limit the right of States to the
sovereign use of their natural resources for their own
economic and social development in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1803 (XVII).
We call upon all parties to act with caution in order
to avoid an escalation of tensions in the region that
could degenerate into an armed conflict. In this regard,
we should work hand in hand, with a comprehensive
focus on various mechanisms and formulas, so as to
gradually build an environment for dialogue that will
lead to peace, with the aim of strengthening the basis
for a negotiated and sustainable resolution of the issue,
in order to preserve and guarantee the stability of the
Korean peninsula.
The implementation of the measures listed in
resolution 2270 (2016) should in no way hamper the
cooperation provided by international organizations
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea aimed
at creating the conditions for stability and well-being
that are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations
between countries, such as those established by
Chapter IX of the Charter of the United Nations. In
this regard, we appreciate the efforts of the multilateral
organizations that have provided technical assistance

16-057759/14

S/PV.7638

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
that continue to back projects aimed at promoting
human development, the achievement of the recently
adopted Sustainable Development Goals and increased
food security for vulnerable groups in rural areas in
the country.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call to Member
States that have influence in this sphere to undertake
the efforts necessary to promote a climate of trust
that will help to break the impasse in a peaceful and
constructive manner, through the relaunching of the
Six-Party Talks as the most important mechanism for
easing tensions on the Korean peninsula and the only
way to peacefully resolve these differences.
The initiatives taken to achieve the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula and to maintain peace and
security there through diplomatic measures and
political negotiations constitute the path that should be
followed so as to build a lasting peaceful solution.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Let me congratulate you
and wish you, Mr. President, every success on Angola’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
in March. I also wish to congratulate Ambassador
Rafael Darío Ramírez Carreño on a successful and
productive Venezuelan presidency in February. I join
other colleagues in expressing appreciation to the
delegations of China and the United States, as well as
all Council members, for the tremendous work leading
to the adoption of resolution 2270 (2016).

02/03/2016

The Korean peninsula has gone through a periodic
cycle of ups and downs. It would benefit from more
predictability of inter-State behaviour through greater
engagement and dialogue. It requires a change of
attitude and embracing more trust to pursue all
peaceful means of resolving the outstanding issues
between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and its neighbours and other interlocutors, not just for
the sake on securing peace and stability on the Korean
peninsula and the wider region, but equally, if not
more important, so that the benefits of enduring peace,
security and stability could prosper the nation and the
people of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Malaysia remains convinced that the interests
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
its grievances could be best served by its return to
the negotiating table. We call upon the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to recommit itself to the
resumption of peaceful dialogue and negotiations under
the six-party talks framework. As others in the region
have reaped the seeds of mutual trust, cooperation
and prosperity sown before, so too should the people
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea enjoy
such benefits of sustained peace and socioeconomic
development. It could learn from the economic success
stories of its immediate neighbours.

Malaysia welcomes the adoption of this very
important text. Given the far-reaching implications of
the resolution, we would have preferred ample time to
consider the text. However, considering the exigencies
involved and the need for proper consultations with our
respective authorities, we had to expeditiously work
to ensure that the spirit and intent of the resolution
were appreciated, so that it could be adopted in a
timely manner.

The inclusion of language safeguarding humanitarian
exemptions in the text is a crucial element. It will
prevent the effects of possible unintended consequences
against legitimate interests, particularly related to
the livelihoods and the humanitarian situation of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea population.
We are fully supportive of that. Malaysia wishes to
underscore that interpretation of relevant provisions
in the resolution must not be a pretext to disrupt
diplomatic access and further impede the conduct of
legitimate diplomatic and humanitarian activities in
the country, as stipulated under the Vienna and Geneva
conventions respectively.

Malaysia unequivocally reaffirms its belief that
illicit development and procurement of weapons of mass
destruction and related technologies and capabilities by
any State is unacceptable and cannot be tolerated by the
international community. Such activities undermine the
work and commitment of all Member States to peaceful
relations with each other and to the peaceful resolution
of conflict. Those are our core values. It is for that
reason that Malaysia voted in favour and co-sponsored
the resolution.

Our primary goal is to see the denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula. We must not be diverted from that
goal. We wish to see the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea return to the negotiation table and embrace
change that builds trust to pursue shared security and
prosperity through international cooperation. As a
member of the Council, we remain committed to doing
our part, including through the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006)
concerning the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.

10/14

16-05775

02/03/2016

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): We too congratulate
Angola on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. New Zealand welcomes the adoption
of resolution 2270 (2016), imposing strengthened
and expanded sanctions on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Our long-standing commitment to
the nuclear non-proliferation regime and to the goal of
a world without nuclear weapons is well known.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
continued pursuit of its nuclear weapons programme,
as demonstrated by its most recent nuclear test and
ballistic-missile launch, represents one of the most
serious threats to the international nonproliferation
regime. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
actions stand in defiance of international law and the
Council’s resolutions.
When the Council met on 6 January, following the
latest nuclear test, we committed to beginning work
immediately to agree further significant measures in
response. Today’s resolution represents the fulfilment
of that commitment. New Zealand co-sponsored today’s
resolution in recognition of the continued threat the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s actions pose
to international peace and security and to the security
of our Asia-Pacific region. We do so with a heavy
heart, wishing that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea would choose a path of providing for the
well-being and basic needs of its citizens, rather than
preoccupying itself with the development of a nuclear
weapons programme.
The measures contained in the resolution will
send a clear message to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, specifically that it will not benefit
from its provocative and combative behaviour and
that the best path available to it is a return, in good
faith, to negotiations on the denuclearization of the
Korean Peninsula.
We commend the United States and China for the
leadership they have shown in preparing the measures
contained in today’s resolution. It is now incumbent on
all Member States to ensure they are implemented fully
and effectively.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Let me begin by
warmly congratulating you, Mr. President, on Angola’s
assumption of the presidency for this month and also
by expressing our deep appreciation to Ambassador
Ramírez Carreño for his leadership during the month
of February.

S/PV.7638

At the outset, I would like to commend the efforts
of both the United States and China in drafting and
putting on the table the text of resolution 2270 (2016)
in response to the recent nuclear test and rocket launch
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We
appreciate the convening of the expert-level meetings
on 25 and 26 February by the delegation of the United
States, so that each Council member had an opportunity
to raise any questions related to the resolution and
its annexes.
We consider the resolution just adopted to be a
comprehensive and balanced document that, on the one
hand, strengthens the existing regime and reinforces it
with additional sectoral and targeted sanctions and, on
the other, clearly demonstrates the Council’s openness
to dialogue on peaceful and diplomatic solutions to
the situation. Such an approach fully corresponds
to the Council’s intention to avoid both affecting the
humanitarian situation in North Korea and aggravating
tensions on the peninsula. Moreover, the document
reflects the findings contained in the reports of the
Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1874 (2009), which in our opinion only strengthens the
rationale behind new sanctions.
Ukraine has always been committed to effective
multilateral action against the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. Our collective decision today is a
historic step which clearly demonstrates the Council’s
consolidated and firm stance to respond decisively and
eradicate any threat to the global non-proliferation
regime. Ukraine is honoured to co-sponsor the
resolution, which, as we all hope, will become one of the
defining documents in putting an end to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s illegal activities in
defiance of every international law principle.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. I wish
to also take this opportunity to thank the Permanent
Mission of Venezuela for its presidency of the Council
last month.
At the outset, I would like to express my appreciation
to the United States for its efforts in preparing resolution
2270 (2016), which has been adopted today, and to China
for its diplomatic and political efforts aimed at restoring
stability to and ensuring security on the Korean
peninsula, as well as for its support of the preparation
of the resolution. Today’s unanimous adoption of

16-0577511/14

S/PV.7638

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

resolution 2270 (2016) sends the strong message that
the members of the Security Council do not accept the
recent actions undertaken by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, be it the conduct of nuclear testing
or the launching of ballistic missiles, which represent
breaches of the relevant Security Council resolutions
and international legitimacy and undermine the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in
its entirety.
I also wish to register our satisfaction with the
balanced language of the resolution, which takes a
political direction with regard to the resumption of the
six-party talks and the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula, while also taking care to avoid aggravating
the humanitarian situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. My delegation is of the view that the
resolution constitutes a step on the long road to prevent
circumvention of the NPT.
Egypt has repeatedly warned against the use of
double standards with regard to challenges to the
Treaty and denuclearization. One State in the Middle
East remains outside of the Treaty. The members of the
Security Council are well aware of the abysmal failure
of the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
to produce an outcome document, due to the double
standards applied by certain influential international
parties. Neither Egypt nor the States of the Middle East
will ever accept this state of affairs. The adoption of
resolution 2270 (2016) is an optimal opportunity to
remind the international community and the members
of the Council of that fact, and calls upon them to fulfil
their responsibilities on that score.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal congratulates Angola, a brotherly
and friendly African country, on its assumption of
the presidency for the month of March. We also take
this opportunity to congratulate Angola’s predecessor,
Venezuela, for the excellent way in which it conducted
the work of the Council last month.
Senegal champions the ideal of a world without
nuclear arms and calls for the total prohibition of
nuclear testing and the launching of ballistic missiles.
It was in that spirit that Senegal co-sponsored and
voted in favour of resolution 2270 (2016) in order to
condemn the recent activities of North Korea, which
constitute a threat to the nuclear non-proliferation
regime. Senegal therefore welcomes the unanimous
12/14

02/03/2016

adoption of the resolution because, among the new
provisions contained therein, there are restrictions on
the export of certain minerals and other rare metals,
unless the funds generated by those exports are used
for the subsistence of the North Korean population
and not to fund Pyongyang’s nuclear and ballisticmissile programmes. We also note the prohibition on
the import of aviation and rocket fuel, as well as the
complete embargo on arms. Moreover, we stress that all
goods destined for North Korea will undergo stringent
inspection, which will without a doubt make it possible
to increase pressure on the regime, in particular since
the resolution steps up sanctions on banks and foreign
assets and introduces restrictions on air links to North
Korea. The resolution imposes new trade restrictions
and prohibits vessels suspected of transporting illegal
cargo to North Korea from entering ports.
As we have all observed, the text significantly
strengthens already existing sanctions against
Pyongyang due to the fourth nuclear test and the missile
launches of 6 January and 7 February 2016, respectively,
in violation of several Security Council resolutions. We
hope that the persons and entities newly added to the
sanctions list, including North Korea’s space agency
and intelligence services, as well as the new measures
referred to previously, will strengthen the effectiveness
of the sanctions regime this time. Indeed, the previous
sanctions did not prevent the progressive improvement
and expansion of the nuclear and ballistic missile
capacity of Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
which continues to flagrantly violate the resolutions
and repeated demands of the Council to respect
its international obligations in this area in a clear,
irreversible and verifiable manner.
In conclusion, my delegation should like to stress
that sanctions are not our objective; better yet, they are
a means or a lever available to the Council to maintain
international peace and security. We hope that these
measures will contribute to the strengthening or, more
specifically, the resumption of talks in the Korean
peninsula for the good of the international community.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I should like to congratulate Angola on
assuming the presidency of the Council in March. I also
wish to thank our dear friend Raphael and the entire
Venezuelan delegation for their excellent leadership of
the Council during the month of February.
16-05775

02/03/2016

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Uruguay co-sponsored resolution 2270 (2016)
and welcomes its unanimous adoption. I should like
to make a general comment using the Toledo formula
that our friend Mr. Román Oyarzun Marchesi urges
us to use. As such, I will not repeat all that has been
said by other members with regard to the failure of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to honour
its international obligations or some of the comments
made by other colleagues with regard to the aims and
content of the resolution.
I will limit myself simply to saying that my
delegation’s support for the resolution is based on our
conviction that the implementation of new sanctions
will not cause direct harm to the civilian population,
whose humanitarian situation is already deplorable and
in need of the immediate attention of the international
community. We also echo the call made by other
delegations with regard to the responsibility of all
Member States to ensure the strict compliance of the
provisions of resolution 2270 (2016). Furthermore, I
reiterate that Uruguay is fully committed to continuing
to work towards a peaceful, diplomatic and political
solution to achieve the denculearization of the
Korean peninsula.
Lastly, for my second general comment, I note that,
as we understand it, the Security Council will have to
continue working to ensure that the negotiating process
that precedes the adoption of resolutions is more
transparent and inclusive.
The President: I shall now take the floor in my
national capacity.
I would like to start by thanking all representatives
who have expressed good wishes to our delegation as
we assume the presidency for the month of March.
Angola voted in favour of resolution 2270 (2016),
joining the international consensus on the need to
prevent nuclear proliferation because of the threat
it poses to international peace and security. Angola
views with concern the recent test and ballisticmissile launches, despite all the efforts deployed by
the international community and incentives afforded
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
change its nuclear-weapons and ballistic-missile
programme, which endangers security and stability
in the Korean peninsula. By unanimously adopting
resolution 2270 (2016), the Security Council is sending
a clear signal of the international community’s
outright rejection of nuclear proliferation, and it is an

S/PV.7638

additional deterrent to the violation of the international
non-proliferation regime.
The negotiations on the resolution tried to strike
a balance between the need to impose measures
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
for its nuclear and ballistic-missile programmes while
avoiding the imposition of general punishment on the
people of North Korea and the wrecking of their basic
livelihoods. Morever, the resolution leaves open a
window of opportunity for negotiations in resolving the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear issue,
which we would like to see all parties concerned take
advantage of. Such negotiations are far more suitable,
given their constructive nature and the fact that this is
a problem that needs to be resolved through dialogue
aimed at a constructive outcome.
Finally, we call on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to negotiate a solution to this issue within the
agreed frameworks with a view to breaking its isolation
and reaping all benefits as a rightful member of the
international community.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Republic of Korea.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would first
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council this
month. The Republic of Korea welcomes and supports
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2270 (2016)
today. We thank the United States for having taken the
initiative on this resolution and the People’s Republic
of China for having engaged in lengthy consultations,
as well as all other members of the Security Council.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s latest
nuclear test and long-range missile launch are grave
violations of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
They pose a clear threat to international peace and
security. They are by far the most serious provocations
of their kind, as they show that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is advancing closer to a comprehensive
and operational nuclear weapon capability. A nucleararmed North Korea would seriously impair the regime
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, and could induce an arms race in the region,
undermining the security of the whole world. The
international community is therefore at an important

16-0577513/14

S/PV.7638

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

02/03/2016

crossroads. If we cannot stop the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea now, then it may soon reach the point
of no return. We must act quickly and decisively to
prevent this from happening.

livelihood. On the contrary, they explicitly target the
pursuit of weapons of mass destruction by the regime
that is causing the hardship of the North Korean people.
We hope this resolution will help alleviate their plight.

Today’s resolution introduces one of the most robust
sanctions regimes in the history of the United Nations.
Its unanimous adoption demonstrates the firm, united
resolve of the whole international community that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s weapons of
mass destruction programmes will never be tolerated.
These measures, when fully implemented, will impede
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s weapons
of mass destruction-related activities in all aspects,
leaving Pyongyang with no other option but to choose
denuclearization. We have seen in the past how effective
sanctions can lead to change of policy in other contexts.

Finally, as a fellow Korean, I would like to say
a few words in appeal to those who are ruling North
Korea. I would say, in Korean, “please, stop it now”.
I would ask them: Why do you need these weapons?
In South Korea we do not have a nuclear bomb. As we
border each other, you do not need an intercontinental
missile if you are targeting us. Why do you need these
weapons? You say that the United States is a threat
to you. Why would the United States threaten you?
Why would the strongest military Power in the world
threaten a small country far across the Pacific? There
is no threat. It is a figment of your imagination. If you
continue in this way, the only people who will suffer
from what you are doing are your own people, and they
are also my people, and our people as well. So please,
wake up, open your eyes, look out at what is happening
in the world. Give up the nukes. Join the rest of us in the
world and we can all live together in safety and peace.”

As noted in the resolution, it is deplorable that
the DPRK is diverting its scarce resources to the
development of weapons of mass destruction while its
own citizens are suffering abject poverty and human
rights abuses. As pointed out by members of the Council,
while the sanctions set out in this resolution are most
comprehensive in scope, they do not target the North
Korean population or intend to negatively affect their

14/14

The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

16-05775
