A /68/PV.70

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

70th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 18 December 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Reports of the Third Committee
The President: The General Assembly will
consider reports of the Third Committee on agenda
items 27, 28, 62, 64 to 69, 108, 109, 122 and 135.
I request the Rapporteur of the Third Committee,
Ms. Adriana Murillo Ruin of Costa Rica, to introduce
the reports of the Committee in one intervention.
Ms. Ruin (Costa Rica), Rapporteur of the Third
Committee (spoke in Spanish): It is a great honour and
privilege for me to introduce to the General Assembly
the reports of the Third Committee submitted to it
under agenda items 27, 28, 62, 64 to 69, 108, 109, 122
and 135.
The reports contained in documents A/68/448 to
A/68/459 and in document A/68/486 include the texts
of draft resolutions and draft decisions recommended
to the General Assembly for adoption. For the benefit
of delegations, the Secretariat has issued document
A/C.3/68/INF/1, which contains a checklist of action
taken on the draft proposals contained in the reports
before the Assembly.
Under agenda item 27, entitled “Social
development”, including sub-items (a) to (d), the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 34 of document
A/68/448, the adoption of seven draft resolutions and,
in paragraph 35, the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 28, entitled “Advancement of
women”, including sub-items (a) and (b), the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 21 of document

A/68/449, the adoption of four draft resolutions and, in
paragraph 22, the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 62, entitled “Report of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced
persons and humanitarian questions”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 16 of document
A/68/450, the adoption of three draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 64, entitled “Report of the
Human Rights Council”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 14 of document A/68/451,
the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 65, entitled “Promotion
and protection of the rights of children”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 31 of document
A/68/452, the adoption of four draft resolutions, and, in
paragraph 32, the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 66, entitled “Rights of
indigenous peoples”, the Third Committee recommends,
in paragraph 11 of document A/68/453, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 67, entitled “Elimination of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 22 of document A/68/454, the adoption of
two draft resolutions and, in paragraph 23, the adoption
of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 68, entitled “Right of peoples to
self-determination”, the Third Committee recommends,
in paragraph 20 of document A/68/455, the adoption of
three draft resolutions.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-62485 (E)

*1362485*

A/68/PV.70

18/12/2013

Under agenda item 69, entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 5 of document A/68/456, the
adoption of one draft decision.

Under agenda item 109, entitled “International
drug control”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 11 of document A/68/458, the adoption of
two draft resolutions.

Under sub-item (a) of agenda item 69, entitled
“Implementation of human rights instruments”, the
Third Committee recommends, in paragraph 20 of
document A/68/456/Add.1, the adoption of three draft
resolutions.

Under agenda item 122, entitled “Revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 5 of document
A/68/486, the adoption of one draft decision.

It is my understanding that the Assembly will defer
its consideration of draft resolution I, entitled “Human
Rights Committee”, until such time as it has before it
the pertinent report of the Fifth Committee.
Under sub-item (b) of agenda item 69, entitled
“Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of
human rights and fundamental freedoms”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 146 of document
A/68/456/Add.2, the adoption of 26 draft resolutions.
It is my understanding that the Assembly will
defer its consideration of draft resolution XVII,
entitled “United Nations Human Rights Training and
Documentation Centre for South-West Asia and the
Arab Region”, until such time as it has before it the
pertinent report of the Fifth Committee.
Under sub-item (c) of agenda item 69, entitled
“Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs
and
representatives”,
the
Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 27 of document
A/68/456/Add.3, the adoption of four draft resolutions.
It is my understanding that the Assembly will
defer its consideration of draft resolution II, entitled
“Situation of human rights in Myanmar”, until such
time as it has before it the pertinent report of the Fifth
Committee.
Under sub-item (d) of agenda item 69, entitled
“Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to
the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action”, the
Third Committee wishes to advise the Assembly, in
document A/68/456/Add.4, that no action was required
under the item.
Under agenda item 108, entitled “Crime
prevention and criminal justice”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 47 of document A/68/457,
the adoption of 11 draft resolutions, and in paragraph
48, the adoption of one draft decision.

2/30

Finally, under agenda item 135, entitled “Programme
planning”, the Third Committee wishes to advise the
Assembly, in document A/68/459, that no action was
required under the item.
I want to thank my fellow Bureau members, in
particular the Chair of the Committee, Stephan Tafrov,
Permanent Representative of Bulgaria, and Vice-Chairs
Mr. Mario von Haff of Angola, Mr. Thorvardur Atli
Thórsson of Iceland, and Ms. Maya Dagher of Lebanon.
I also wish to thank the Secretary of the Committee
and his team for their work and support in making this
session efficient and in ensuring its timely conclusion.
I respectfully recommend the reports of the Third
Committee to the plenary of the General Assembly for
its consideration.
The President: I thank the Rapporteur of the Third
Committee for her introduction of the reports of the
Third Committee.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Third Committee
which are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Third
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in a plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in
plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in
plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”

13-62485

18/12/2013

May I also remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we will proceed to take decisions in the same manner
as was done in the Committee, unless the Secretariat
is notified to the contrary in advance. That means that
where recorded votes were taken, we will do the same. I
should also hope that we will proceed to adopt without a
vote those recommendations that were adopted without
a vote in the Committee.
Before proceeding further, I would like to draw
the attention of members to a note by the Secretariat,
entitled “List of proposals contained in the reports of
the Third Committee”, which has been circulated in
English only as document A/C.3/68/INF/1. The note has
been distributed desk to desk as a reference guide for
action on draft resolutions and decisions recommended
by the Committee in its reports.
In that regard, members will find in the fourth
column of the note the symbols of the draft resolutions
or decisions of the Committee, with the corresponding
symbols of the reports for action in the plenary in the
second column of the same note. For reports containing
multiple recommendations, the draft resolution or
decision number is contained in the third column of
the note. Furthermore, members are reminded that
additional co-sponsors are no longer accepted now that
draft resolutions and decisions have been adopted by
the Committee. Any clarification about co-sponsorship
should be addressed to the Secretary of the Committee.
Agenda item 27
Social development
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/448)
The President: The Assembly has before it
seven draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 34 of its report and a draft
decision recommended by the Committee in paragraph
35 of the same report. We will now take a decision on
draft resolutions I to VII and on the draft decision, one
by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Policies and
programmes involving youth”. The Third Committee

A/68/PV.70

adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 68/130).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Promoting social integration through social inclusion”.
The Third Committee adopted it. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 68/131).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Literacy for life: shaping future agendas”. The Third
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
68/132).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Cooperatives in social development”. The Third
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 68/133).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing”.
The Third Committee adopted it. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 68/134).
The President: Draft resolution VI is entitled
“Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit
for Social Development and of the twenty-fourth
special session of the General Assembly”. The Third
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution
68/135).
The President: Draft resolution VII is entitled
“Preparations for and observance of the twentieth
anniversary of the International Year of the Family”.
The Third Committee adopted it. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution
68/136).
The President: We shall now turn to paragraph
35 of the report to take action on the draft decision,
entitled “Reports considered by the General Assembly
in connection with the question of social development”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to

13-624853/30

A/68/PV.70

adopt the draft decision recommended by the Third
Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 68/531).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 27 and its sub-items (a) to (d)?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 28
Advancement of women
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/449)
The President: The Assembly has before it
four draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 21 of its report and a draft
decision recommended by the Committee in paragraph
22 of the same report. We will now take decisions on
draft resolutions I to IV and on the draft decision, one
by one.
We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled
“Violence against women migrant workers”. The Third
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 68/137).
Draft resolution II is entitled “Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women”. The Third Committee adopted it. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 68/138).
Draft resolution III is entitled “Improvement
of the situation of women in rural areas”. The Third
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
68/139).
Draft resolution IV is entitled “Follow-up to
the Fourth World Conference on Women and full
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly”. The Third Committee
adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 68/140).

4/30

18/12/2013

The President: We now turn to the draft decision
entitled “Reports considered by the General Assembly
in connection with the advancement of women”. May
I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to adopt
the draft decision as recommended by the Third
Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 68/532).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 28 and its sub-items (a) and (b)?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 62
Report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, questions relating to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/450)
The President: The Assembly has before it three
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 16 of its report. We will now take a decision
on draft resolutions I, II and III.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees”. The Third
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 68/141).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the
Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees”. The Third Committee adopted it. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 68/142).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced
persons in Africa”. The Third Committee adopted it.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
68/143).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 62?
It was so decided.

13-62485

18/12/2013

Agenda item 64 (continued)
Report of the Human Rights Council
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/451)
Amendment (A/68/L.33)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 14 of its report and and an amendment to the
draft resolution contained in document A/68/L.33.
I give the floor to the representative of Switzerland
to introduce the amendment contained in document
A/68/L.33.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the sponsors of A/68/L.33, which relates to
the draft resolution on the report of the Human Rights
Council contained in the report of the Third Committee
(A/68/451).
Throughout the Third Committee’s consideration,
we expressed our concern about additions made to
the draft resolution on the report of the Human Rights
Council in paragraphs 2 and 3 as compared with 2012,
when the text was adopted by consensus. In our view,
those paragraphs were contary to the established
institutional relationship between the Human Rights
Council and the General Assembly, including the Third
Committee, which had been reaffirmed by the General
Assembly in resolution 65/281 after being reviewed by
the Human Rights Council. If the General Assembly
was to confirm the retention of these paragraphs in the
draft resolution contained in the report of the Third
Committee, it could have unforeseen consequences
for over 100 resolutions adopted by the Human Rights
Council each year.
We firmly believe that a solution should be found
to the concerns expressed by many delegations on
that issue, in a manner that respects the institutional
architecture of the human rights system, as agreed
by all Member States. We have continued over the
past weeks to call on the main sponsors of the draft
resolution to engage in a constructive dialogue so as
to discuss solutions to those concerns, including by
working on concrete proposals. We were convinced that
a consensual and balanced solution that would address
delegations’ concerns by promoting a coherent and
well-functioning United Nations human rights system
would benefit all Member States. However, we were
not able to achieve that in the Third Committee or in
the run-up to this plenary meeting. We are disappointed

A/68/PV.70

therefore that the promising discussions we held
yesterday evening were not continued today and that
the request for another meeting was refused.
As no consensual solution could be found, the
sponsors have submitted amendment A/68/L.33,
pursuant to which paragraphs 2 and 3 of the draft
resolution would be deleted. We respectfully call on
all Member States to support the proposed amendment
so as to adopt a text that respects and strengthens the
human rights system.
The President: I call on those delegations wishing
to explain their vote before the voting on the amendment
contained in document A/68/L.33.
Mrs. Mørch Smith (Norway): Norway would like
to explain why we will vote in favour of the proposed
amendment (A/68/L.33).
Norway is of the view that a compromise solution
that addressed the concerns of interested parties could
have been possible. Unfortunately, such a compromise
was not reached. We are therefore left with no choice but
to vote in favour of the amendment, deleting paragraphs
2 and 3 of the draft resolution contained in the report of
the Third Committee (A/68/451). Norway will vote in
favour in order to protect the institutional architecture
of the United Nations human rights system, which has
been agreed on by all States Members of the United
Nations in both resolution 60/251, which established the
Human Rights Council, and resolution 65/281, which
reviewed the Council.
It is unwarranted to single out any Human
Rights Council resolution that does not contain
recommendations to the General Assembly and is
not of a norm-setting character. By reopening one of
the agreed resolutions of the Human Rights Council,
we would risk setting a dangerous precedent that
could undermine the United Nations human rights
architecture. By allowing for the reopening of Human
Rights Council resolutions by the General Assembly,
we would challenge the clearly defined divisions of
labour and responsibilities among the United Nations
human rights mechanisms.
All States are permitted to participate on equal
terms in the negotiation of all Human Rights Council
resolutions, regardless of their status as members or
observers. The role of the Human Rights Council as the
main body for dealing with human rights issues within
the United Nations has been emphasized by universal
support for the Council among the entire United

13-624855/30

A/68/PV.70

Nations membership since its establishment in 2006.
We believe that it is in our common interest to protect
its integrity and effectiveness. By voting in favour, we
hope to maintain and protect the universally agreed
United Nations human rights architecture.
Ms. Cousens (United States of America): On behalf
of the United States, I am taking the floor first to inform
colleagues that we are withdrawing our sponsorship of
amendment A/68/L.33 in order to make an explanation
of vote before the voting to urge Member States to
support this amendment.
The amendment is crucial to preserving the
integrity of the Human Rights Council and the
established and well-understood balance between the
Human Rights Council and the General Assembly. The
amendment is vital in order to ensure that we do not
today set a precedent with far-reaching implications
that could have negative consequences for each and
every Member State.
The United States has listened seriously to the
concerns that some colleagues have raised about one
particular resolution adopted by the Human Rights
Council this year. We have also been very clear that
we are open to any number of ways to give voice to
those concerns and find ways to address them. It is in
that spirit of mutual respect that we have been working
diligently with colleagues to explore any scope for
common ground up until this very moment. We are
disappointed that those efforts have not borne fruit,
and our grave reservations about the draft resolution
remain.
It is without precedent and entirely inappropriate
for the annual resolution on the report of the Human
Rights Council to single out one item of the Council’s
work that is fully within the mandate of the Human
Rights Council — in this instance resolution 24/24,
which deals with the important issue of reprisals against
human rights defenders — for reconsideration by the
General Assembly. Resolution 24/24 does not include
any recommendations from the Council to the General
Assembly that would require the Assembly to consider
the resolution or take any further action.
We are also troubled that no informal negotiations
were held on the draft text. This year’s draft differs
significantly from last year’s and every prior year’s
texts, which have been adopted by consensus. This
departure from precedent should not have moved ahead
without broad consultations and negotiations that

6/30

18/12/2013

included Member States from all regions. Moreover,
the Human Rights Council adopted resolution 24/24
with broad support. Sixty-seven States, including
States from every regional group, including the Group
of African States, sponsored the resolution. Not one
Member State voted against the resolution.
Most concerning is the fact that, independent of
the specific concerns about this specific resolution, the
annual resolution taking note of the report of the Human
Rights Council is not the appropriate way to address a
new substantive concern, and it upsets the long-standing
balance carefully wrought between the Human Rights
Council and the General Assembly. Deferring action
or reconsidering a Human Rights Council resolution in
the General Assembly creates a dangerous precedent
that could undermine the Council’s work by opening
the door to the General Assembly’s revisiting any of the
Council’s decisions that are clearly and fully within the
mandate we have all entrusted to the Council.
The decision we take here today is therefore not
one that delegations should make lightly. The success
of the amendment before the Assembly is critical
to ensuring that the integrity of the Human Rights
Council is preserved, in line with the mandate all the
States members of the General Assembly have given it.
The amendment needs to succeed in order to prevent
a damaging precedent for any future Human Rights
Council resolutions.
If delegations have concerns about Council action,
there are many ways to deal with them in both Geneva
and New York. Using this Third Committee technical
draft resolution as a vehicle, however, is the one way in
which it should not be used. Delegations’ support for
the amendment before us is vital and will ensure that
the General Assembly safeguards the Human Rights
Council from having its legitimacy eroded. We urge
all Member States committed to fundamental human
rights, to the appropriate and legitimate exercise of the
Human Rights Council’s mandate and to the established
institutional relationships between the Council and the
General Assembly to therefore vote in favour of the
amendment.
Ms. Ruin (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation will vote in favour of the amendment
(A/68/L.33) introduced by the delegation of Switzerland
on behalf of the main sponsors.
Costa Rica has always had difficulties with this
text presented in the Third Committee, on which,

13-62485

18/12/2013

unfortunately, open consultations were not held. In the
past, we have abstained in the voting on this text, and
we have also explained our position. Given that my
country’s traditional position is that the report of the
Human Rights Council, a key human rights body of the
Organization, must be considered in the plenary of the
General Assembly and not in the Third Committee. This
position, based on paragraph 5 (j) of resolution 60/251,
was reaffirmed with the agreements reached during the
review process of the Council at the sixty-fifth session,
in accordance with paragraph 6 of resolution 65/281.
The report must thus be considered by the plenary of
the General Assembly. Only the recommendations must
be considered by the Third Committee. More important
still, the paragraphs that were added this year are
unacceptable to my delegation.
Besides the fact that Human Rights Council
resolution 24/24 contains no formal recommendation,
paragraph 2 of the draft resolution contained in the
report of the Third Committee (A/68/451) refers to
deferring consideration of the entire resolution, and not
just the paragraph concerning the relevant issue. My
delegation regrets that an agreement was not reached,
as we believe that it would have been possible to
respond to the concerns expressed by the sponsoring
delegations of the draft resolution on the report of the
Human Rights Council. We deplore the fact that such
an agreement was not achieved. We believe that the
practical consequences of not adopting the amendment
for the entire work of the Human Rights Council will
be most unfortunate. The resolutions of the Human
Rights Council, the principal relevant body of the
Organization, have value in themselves and should not
be reviewed or questioned by the General Assembly.
My delegation wishes to express its full support for
the work of the Human Rights Council, its resolutions
and recommendations. As a member of the Human
Rights Council and as a country committed to the
cause of human rights, we believe that it is essential to
safeguard the work and decisions of the Council, and
we will therefore vote in favour of the amendment.
Mr. Tangara (Gambia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 54 States members of the Group of
African States.
At the outset, the African Group wishes to reaffirm
the Human Rights Council mandate, as contained in
resolution 60/251, to promote universal respect for the
protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms
for all, without distinction of any kind and in a fair

A/68/PV.70

and equitable manner, and to make recommendations
thereon. It is on that basis that the Group has been
consistently supportive of the Council’s work. The
Group views the principles underpinning the Council’s
mandate as important, particularly with respect to the
principle of cooperation and genuine dialogue aimed at
strengthening the capacity of Member States to comply
with their human rights obligations.
The Group would like to recall that we submitted
the draft resolution contained in the report of the
Third Committee (A/68/451) under agenda item 64,
entitled “Report of the Human Rights Council”, in
order to address a procedural element regarding the
adoption of Human Rights Council resolution 24/24,
entitled “Cooperation with the United Nations, its
representatives and mechanisms in the field of human
rights”.
The Group would like to stress that the draft
resolution has serious potential ramifications for the
mandate of the Human Rights Council vis-à-vis the
General Assembly, the Third Committee and other
United Nations entities and bodies in addressing this
critical procedural issue with respect to the Council’s
mandate in relation to taking binding decisions on
behalf of other United Nations entities. Paragraphs
2 and 3 were introduced into the draft resolution to
defer action in order to allow time for the consultation
process.
At this stage, the African Group would like to
bring to the attention of the Assembly the fact that
Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 clearly defines
the mechanisms, mandates, roles, responsibilities
and principles of reviews and the rationalization and
improvement of mandates. In particular, paragraph 58
(g) stipulates that new mandates should be as clear and
specific as possible, so as to avoid ambiguity.
While recognizing that the consultations still have to
be undertaken and that no prejudging of that discussion
should take place, the African Group is of the view that
the following issues need to be part of the consultation
process: first, the feasibility of a designation of a
United Nations-wide senior focal point to promote
the prevention of protection against accountability for
reprisals and intimidation related to cooperation with
the United Nations, its representatives and mechanisms
among others; secondly, the existence of mechanisms,
in other United Nations bodies that deal with matters
of this nature and their experiences, challenges and
good practices ahead of the designation of the United

13-624857/30

A/68/PV.70

Nations-wide senior focal point; thirdly, the mandate of
the Human Rights Council’s 47 members to designate
or create a focal point that binds other United Nations
entities; and fourthly, the serious ramifications for the
institution-building package adopted by the General
Assembly, particularly with respect to its carefully
crafted agenda and mandates mechanism.
The African Group believes in the principle of
constructive and genuine dialogue and cooperation. In
that regard, we have undertaken intensive consultations
with Member States and regional groups in order
to determine the way forward on this issue. But the
consultations failed to elaborate a compromise proposal
addressing the concerns of the African Group and a
slim majority of the Assembly.
On 27 November, the Third Committee rejected
the amendments contained in draft resolution
A/C.3/68/L.77, introduced by the United States of
America and Lithuania, on behalf of the European
Union, which sought the deletion of paragraphs 2 and
3 of draft resolution A/C.3/68/L.75, presented by the
African Group. The same amendments contained in
document A/68/L.33 are presented today for action.
The only change of the so-called new proposal is the
reference of the document itself. There is nothing new
in the substance of the text. Therefore, the African
Group requests all Member States that voted against
the amendments presented in the Third Committee to
continue to do so in the Assembly.
For those delegations that abstained or did not
participate in the vote, the African Group urges them
to follow the voice of reason and democracy in the
Assembly and to vote against A/68/L.33.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
I take the floor after the Chair of the Group of African
States simply because, as all are aware, Cameroon
was responsible for coordinating the negotiations in
the Third Committee of the viewpoints of the group
of experts of the African Group on this issue. I am
therefore taking the floor in full awareness of the
matter.
First, I would like to strongly and powerfully
express our support for the views expressed on behalf
of the Group of African States by the Permanent
Representative of the Gambia.
Secondly, I recall that, the contrary to what has
been said, the report of the Human Rights Council
(A/68/451) containing these analyses and proposals
8/30

18/12/2013

was already opened for certain points in the past. Some
of those points concerned recommendations that had
been made, while others did not. Some had to do with
recommendations made by consensus, while others
did not. In any case, everybody in the Assembly can
recall the points in the Human Rights Council’s report
that touched on the marriage of young girls. Although
the Council had already made a recommendation and
even reached a decision on that issue, some delegations
presented new draft resolutions to the Assembly on the
same issue without its raising any major issues.
Let us also recall the issue of indigenous peoples.
Clearly, the Human Rights Council had made a
recommendation and reached a decision on that issue,
and when it reached the Assembly an entire year passed
before the declaration was adopted. It was reopened
because we believed that this was quite a routine thing
to do, and some delegations, including those that spoke
today, had no objection to it. The issue of drinking
water and sanitation was also the subject of discussion
in the Human Rights Council. It was taken up again in
the Assembly and there were no problems as a result.
In conclusion, I wish to state that the African Group is
not breaking any new ground. We are simply following
what has been done in the past.
My third point concerns document A/68/L.33,
which is before us today. As the Chair of the African
Group said, it is the same document A/C.3/68/L.77 that
was submitted to the Third Committee.
I respect the President’s honour, and I did not
want to get into a discussion as to whether an identical
proposal adopted or rejected in the Third Committee
should be presented once again. That is not the issue.
The proposal is being submitted now as A/68/L.33, but
the content is exactly the same. When it was considered
in the Third Committee, I said that the situation was
clear.
With regard to the draft resolution contained in
the report of the Third Committee (A/68/451), which
is before the Assembly today, the African Group had
believed that when it comes to the creation of a focal
point, the ramifications of which are so broad, it was
not possible to avoid discussing it in depth, since only
the 47 members of the Human Rights Council had
reached a decision and since it was routine for the
other members of the General Assembly to be fully
informed of the issue before they took a decision. The
African Group even made it a point of honour that the
discussions would not last indefinitely and that they
13-62485

18/12/2013

would come to an end before the end of the sixty-eighth
session.
For those wise reasons, the African Group decided
to adopt a “slow and steady wins the race” approach.
There is no point in sprinting, but we do have to take
things step by step. A/C.3/68/L.77, which appears
before the Assembly today as A/68/L.33, was presented
in its current format in order to eliminate the two
paragraphs contained in the African Group’s draft,
thereby forcing everyone to accept it immediately and
creating a focal point. We believe that it would be wise
to have a discussion before creating a focal point. We
said at the time that A/C.3/68/L.75 represented the
voice of wisdom, the voice of balance, and that we had
to leave the door open in order to avoid unintended
consequences. That is why we state today that A/68/L.33
is aimed at destroying the draft resolution contained in
the report of the Third Committee.
For all the reasons raised by the Chair of the African
Group, and for the reasons that I myself have just listed,
which support this wise compromise, we cannot support
or accept A/68/L.33. We will vote against it, and we
hope that all those who have tried to protect the African
calabash will come to see that the stone contained in
A/68/L.33 will end up breaking it, and thus deprive
everyone of the opportunity to discuss this issue in full
cognizance of the facts before accepting the creation of
a focal point.
Mr. Chipaziwa (Zimbabwe): I just wish to say very
briefly that it must be possible — it is possible — for
the General Assembly to correct the Human Rights
Council when it has acted in a spirit that is contrary
to the spirit of the majority of this more representative
body, the General Assembly, with its 193 members.
The Human Rights Council is a subsidiary body of the
Assembly. We can correct the Human Rights Council
without damaging its status in any way. Moreover, as
has already been said, A/68/L.33 is just the defeated
A/C.3/68/L.77 in a new guise. We urge members to vote
against A/68/L.33. In so doing, they will not damage the
Human Rights Council; they will merely be exercising
their responsibility.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I have refrained from participating in this discussion
up to this point, but certain questions of principle
have been raised on which my delegation believes it
indispensable to provide some clarification.

A/68/PV.70

The General Assembly created the Human Rights
Council. It has the full authority and mandate to review
the work of the Human Rights Council. I myself was
Cuba’s representative in Geneva and a Vice-Chair of
the Human Rights Council. I have no reason to discredit
or to detract from the authority of the Council, but at
the same time the General Assembly has all the power
and mandate necessary to study, analyse and reach
conclusions about any decision of the Human Rights
Council. As a matter of fact, the Human Rights Council
was not established by consensus.
I am surprised to hear certain delegations allude
to and defend the decisions of the Human Rights
Council today, when for years they did not even take
part in the Council’s work. Not all members of the
General Assembly are represented in Geneva. Others
have missions that are so small that they are unable
to attend all the meetings. There are missions from
Caribbean countries, my own region, that have so few
representatives that they have to focus their efforts on
the World Trade Organization, because trade and the
economy are what their States are dependent on to meet
their peoples’ right to food and development.
On the issue of reprisals, I believe that the Human
Rights Council and the entire machinery of the United
Nations must work to prevent reprisals against human
rights defenders and those cooperating with the Council.
I wonder why we are stressing the issue of the focal
point when the High Commissioner, her Office, the
Secretary-General and the entire Secretariat already
have a mandate. I very much fear that there is some kind
of hidden motive behind this draft resolution. If not, why
is so much stress being placed on an intergovernmental
mandate? Why is an intergovernmental mandate needed
when there are no programme budget implications?
What staff members from the Office of the High
Commissioner are going to work in the focal point? If
the Office does not have money or enough staff, how
is it going to create a new focal point? Where is the
money coming from? What personnel are going to work
on that? Are they going to transfer the staff who are
working on the right to development? Are they going
to move the people working on the universal periodic
review? I see here issues that are not fully clarified.
I therefore believe that the proposal of the Group of
African States is a very wise one. It is not calling for the
elimination or dismissal of the proposal that the Human
Rights Council considered. It is simply asking for time
for clarification so that all of us can be convinced of the

13-624859/30

A/68/PV.70

importance of the decision we are about to take. I think
there is a certain extremism in the positions of those
who wish to push this process forward at any cost. We
have time, both in the Human Rights Council and in
the General Assembly. We have months before us, and
we have all the time in the world to discuss and reach a
consensus on the issue of how to put an end to reprisals
and the best way in which the United Nations can work
so that reprisals do not take place.
I believe it would be extremely dangerous for
the amendment contained in document A/68/L.33 to
be adopted here, and for the position of focal point
established pursuant to the draft resolution to be
imposed when a large number of delegations still have
questions, when there is no clarity about what is going to
be done, and when its very legitimacy as an institution
is in question. Therefore, in these circumstances, I
think we must vote against the amendments and for
the African draft resolution, which will give us time to
analyse, study and build a true consensus.
The President: The Assembly will first take a
decision on the amendment contained in document
A/68/L.33.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the amendment,
and in addition to those delegations listed in A/68/L.33,
the following countries have become sponsors: Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Luxembourg,
Malta, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,

10/30

18/12/2013

Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Vanuatu
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, China, Comoros,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kenya,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Philippines, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain, Brunei
Darussalam, Haiti, Iraq, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Nepal,
Oman, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Trinidad and Tobago, Viet Nam, Yemen
The amendment was rejected by 83 votes to 80,
with 18 abstentions.
The President: We shall now proceed to take a
decision on the draft resolution entitled “Report of the
Human Rights Council”, contained in paragraph 14 of
the report of the Third Committee (A/68/451).
13-62485

18/12/2013

I now call on those delegations wishing to speak in
explanations of vote before the voting.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I have the
honour to make this explanation of vote on behalf of
Switzerland, New Zealand, Iceland, Norway and my
own country, Liechtenstein.
The institutional relationship between the Human
Rights Council and the General Assembly has developed
over the years towards a stable arrangement that was
last confirmed in resolution 65/281 on the review of the
Human Rights Council. The arrangement is expressed
in the understanding that
“the Third Committee would consider and act on
all recommendations of the Human Rights Council
to the Assembly, including those that deal with
the development of international law in the field
of human rights, without prejudice to the right of
Member States to present resolutions and decisions
on all issues considered in the report of the Council.
Taking this recommendation into account, the
Assembly, in plenary meeting, would consider the
report of the Council on its activities for the year”
(A/63/250/Add.1, para. 3).
By singling out in the Third Committee a specific
resolution of the Human Rights Council that does not
contain a recommendation, the main sponsors of the
draft text before us have violated that understanding.
Our delegations therefore supported the amendment to
the draft resolution presented to the Third Committee
and today in plenary. We would also like to express
our disappointment that the main sponsors have not
consulted the membership on the draft resolution
which, for the first time, is of a substantive nature and
raises issues of institutional importance. All States
should have had an opportunity to consider and discuss
the draft text. It is disappointment that there was no
response to constructive attempts to find a consensual
agreement on the matter in the framework of the Third
Committee.
For the foregoing substantive and procedural
reasons, our delegations will, at this point, oppose the
draft resolution before us.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and its member
States. Our concern with additional elements in the
draft resolution are well known and shared by a broad
range of colleagues across regions. We have continued
to work tirelessly and sincerely to reach out to the main

A/68/PV.70

sponsors of the draft resolution to find a balanced
solution to the concerns on the issue in a manner that
respects the institutional architecture of the United
Nations human rights system, as agreed by all Member
States. We believe that is our shared, long-term goal.
We therefore regret that our efforts to find a balanced
solution could not be achieved and left us with no other
opportunity than to resort to submitting amendments to
address our continuing strong concerns.
It is based on our continuing view that the additional
elements in the draft resolution as it stands disrupt the
established relationship between the Human Rights
Council and the General Assembly, including its Third
Committee. It is a view based on principled support for
the agreement and our intent to ensure a consistent and
well-functioning United Nations human rights system.
As the amendments, which would have restored the text
to the format that was adopted without a vote in 2012,
were not accepted, we encourage all delegations to vote
against the draft resolution.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): Brazil remains fully
committed to the protection of all individuals against
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms
wherever they may be perpetrated. That attitude is
consistently reflected today in national policies and
programmes dealing with the protection of human
rights defenders, threatened victims and witnesses
and endangered children and adolescents. The same
principles we defend at the national level guide us
internationally. Brazil voted in favour of Human Rights
Council resolution 24/24 on reprisals against human
rights defenders and thus reaffirmed its position at the
General Assembly by voting in favour of the amendment
contained in document A/68/L.33.
Our abstention in the Third Committee represented
an expression of the expectation that a consensus might
be reached. That, unfortunately, did not occur. At
the same time, it is of paramount importance that the
process of the creation of the post of a United Nationswide senior focal point be carried out in a transparent
manner and through a comprehensive dialogue with
a view to strengthening the international legitimacy
associated with that new position. Of particular
relevance will be the establishment of a clear mandate
and adequate procedures for accountability.
Brazil acknowledges the systemic implications of
the mandate for a United Nations-wide focal point. For
that reason, we are of the view that it is legitimate for
any Member State to bring the issue to the attention of

13-6248511/30

A/68/PV.70

the General Assembly for its consideration. That should
not be construed as disregard for the institutional
architecture of the United Nations human rights system
nor as an expression of an inferior level of commitment
to the promotion and protection of human rights. On
the contrary, by recognizing the existence of systemic
implications in the case at hand, we will be contributing
to a more balanced and democratic approach to this
specific situation. It is in that spirit that we will abstain
on the draft resolution before us.
Ms. King (Australia): Australia is a strong
supporter of the work of the United Nations to promote
and protect human rights. We consider the Human
Rights Council to be a fundamental part of the United
Nations human rights architecture, and we strongly
believe that preserving its autonomy and expertise is
critical to ensuring its effectiveness. We have been
pleased that over recent years we have been able to
reach consensus on the General Assembly resolution on
the Human Rights Council report. We regret deeply that
has not been the case this year. We particularly regret
that the lack of consensus is due to efforts to defer
implementation of Human Rights Council resolution
24/24 on cooperation with the United Nations, its
representatives and mechanisms in the field of human
rights.
Human Rights Council resolution 24/24 addresses
the critical issue of countering reprisals against those
who cooperate with United Nations mechanisms. We
regard that as a fundamental issue that requires urgent
United Nations attention. It is at the heart of the human
rights functions of the United Nations, namely, to
do what it can to help and protect those individuals
who seek to support its work. Australia believes that
the Human Rights Council’s adoption of resolution
24/24 was within its mandate, and General Assembly
resolution 60/251 establishing the Human Rights
Council makes clear that the Council should promote
the effective coordination and mainstreaming of human
rights within the United Nations system.
Australia has been committed to working with
other States towards a compromise solution to address
the concerns of some States with regard to Human
Rights Council resolution 24/24 in a way that does not
risk eroding the United Nations international human
rights framework. We regret deeply that a compromise
solution was not found. We now look forward to
working with others within the General Assembly to
address issues of concern with resolution 24/24 so

12/30

18/12/2013

that the provisions of that important resolution can be
implemented.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested
on the draft resolution recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 14 of its report.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Chad, China,
Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
13-62485

18/12/2013

Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay
Abstaining:
Armenia, Bahamas, Bahrain, Brazil, Dominica,
Grenada, Haiti, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Jamaica, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia,
Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Samoa, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Vanuatu
The draft resolution was adopted by 94 votes to 71,
with 23 abstentions (resolution 68/144).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Chad informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote against.]
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar, who wishes to speak in
explanation of vote after the voting.
Ms. Al-Mulla (Qatar): I would like to make an
explanation of vote following the adoption of resolution
68/144, on the report of the Human Rights Council
(A/68/451). Let it be noted that the State of Qatar made
the same remarks during its consideration in the Third
Committee. We take this opportunity to reiterate our
position because of the concerning precedent that this
resolution creates.
At the outset of my remarks, allow me to recall
that the State of Qatar supported the African Group’s
stance during the consideration of Human Rights
Council resolution 24/24, at the Council’s twentyfourth session. Our support is grounded in the belief
that, through channels consistent with established
United Nations rules of procedure, Member States
have the right to further discuss subjects of concern to
them. The consideration of resolution 24/24, contained
in the present resolution before us, reopens negotiation
on a resolution already adopted at the Human Rights
Council. Such a practice can consequently undermine
the role of the Human Rights Council. To that end and
as a matter of principle, we chose to abstain on the
adoption of the resolution of the report of the Human
Rights Council.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 64?
It was so decided.

A/68/PV.70

Agenda item 65
Promotion and protection of the rights of children
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights
of children
(b) Follow-up to the outcome of the special session
on children
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/452)
The President: The Assembly has before it four
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 31 of its report, and a draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 32 of
the same report. We will now take a decision on draft
resolutions I, II, III and IV and on the draft decision,
one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Strengthening
collaboration on child protection within the United
Nations system”. The Third Committee adopted the
draft resolution. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 68/145).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled “The
girl child”. The Third Committee adopted the draft
resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 68/146).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Rights of the child”. The Third Committee adopted
the draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
68/147).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Child, early and forced marriage”. The Third
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 68/148).
The President: We shall now turn to paragraph
32 of the report to take action on the draft decision
entitled “Reports considered by the General Assembly
in connection with the question of the promotion and
protection of the rights of children”. May I take it that it
is the wish of the Assembly to adopt the draft decision
recommended by the Third Committee?

13-6248513/30

A/68/PV.70

The draft decision was adopted (draft decision
68/533).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 65 and its sub-items (a) and (b)?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 66
Rights of indigenous peoples
(a) Rights of indigenous peoples
(b) Second International Decade of the World’s
Indigenous People
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/453)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 11 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Third Committee adopted
the draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
68/149).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 66 and its sub-items (a) and (b)?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 67
Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up
to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/454)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 22 of its report, and one draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 23 of
the same report. We will now take a decision on draft
resolutions I and II and on the draft decision, one by
one.

14/30

18/12/2013

We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Combating glorification of Nazism and other practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Kiribati, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, El Salvador,
13-62485

18/12/2013

Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution I was adopted by 135 votes to 4,
with 51 abstentions (resolution 68/150).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution
II, entitled “Global efforts for the total elimination of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of
and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad

A/68/PV.70

and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, France,
Germany, Israel, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kiribati,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine
Draft resolution II was adopted by 134 votes to 11,
with 46 abstentions (resolution 68/151).
The President: We turn now to the draft decision,
entitled “Documents considered by the General
Assembly in connection with the elimination of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance”. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt the draft decision, as
recommended by the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 68/534).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 67?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 67.
Agenda item 68
Right of peoples to self-determination
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/455)
The President: The Assembly has before it
three draft resolutions recommended by the Third

13-6248515/30

A/68/PV.70

Committee in paragraph 20 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I to III, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Use of mercenaries
as a means of violating human rights and impeding the
exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
16/30

18/12/2013

(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Colombia, Kenya, Liberia, Mali, Mauritania,
Mexico, Switzerland, Tonga
Draft resolution I was adopted by 128 votes to 55,
with 8 abstentions (resolution 68/152).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Universal realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination”. The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution II. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 68/153).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution
III, entitled “The right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,

13-62485

18/12/2013

Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Paraguay, Tonga, Vanuatu
Draft resolution III was adopted by 178 votes to 7,
with 4 abstentions (resolution 68/154).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 68?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 69
Promotion and protection of human rights
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/456/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it three
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 20 of its report. Before proceeding further,
I should like to inform members that action on draft
resolution I, entitled “Human Rights Committee”, is
postponed to a later date to allow time for the review

A/68/PV.70

of its programme budget implications by the Fifth
Committee. The Assembly will take action on draft
resolution I as soon as the report of the Fifth Committee
on its programme budget implications is available.
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions II
and III, one by one.
Draft resolution II is entitled “International
covenants on human rights”. The Third Committee
adopted the draft resolution. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 68/155).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment”. The Third Committee
adopted the draft resolution. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
68/156).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 69?
It was so decided.
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/456/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it 26 draft
resolutions recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 146 of its report. Before proceeding further,
I should like to inform members that action on draft
resolution XVII, entitled “United Nations Human
Rights Training and Documentation Centre for SouthWest Asia and the Arab Region” is postponed until a
later date to allow time for the review of its programme
budget implications by the Fifth Committee. The
Assembly will take action on draft resolution XVII
as soon as the report of the Fifth Committee on its
programme budget implications is available.
We will now take decisions on draft resolutions I
to XVI and XVIII to XXVI, one by one. After all the
decisions have been taken, representatives will again
have an opportunity to explain their votes or positions.
We now turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “The
human right to safe drinking water and sanitation”. The

13-6248517/30

A/68/PV.70

Third Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 68/157).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution II,
entitled “The right to development”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Portugal, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe

18/30

18/12/2013

Against:
Canada, Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Japan,
Latvia, Lithuania, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, Slovakia, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine
Draft resolution II was adopted by 158 votes to
4, with 28 abstentions (resolution 68/158).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution
III, entitled “Human rights and cultural diversity”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,

13-62485

18/12/2013

Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
None
Draft resolution III was adopted by 136 votes to 54
(resolution 68/159).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Enhancement of international cooperation in the field
of human rights”. The Third Committee adopted the
draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 68/160).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution
V, entitled “Promotion of equitable geographical
distribution in the membership of the human rights
treaty bodies”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,

A/68/PV.70

Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Chile
Draft resolution V was adopted by 135 votes to 54
votes, with 1 abstention (resolution 68/161).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution
VI entitled “Human rights and unilateral coercive
measures”. A recorded vote has been requested.

13-6248519/30

A/68/PV.70

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,

20/30

18/12/2013

Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
None
Draft resolution VI was adopted by 135 votes to 55,
with 0 abstentions (resolution 68/162).
The President: Draft resolution VII is entitled
”The safety of journalists and the issue of impunity”.
The Third Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution
68/163).
The President: Draft resolution VIII is entitled
“Strenghtening the role of the United Nations in
enhancing periodic and genuine elections and the
promotion of democratization”. The Third Committee
adopted the draft resolution. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution VIII was adopted (resolution
68/164).
The President: Draft resolution IX is entitled
“Right to the truth”. The Third Committee adopted the
draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IX was adopted (resolution
68/165).
The President: Draft resolution X is entitled
“Internationl Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance”. The Third
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution X was adopted (resolution 68/166).
The President: Draft resolution XI is entitled
”The right to privacy in the digital age”. The Third
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XI was adopted (resolution
68/167).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution
XII, entitled ”Globalization and its impact on the full

13-62485

18/12/2013

enjoyment of all human rights”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland,

A/68/PV.70

Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
None
Draft resolution XII was adopted by 136 votes to 55
(resolution 68/168).
The President: Draft resolution XIII is entitled
“Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping,
stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence
and violence against persons, based on religion or
belief.” The Third Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XIII was adopted (resolution
68/169).
The President: Draft resolution XIV is entitled
”Freedom of religion or belief”. The Third Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XIV was adopted (resolution
68/170).
The President: Draft resolution XV is entitled
“National institutions for the promotion and protection
of human rights”. The Third Committee adopted the
draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XV was adopted (resolution
68/171).
The President: Draft resolution XVI is entitled
“Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of
Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and
Linguistic Minorities”. The Third Committee adopted
the draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XVI was adopted (resolution
68/172).
The President: Draft resolution XVIII is entitled
“Follow-up to the International Year of Human Rights
Learning”. The Third Committee adopted the draft
resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?

13-6248521/30

A/68/PV.70

Draft resolution XVIII was adopted (resolution
68/173).
The President: Draft resolution XIX is entitled
“Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy
in Central Africa”. The Third Committee adopted the
draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution XIX was adopted (resolution
68/174).
The President: Draft resolution XX is entitled
“Promotion of a democratic and equitable international
order”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
22/30

18/12/2013

Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Chile, Costa Rica, Mexico, Palau, Peru, Samoa
Draft resolution XX was adopted by 132 votes to
52, with 6 abstentions (resolution 68/175).
The President: Draft resolution XXI is entitled
“Strengthening United Nations action in the field of
human rights through the promotion of international
cooperation and the importance of non-selectivity,
impartiality and objectivity”. The Third Committee
adopted the draft resolution. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XXI was adopted (resolution
68/176).
The President: Draft resolution XXII is entitled
“The right to food”. The Third Committee adopted the
draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution XXII was adopted (resolution
68/177).
The President: Draft resolution XXIII is entitled
“Protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism”. The Third Committee
adopted the draft resolution. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XXIII was adopted (resolution
68/178).
The President: Draft resolution XXIV is entitled
“Protection of migrants”. The Third Committee adopted
the draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?

13-62485

18/12/2013

A/68/PV.70

Draft resolution XXIV was adopted (resolution
68/179).

report of the Third Committee contained in document
A/68/456/Add.3.

The President: Draft resolution XXV is entitled
“Protection of and assistance to internally displaced
persons”. The Third Committee adopted the draft
resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?

Permit me on this occasion to remind members
that the international legal framework within which
Member States operate is based on the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of States under
any pretext. That principle has been consecrated
in many international instruments and resolutions,
in particular the Charter of the United Nations.
Accordingly, the introduction of such politicized
draft resolutions targeting specific States violates the
provisions of the Charter in general and impedes a
peaceful political resolution to the Syrian crisis. That
is all the more so given the fact that such a solution
hinges on a comprehensive national dialogue among
Syrians, in accordance with their will and free from
any external interference. Such a draft resolution would
encourage the continuation of armed violence, killing
and the shedding of Syrian blood, thereby serving the
agendas of specific States that are trying hard to bring
about the failure of the “Geneva II” conference.

Draft resolution XXV was adopted (resolution
68/180).
The President: Draft resolution XXVI is entitled
“Promotion of the Declaration on the Right and
Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of
Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms: protecting
women human rights defenders”. The Third Committee
adopted the draft resolution. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XXVI was adopted (resolution
68/181).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 69.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/456/Add.3)
The President: The Assembly has before it four
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 27 of its report.
Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members that action on draft resolution II, entitled
“Situation of human rights in Myanmar”, is postponed to
a later date to allow time for the review of its programme
budget implications by the Fifth Committee. The
Assembly will take action on draft resolution II as soon
as the report of the Fifth Committee on its programme
budget implications is available.
I shall now give the floor to representatives who
wish to speak in explanation of vote or position before
we take action on the draft resolutions.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to make the following
statement in explanation of vote before the voting on
draft resolution I, entitled “Situation of human rights
in the Syrian Arab Republic”, which was introduced in
the context of sub-item (c) of agenda item 69 and the

The reality of events in Syria is no secret; nor is the
outrageousness and enormity of the crimes perpetrated
against the Syrian people by armed terrorist groups
connected with Al-Qaida. Those groups were brought in
by the Saudi regime with the assistance of Governments
representing more than 83 States — most of them
Islamic, Arab or Western countries that are sponsors
of this outrageously hostile, politicized and politically
driven draft resolution. That has been clear from the
fact that a number of States are hastening to review
their policies vis-à-vis the Syrian crisis with a view
to rectifying the egregious mistakes they perpetrated
against our people and to clean up their international
profile for fear of being held accountable to their people
and to history for their misdirected policies with regard
to the Syrian crisis.
It is the height of cynicism and frivolity that the
Saudi regime, which epitomizes the violation of human
rights of its people, Arabs and Muslims, is sponsoring
the draft resolution before us. The Saudi regime is a
principal source of fundamentalist and Takfiri terrorism
in States across the world, beginning with Afghanistan
in the 1980s. It is also linked to the 11 September event
in New York and with attacks in London, Madrid, Paris,
various Arab capitals and the African Sahel.
Saudi Arabia is presenting a draft resolution
calling for protection of the human rights of the Syrians
at a time when its regime is interfering overtly and

13-6248523/30

A/68/PV.70

with impunity in the internal affairs of my country,
fanning the flames of hatred and preventing Syrians
from finding a peaceful political solution to the crisis
themselves. In that regard, I would like to quote the
statement made yesterday by the Saudi Ambassador to
the United Kingdom, which appeared in The New York
Times.
(spoke in English)
“We continue to show our determination
through our support for the Free Syrian Army and
the Syrian opposition. It is too easy for some in
the West to use the threat of Al Qaeda’s terrorist
operations in Syria as an excuse for hesitation and
inaction.
“The way to prevent the rise of extremism
in Syria — and elsewhere — is to support the
champions of moderation: financially, materially
and yes, militarily, if necessary.” (The New York
Times, 17 December 2013)
(spoke in Arabic)
The Saudi Ambassador and his regime are of the
view that extending financial and training support to
terrorists — those who destroy churches, abduct monks
and nuns and kill Syrians — should continue. That is
what the Saudi Ambassador to the United Kingdom
said in his statement in The New York Times.
The Saudi regime finances and backs every sort of
sanctuary for terrorism throughout the world. The Saudi
financing of, and complicity with, terrorism is better
documented by the international and Western media
than by Syria’s media. Rather than apologizing to our
people and Government for its support for terrorism,
for killing innocent people and for committing abuses
that threaten international peace and security, the
Saudi regime persists in dispatching Al-Qaida terrorist
operatives to my country. The Saudi position will only
lead to the proliferation of terrorism and its evils inside
Saudi Arabia itself. It will also lead to continuous
violations of human rights in Syria by the armed
Takfiri terrorist groups that are financed and supported
by the foolhardy Saudi regime, causing harm to Syrian
villages and citizens.
As I address the General Assembly right now,
Takfiri groups are invading the workers’ city of Adra,
which is inhabited by 70,000 simple workers employed
in 600 laboratories and factories. The most horrendous
crimes are being committed against them — they are

24/30

18/12/2013

being slaughtered, burned alive in furnaces and subject
to decapitation in the countryside, with promises of
similar treatment for those who support the victims.
This sectarian rebellion is being fuelled by ignorant
messages being spread by the religious leaders.
Why is there so much reticence with respect to
the Saudi-Qatari terrorist hysteria? Why is there this
unwarranted silence by the international community
with regard to the Turkish, Saudi and Qatari regimes’
sponsorship of terrorism in my country? I wonder
whether, for members of NATO such as Turkey, the
smell of oil and gas attracting interests to Saudi Arabia
and Qatar will justify turning a blind eye to the crimes
committed by those regimes in Syria.
The Assembly has heard about the killing of more
than 100,000 in Syria; yet the Saudis, Turks and Qataris
do not talk about the reason for that painful number of
deaths. The Assembly will not hear about who killed
them and how they were killed. The Assembly will
not hear about the number of those who were killed
with cold steel as the result of abominable sectarian
strife, or about the number of victims killed by suicide
explosions and car bombs. Nobody will explain to the
Assembly where the Takfiri mercenary training camps
are located and who is in charge of them.
In conclusion, my delegation has requested a
recorded vote on draft resolution I. We urge Member
States to reconsider their votes and call on them to vote
against the draft resolution in order to avoid being drawn
into the web of illusions that the sponsor countries seek
to falsely plant in the global consciousness, in a bid
to divert attention from their inhuman, immoral and
illegal practices.
Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): My delegation firmly believes that all human
rights issues should be addressed through the Universal
Periodic Review mechanism, rather than in plenary
meeting, especially given that country-specific draft
resolutions clearly run counter to the principles of
impartiality and non-selectivity with respect to human
rights.
Draft resolution I, contained in document A/68/456/
Add.3, can have no impact on the human rights
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, since the alleged
human rights violations are the consequence of political
considerations. My delegation believes that human
rights cannot be imposed from outside. Accordingly,
my delegation will vote against the draft resolution.

13-62485

18/12/2013

A/68/PV.70

Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I take
the floor to once more enumerate the reasons for which
we believe that delegations should vote against draft
resolution IV, contained in document A/68/456/Add.3,
entitled “Situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran”. The reasons are as follows.

I am aware that the consideration of draft resolution
II has been postponed, but I wonder when we are going
to finish our consideration of the situation in Myanmar.
This is another example of initiating a politically
motivated draft resolution that never comes to an end,
irrespective of changes in the situation on the ground.

First, the draft resolution does not correspond to the
actual situation on the ground, as it does not take into
consideration the development of human rights in Iran
and ignores all the cooperation that Iran has extended.

Turning the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, we distanced ourselves from the consensus in
the Third Committee, and I should like to reiterate
Cuba’s position with regard to draft resolution III.

Secondly, it is imbalanced, as it either exaggerates
or distorts the real course of events in my country. As
a result, it will fail to be effective or bring about any
outcome.

The same is true with regard to the Islamic Republic
of Iran. We are going to vote against draft resolution IV.
Again, we believe that the draft text does not help to
meet the needs of any of the various countries in terms
of human rights. Iran, like the other two countries
under consideration, cooperates with the Human Rights
Council via the Universal Periodic Review. A number
of important developments have taken place in the
Islamic Republic of Iran that the draft text does not take
into account. Cuba will therefore vote against the draft
resolution.

Thirdly, it is based on a misguided and erroneous
approach that is selective, discriminatory and punitive.
Experience shows that such an approach has led nowhere.
It is damaging because it undermines and discredits the
United Nations human rights mechanisms.
Fourthly, does not seek to encourage cooperation
in the field of human rights and is thereby
counterproductive and fails to encourage meaningful
engagement with the United Nations human rights
mechanisms and bilateral human rights dialogue based
on mutual respect and understanding.
Fifthly and finally, since political objectives
are paramount among the main sponsors of the draft
resolution, it does not add any value to the lofty goals
that human rights seek to advance.
Taking that into consideration, we hope that
delegations will vote against draft resolution IV.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to express Cuba’s position
regarding the various draft resolutions.
With regard to Syria, we will vote against draft
resolution I. We believe that we are not really promoting
dialogue and reconciliation, which are necessary in
the quest for a peaceful and inclusive way out of the
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, by continuing
this exercise — one that involves a draft text that
does not genuinely respond to the situation on the
ground. I believe that dialogue and compromise are the
only solutions that will enable us to find a peaceful,
negotiated solution to the situation that has been
imposed upon the Syrian Arab Republic.

The President: We will now take a decision on
draft resolutions I, III and IV, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Situation of human
rights in the Syrian Arab Republic.” A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Latvia, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,

13-6248525/30

A/68/PV.70

Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Yemen
Against:
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Ecuador, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Nicaragua,
Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cabo
Verde, Chad, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Ghana, Guyana, India, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Mali, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Philippines, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Singapore, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Tajikistan, Togo, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia
Draft resolution I was adopted by 127 votes to 13,
with 47 abstentions (resolution 68/182).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea”. The Third Committee adopted the
draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
68/183).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran.” A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

26/30

18/12/2013

In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Vanuatu
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Armenia, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei
Darussalam, Burundi, Cambodia, China, Cuba,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Benin,
Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria,
Philippines, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South
Africa, Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand, Togo,

13-62485

18/12/2013

Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Yemen, Zambia
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 86 votes to 36,
with 61 abstentions (resolution 68/184).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to vote against.]
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote or position on the resolutions just adopted.
Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): My delegation takes the floor to clarify its
position in total rejection of resolution 68/183, entitled
“Situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea,” and to disassociate itself from its
adoption.
There are no human rights violations in my country
as mentioned in the resolution. My delegation firmly
believes that all human rights issues must be treated
under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism, which
is fully operational, rather than in plenary meeting of
the General Assembly. The adoption of the resolution
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
will result in the further deterioration of the political
situation in the already deadlocked dialogue between
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
European Union. It will also escalate the dangerous
situation on the Korean peninsula, since the resolution
is only the product of the hostile policy of the United
Nations against the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to overthrow our political and social system.
The main sponsors of the resolution are those
countries that committed human rights violations by
invading sovereign States and undertook the mass
killing of innocent people in Iraq and Afghanistan,
doing so by disguising their actions as a war on terror
and humanitarian intervention. Before criticizing
the human rights situations of other countries, they
should reflect on the human rights records in their own
countries.
Moreover, the information contained in the
resolution is a full fabrication, cooked up by hostile
forces through so-called defectors from the North. We
cannot overlook the fact that the South Korean authorities
mean to use defectors as a tool of human rights against
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The South
Korean authorities must immediately stop luring and

A/68/PV.70

abducting citizens of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. If South Korea is really interested in human
rights, as a sponsor of the resolution they must abolish
the anti-human-rights national security law that defines
compatriots of the same blood as an enemies to be
eliminated by any means. Under that law, any person
having contact and communication with the North
will be the subject of a crackdown, and persons who
demand the democratization of their society and talk
about national reunification are sent to prison. Such is
the real human rights situation in South Korea.
Finally, my delegation once again fully rejects this
resolution and disassociates itself from its adoption.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China maintains its consistent position on countryspecific resolutions on human rights. We oppose the
adoption of such resolutions. We believe that human
rights can be promoted and protected only through
constructive dialogue and cooperation. On the basis of
that principled position, we voted against the countryspecific resolutions concerning Syria and Iran.
I reiterate our position, as stated in the Third
Committee, on resolution 68/183, on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. We did not participate in
the consensus.
Ms. Belskaya (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Belarus
would like to reiterate its position with regard to the
unacceptability of country-specific resolutions as a
means of exerting political pressure against sovereign
States. For that reason, we voted against resolutions
68/182 and 68/184, on the human rights situations in
the Syrian Arab Republic and the Islamic Republic
of Iran, respectively. For the same reason, we would
like to disassociate ourselves from the consensus on
resolution 68/183, on the situation of human rights in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(c) of agenda item 69?
It was so decided.
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and
follow-up to the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/456/Add.4)
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to take note of the report of the Third Committee?

13-6248527/30

A/68/PV.70

It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(d) of agenda item 69?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 69 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/456)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
decision recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 5 of its report. We will now take action on
the draft decision, entitled “Documents considered by
the General Assembly in connection with the question
of the promotion and protection of human rights”. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft
decision as recommended by the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 68/536).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 69.
Agenda item 108
Crime prevention and criminal justice
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/457)
The President: The Assembly has before it 11 draft
resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 47 of its report, and one draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 48 of
the same report. We will now take a decision on draft
resolutions I to XI and on the draft decision, one by
one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Follow-up to the
Twelfth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice and preparations for the Thirteenth
United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice”. The Third Committee adopted the
draft resolution. May I take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 68/185).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Strengthening crime prevention and criminal justice
responses to protect cultural property, especially with
regard to its trafficking”. The Third Committee adopted

28/30

18/12/2013

the draft resolution. May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 68/186).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Technical assistance for implementing the international
conventions and protocols related to counter-terrorism”.
The Third Committee adopted the draft resolution.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to do
likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
68/187).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled “The
rule of law, crime prevention and criminal justice in the
United Nations development agenda beyond 2015”. The
Third Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I
take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 68/188).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Model strategies and practical measures on the
elimination of violence against children in the field
of crime prevention and criminal justice”. The Third
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that it is the wish of the Assembly to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 68/189).
The President: Draft resolution VI is entitled
“Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
Prisoners”. The Third Committee adopted the draft
resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution
68/190).
The President: Draft resolution VII is entitled
“Taking action against gender-related killing of women
and girls”. The Third Committee adopted the draft
resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution
68/191).
The President: Draft resolution VIII is entitled
“Improving the coordination of efforts against
trafficking in persons”. The Third Committee adopted
the draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?

13-62485

18/12/2013

Draft resolution VIII was adopted (resolution
68/192).
The President: Draft resolution IX is entitled
“Strengthening the United Nations crime prevention
and criminal justice programme, in particular its
technical cooperation capacity”. The Third Committee
adopted the draft resolution. May I take it that it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IX was adopted (resolution 68/193).
The President: Draft resolution X is entitled
“United Nations African Institute for the Prevention
of Crime and Treatment of Offenders”. The Third
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution X was adopted (resolution 68/194).
The President: Draft resolution XI is entitled
“Preventing and combating corrupt practices and the
transfer of proceeds of corruption, facilitating asset
recovery and returning such assets to legitimate owners,
in particular to countries of origin, in accordance with
the United Nations Convention against Corruption”.
The Third Committee adopted the draft resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XI was adopted (resolution
68/195).
The President: We will now take action on the
draft decision, entitled “Reports considered by the
General Assembly in connection with the question of
crime prevention and criminal justice”. May I take it
that it is the wish of the Assembly to adopt the draft
decision, as recommended by the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 68/537).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 108?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 109
International drug control
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/458)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 11 of its report. We will now take a decision
on draft decisions I and II, one by one.

A/68/PV.70

Draft resolution I is entitled “United Nations
Guiding Principles on Alternative Development”. The
Third Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 68/196).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“International cooperation against the world drug
problem”. The Third Committee adopted the draft
resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 68/197).
The President: May I take it that is is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 109?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/486)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 5 of its report. We will now take action
on the draft decision, entitled “Programme of work of
the Third Committee for the sixty-ninth session of the
General Assembly.” May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt the draft decision, as recommended by
the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 68/538).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
122.
Agenda item 135 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Third Committee (A/68/459)
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to take note of the report of the Third Committee?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 135.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I would like
to thank the Permanent Representative of Bulgaria,

13-6248529/30

A/68/PV.70

Ambassador Tafrov, and Chair of the Third Committee,
the members of the Bureau, the Secretary of the
Committee, as well as all representatives for a job well
done.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Third Committee
before it today, with the exception of documents

30/30

18/12/2013

A/68/456/Add.1, A/68/456/Add.2 and A/68/456/
Add.3, concerning draft resolutions I, XVII and II,
respectively. As noted earlier, the Assembly will take
action on those draft resolutions as soon as the reports
of the Fifth Committee on their programme budget
implications are available.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

13-62485
