S/PV.8661

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8661st meeting

Wednesday, 6 November 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Allen/Mr. Clay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Asumu Abeme
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Ugarelli
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Barkin

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Police Commissioners

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-35473 (E)
*1935473*

S/PV.8661

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

This annual briefing serves as an opportunity
to reaffirm the vital role that United Nations police
(UNPOL) play in peace operations and to reflect on the
ways in which we might better support their essential
work, from conflict prevention to peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Police Commissioners
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General
for Peace Operations; Ms. Marie-Joseph Fitah-Kona,
Adviser to the Mayor of the Third Arrondissement of
Bangui; Mr. Awale Abdounasir, Police Commissioner of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; Ms. Mary
Gahonzire, Police Commissioner of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei; and Mr. Issoufou
Yacouba, Police Commissioner of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali. I offer my apologies to all of them for
any mispronunciations.
Ms. Fitah-Kona is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Bangui.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

The intention of this meeting is for us to be as
interactive as we were during the same briefing in
November 2018 (see S/PV.8393) and as we try to be
during our dialogue with the Force Commanders. We
are looking forward to questions from Council members
to the Commissioners, and from the Commissioners
to the Council, which is why I am going to ask my
Council colleagues to show excessive discipline and
keep their statements brief so as to give more time to
the Commissioners to respond. I would therefore also
ask our briefers to try to be as brief as possible.
Setting the tone will be Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, to
whom I give the floor.
Mr. Lacroix: Thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this briefing on the strategic priorities of
United Nations police components in peace operations.
I am pleased to be joined by our Police Commissioners
currently serving in Abyei, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Mali.
2/28

06/11/2019

In 2018, the Secretary-General launched the
Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative, calling on all
stakeholders to collectively address the challenges facing
peacekeeping and to renew their collective engagement.
I thank everyone — police, troop and financial
contributors, members of the General Assembly and
the Security Council — for supporting A4P. Today I
will highlight some of what we have achieved through
ongoing efforts to reinforce peacekeeping, as well
as those areas that require progress. I also welcome
Member States’ plans for advancing the A4P agenda.
While the overall number of peacekeepers has
decreased in recent years as a result of the closure of some
of our missions that have completed their mandates,
the role of police in peacekeeping is likely to grow in
the near future. In fact, our missions are increasingly
faced with challenges that call for a response that the
United Nations police is particularly well placed to
provide, including the challenge of dealing with high
concentrations of the population, whether it be in urban
areas or internally displaced persons camps, the need
to respond to such emerging challenges and threats as
organized crime and international terrorism, and the
need to build the national capacities of host States,
particularly in the area of the rule of law.
I would like to pay tribute to our dedicated men
and women serving in UNPOL, both at Headquarters
and, particularly, the field, often in very difficult and
challenging conditions.
Partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations, as well as across the United Nations
system, are critical in every area of our work and
particularly in facilitating transitions. In Darfur, we
are collaborating closely with the African Union to plan
for the transition and exit of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) with a
view to sustaining gains and preventing a relapse into
conflict. UNAMID and the United Nations country
team have pioneered a unique approach to jointly
deliver programmatic activities in four states, through
state-liaison functions in three key areas, namely, the
rule of law, durable solutions, resilience and livelihoods,
19-35473

06/11/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and human rights. The role of United Nations police
in ensuring the delivery of the mandated activities of
the state-liaison function is critical, particularly with
regard to UNAMID’s efforts to strengthen rule of
law capacities.
In Mali, police of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali are contributing to building key national rule of
law capacities and are partnering in that effort with
other stakeholders, such as the European Union.
Protection is also one of the key roles of United
Nations police, in close cooperation with our civilian
and military colleagues. In Abyei, protection
committees have been established to fill the void in
the absence of a functioning police service. Owing to
increased crime, the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei police component has started to
expand those committees, particularly among women.
A total of 172 members of joint protection companies,
including 18 women, have received basic training
from UNPOL to provide law and order in the Amiet
common market. Commissioner Gahonzire will brief
the Council on the community protection committee
concept in more detail.
Our efforts to enhance performance are guided
by the provisions of resolution 2436 (2018). We have
made significant progress in that regard, including by
strengthening internal evaluations as a core element
of the action plan to improve the safety and security
of United Nations peacekeepers. Since January
2018, we have undertaken over 40 assessments of
operational readiness visits. The evaluations of our
police commissioners give us a comprehensive view of
strength, capacities and limitations and allow us to make
more informed selection decisions through monthly
performance meetings, which I chair. The roll-out of
the comprehensive performance assessment system
(CPAS) in five missions provides a platform to assess
the overall performance of our components, including
that of police components. What we have seen so far is
that CPAS has strengthened unity of purpose and crosscomponent planning, while enhancing data collection.
We are also revising our approach to training.
A new curriculum based on the Strategic Guidance
Framework for International Police Peacekeeping will
enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of all UNPOL
activities in the field. To oversee those efforts, the
Police Division has created a task force to address the

S/PV. 8661

needs of our police officers across the spectrum, from
predeployment assessment and training to in-mission
and specialized training to post-duty care.
Increasing the number of women peacekeepers
means making peacekeeping more effective. To date,
we have met our targets for the percentage of women
peacekeepers deployed as individual officers and as
part of formed units, which stands at 26.8 per cent and
10.9 per cent, respectively. As the targets are baselines
not ceilings, more work remains to be done. I therefore
call on police-contributing countries to redouble their
efforts to deploy more women. I would like to pay
tribute to Major Diouf from Senegal, currently serving
in the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, who
was awarded the title of female police officer of the
year yesterday. Her dedication and commitment are an
inspiration to all of us and, most certainly, to her fellow
female police officers, as well as to the vulnerable
women she is helping every day.
We all know that the whole of United Nations
peacekeeping is undermined when our standards of
conduct are violated, especially when it comes to sexual
exploitation and abuse. I am therefore pleased to report
that we have seen a steady downward trend in claims of
sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping, from 104
claims in 2016 to 55 in 2018. Our continued vigilance
remains essential, and we rely on the full cooperation of
all troop- and police-contributing countries to advance
our goal of fully implementing a zero-tolerance policy.
In conclusion, while much progress has been made
through the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative
on making peacekeeping, including United Nations
police, fit for the challenges we face, we are still at
the start of the journey and we cannot go it alone. For
our part, I commit to reinforcing our efforts to support
political processes, enhance our performance and
make peacekeeping missions stronger and safer. By
aligning our reporting with the A4P agenda, we aim to
provide clearer, more consistent information to inform
decision-making by our Member States. UNPOL is
fully committed to our collective effort to improve the
performance and impact of peace operations. Allow
me to reiterate that we are grateful for Member States’
ongoing commitment to our work in all areas of A4P,
and in particular for the support provided to United
Nations police. I trust that we can continue to count on
that support.

19-354733/28

S/PV.8661

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Fitah-Kona.
Ms. Fitah-Kona (spoke in French): My name is
Marie-Joseph Fitah-Kona, from the Central African
Republic. I am proud and very honoured to brief the
Security Council, and I thank Mr. Luís Carrilho for
his invitation.
I am an adviser to the Mayor of the third
arrondissement of Bangui, which is rightly considered
as the most sensitive in the city, and perhaps even the
whole country. I also hold positions in various groups
in the district, specifically for the benefit of women, the
Red Cross and religious associations. Through those
various positions, but also as a resident and citizen
of Bangui, I have been able to observe first-hand the
changes in the security and humanitarian situation
for many years. The changes have been positive,
and the efforts of the police of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) have
been instrumental.
In order for the Council to better understand, I
must recall what the situation in Bangui was like just a
few years ago. In late 2012, early 2013, the country was
plunged into considerable chaos and complete insecurity.
MINUSCA arrived in September 2014 and we very
quickly felt an improvement in Bangui thanks to the
work of the formed police units. Through MINUSCA’s
efforts, significant progress was observed within a
short time. For example, free movement resumed in
the district with the signing of a non-aggression pact
in 2015, schools were reopened, as was the hospital,
although its resources remain limited, trade resumed,
the police station reopened its doors and public services
and intercommunal activities gradually resumed.
As a woman and a mother, I am very grateful for
the communication and awareness-raising work that is
being done on violence against women and on forms
of sexual exploitation and abuse. There are still too
many victims, some of them very young, and that is
unbearable. Impunity must end.
I take this opportunity to thank the Secretary
General for his action during his visit to the PK5
neighbourhood in October 2017. He enabled the
rehabilitation of the community centre, which today
plays a very important role in strengthening social and
intercommunal cohesion.
4/28

06/11/2019

Other current projects are very promising and
have been developed in close collaboration with
local elected representatives, of which I am one. In
accordance with the wishes of the population, thanks
to United Nations police (UNPOL), the police station
in the third arrondissement reopened its doors to the
public on 28 October and MINUSCA police officers
patrol the neighbourhood based on the principle of
community policing to gradually regain the confidence
of the population. To that end, all the actors were able to
sit around a table and jointly develop the project, with
support from UNPOL, something that was not possible
until recently.
The first steps of the new team, including three
women, are very promising, while tangible results
have already been observed. For instance, dialogue
has resumed between representatives of the various
armed or self-defence groups, and the various religious
communities are coexisting better and are even carrying
out some joint activities. However, some challenges
remain in the country. The peace agreements are not
being implemented as fast as hoped, and there are far
too many weapons in circulation, particularly in the
PK5 neighbourhood.
In conclusion, I thank the Council for the support
it has provided to my country, but I would also like to
emphasize how vital it is for that assistance to continue
to be provided. The political balance is fragile, and the
population has high hopes for the upcoming elections.
I know that United Nations police are already working
hard in that area. We welcome the recruitment of
1,000 police officers and gendarmes, who will soon
be arriving to support our forces in order to secure the
electoral process. We must not be abandoned, because
the situation is still far too fragile. I count on the
support of the Council to help us bring lasting peace
to the Central African Republic. Please help us so
that peace can be fully restored in the Central African
Republic. Help us.
The President: I thank Ms. Fitah-Kona for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Abdounasir.
Mr. Abdounasir (spoke in French): It is an honour
for me, on the occasion of the fourteenth United
Nations Police Week, to use this opportunity to speak
to the Security Council about the prime importance of
political solutions in our efforts to prevent and combat
organized crime.
19-35473

06/11/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Organized crime has become an international
scourge that threatens the stability of many countries
around the world, thereby undermining international
peace and security. The international community has
always mobilized its efforts to ease the suffering of
affected countries by deploying peacekeeping missions.
Through the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), the United Nations has articulated its
efforts to assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in better combating organized crime and the militant
actions of armed groups. MONUSCO police have
developed strategies to prevent and combat organized
crime in order to provide support to the Congolese
national police and local populations in that process.
The role of national law enforcement institutions is
paramount in preventing and combating armed groups
and organized criminal groups. We must therefore
seek out relevant national and subregional political
will and ensure that it is supported by a very strong
regional intelligence network and an international
commitment to combating organized crime. Given
that criminal networks operate in complex ways and
are connected by cross-border links, an obligation to
bring perpetrators to justice would clearly strengthen
the authority of States to advance unity with regard to
achieving social progress. Given that good governance
is a collective responsibility, the rule of law remains
a prerequisite for the development of fragile States.
In order to overcome their instability, most countries
affected by organized crime have developed a strong
tendency to respond to it with military action when
it would be more appropriate for them to strengthen
their judicial systems by integrating into their law
enforcement structures a more transparent and rigorous
criminal justice system.
If we are to combat organized crime effectively
and holistically, we must place political action at the
forefront of our efforts. The ultimate solution lies not
in a military-based approach, which has been quick to
reveal its limitations, but rather in promoting sustainable
political solutions, combating bad governance and
guaranteeing an operational and accessible criminal
justice system — notwithstanding the need to increase
transparency in the management of public affairs. I
remain strongly convinced that, if we strengthen the
operational capacities of the Congolese national police
and put forth a substantial plan to reform the judicial
and penal systems in that country, we will ensure good

S/PV. 8661

governance in a context that is conducive to effectively
combating organized crime. In that connection, I
also welcome the fact that the Security Council has
consistently kept the issue of restoring State authority
through the strengthening of criminal justice systems
among the priority objectives of its various mandates.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Council for its efforts in promoting and consolidating
peace in fragile countries.
The President: I thank Mr. Abdounasir for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Gahonzire.
Ms. Gahonzire: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council.
The 2011 Agreement between the Government of
the Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement
on Temporary Arrangements for the Administration
and Security of the Abyei Area provided for temporary
administrative arrangements for Abyei and the
consequent deployment of an interim security force
in Abyei. Both parties requested the African Union
and United Nations to support that agreement and its
implementation. Resolution 1990 (2011) then established
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). The United Nations police (UNPOL)
component was mandated to strengthen the capacity
of the Abyei Police Service, including by training the
personnel of the Abyei Police Service and coordinating
with it on law and order.
Since the signing of the Agreement, both parties
have had difficulties implementing it because South
Sudan does not agree to the establishment of a joint
administration or joint security forces in Abyei and
claims that the Agreement expired after the initial
six-month period. The Sudan only supports the
establishment of a joint administration in Abyei and
the establishment of the Abyei Police Service. Little
progress has been made in implementing outstanding
commitments agreed upon by the parties in the 20 June
2011 Agreement, such as the establishment of the
Abyei Police Service, the additional deployment of
UNPOL officers in UNISFA and the issuance of visas
to UNISFA personnel.
The delay in the establishment of Abyei Police
Service and other institutions has created a grave
law-and-order vacuum. Due to this situation, an
informal structure known as “community protection

19-354735/28

S/PV.8661

United Nations peacekeeping operations

committees” has been created through concerted
efforts between UNPOL and Ngok Dinka traditional
leaders. Resolution 2205 (2015) therefore requested
UNISFA, within its existing capabilities and resources
and in close coordination with the Misseriya and Ngok
Dinka communities, to strengthen the capacities of
community protection committees to assist with law
and order management in the Abyei Area. UNISFA
police therefore work closely with and supports the
community protection committees by providing
basic policing training and co-locating, mentoring,
monitoring and advising them in the performance of
their duties.
It became necessary to enhance the operational
and administrative capacity of community protection
committees. A total of 30 such committees have been
established in the central and southern parts of the
Abyei Area, which are mainly Ngok Dinka-populated
areas. In addition, one joint protection committee has
been established at the Amiet common market, and
three attached detention facilities have been set up in
Abyei, in the Amiet market and in Agok. However, there
are no community protection committees structures in
the north of Abyei, due to reservations that have been
expressed by the Government of the Sudan.
Sustaining peace constitutes a goal and a part
of the process towards building a common vision of
society with national ownership, where local actors
have a consistent voice and women and youth play a
critical role. In the context of Abyei, the role of UNPOL
is to support the community protection committees,
enhance and foster a positive protective environment
across Abyei and conduct awareness campaigns and
sensitize communities on the effects of crime and
on crime prevention, especially sexual and genderbased violence and serious and violent crimes. The
community protection committees and joint protection
committees also serve as sources of information on
all crime-related incidents and investigations. Female
community protection committee members are playing
a crucial role in sustaining peace and security in Abyei,
especially through their involvement and support
in addressing all forms of sexual and gender-based
violence incidents and related cases.
Further enhancement to the community protection
committees support has increased. Recruitment of
community protection committee members increased
from 330 recruits in 2018 to 600 recruits to date in 2019,
including 89 females. UNPOL undertook the initiative
6/28

06/11/2019

to organize women into associations for both the north
and south. Women from both areas met in October, and
it was remarkable.
The protection of civilians is the primary
responsibility of UNISFA. And the community
protection committees, supported by UNPOL, have
played a pivotal role in implementing the protection-ofcivilians strategy. The current mandate allows for
the increment of UNPOL to 148 personnel, which
also allows for their deployment to additional team
sites — 10 in the area of responsibility, including 30
community protection committees in crime hotspots.
According to performance assessments done in May,
the joint protection committee at the Amiet common
market has achieved excellent results in maintaining
law and order in the market and surrounding areas.
Good practices include a road safety strategy where
community protection committee checkpoints along
the road between Agok and Amiet have helped in
reducing traffic-related incidents. The joint protection
committee is also responsible for the management of
the detention centre at the Amiet common market,
including case management and referral of suspects and
cases to traditional courts. Executing their duties under
the mentorship and advice of UNPOL, the community
protection committees and joint protection committee
act in compliance with international standards and
human rights.
The community protection committees handle
other basic law enforcement duties, for example, during
an incident in Abyei, they restrained demonstrators
organized against UNISFA by Ngok Dinka on
30 October. Another incident occurred when the
community protection committees protected local
communities during a youth football tournament
organized by the UNISFA police in April.
Notwithstanding their generally good performance,
some community protection committee members
resigned due to better job opportunities. It would be
more beneficial to UNISFA and the communities if
the mission and related partners could support its
sustainability. Implementing the community protection
committee doctrine and concept in both areas would
be a major achievement as efforts to seek final
status continue.
In conclusion, parties should be urged to abandon
their current positions and work together for the good
of the Abyei community. The operational capacity of
19-35473

06/11/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

community protection committees should be improved
by providing them with more operational and logistical
support and improving their infrastructure to enhance
the execution of law-and-order duties, in line with
international policing and human rights standards. It
must be noted that the developed community protection
committee infrastructure may be used by the Abyei
Police Service once it is established. United Nations
country teams working in Abyei would also indirectly
support both UNISFA and the people of Abyei.
The President: I thank Ms. Gahonzire for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Yacouba.
Mr. Yacouba: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
honour and opportunity to speak to the Security Council
about improving protection by building governance in
ungoverned spaces.
A combination of factors, coupled with the slow
implementation of the peace agreement and with the
2012 crisis, have significantly reduced the capacity of
the State in the northern and later central regions where
it is struggling to carry out its functions. That has
eroded public confidence in the State and its services,
thereby creating a conducive environment for extremist
and terrorist groups, who provide the social needs
of the populations in their areas of influence, with
multiple asymmetric attacks against Malian defence
and security forces, international forces and civilians
who refuse to accept their cause.
Despite the gradual operationalization of the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, the
announcement of efforts by the Malian security forces
and the extension of the State of emergency, some
communities have fallen under the sway of violent
extremist groups and resorted to self-defence groups,
which further complicates the situation by exacerbating
inter-community conflicts and their impact on civilians.
(spoke in French)
Police of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
acting in accordance with the integrated strategic
framework, are committed to the priorities of the
Mission as defined in resolution 2480 (2019) and are
contributing to the administration of governance in a
way that enhances protection in ungoverned areas in
Mali. Capacity-building and developing the Malian
security forces is therefore a major part of our work,

S/PV. 8661

as reflected in training activities and advice in various
areas, in addition to efforts by other actors, including
the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in the
Sahel. We have also been developing infrastructure and
equipment in order to accelerate the restauration and
expansion of State authority throughout Mali.
In the area of civilian protection, MINUSMA
police provide crucial support to the operationalization
of the strategy for the centre of the country, to the
functionality of the operations and intelligence analysis
centre, as well as to the centre for coordination and
risk management in analysing information. Those
coordinating mechanisms allow for an improvement in
operational capacity through monitoring and an earlywarning system.
Moreover, in the centre, MINUSMA police support
the implementation of Government-initiated strategies,
including the Integrated Security Plan for the Central
Regions and a Malian comprehensive strategy to protect
civilians, reduce inter-community violence and restore
the authority of the State and essential social services.
That support has made it possible to redeploy defence
and security forces, albeit hesitant, and to organize
coordinated and joint operations, operational logistical
support and transport.
In the fight against impunity, which is one of the
root causes of the crisis, MINUSMA provides crucial
support in strengthening the criminal justice system
through capacity-building, development, advisory
support and the use of technical and scientific data.
Regarding the development and implementation
of a comprehensive plan for the redeployment of
reformed and reconstituted defence and security forces,
MINUSMA strongly advocates for the acceleration
of the security sector reform process and through
consultation and will contribute to the development of
internal security and civilian protection strategies.
Overall, the issue of governing in ungoverned zones
is a daily reminder that strengthening trust among the
population and authorities is a requirement that is
often forgotten. In that regard, MINUSMA supports
Government initiatives in engaging with communities
and civil society on the security issues affecting them.
Indeed, in a country as geographically and culturally
diverse as Mali, great importance must be attached
to the concept of community policing, a major focus
of security sector reform. The aim is to establish

19-354737/28

S/PV.8661

United Nations peacekeeping operations

06/11/2019

strategic partnerships based on prior consultation and
community involvement.

for their remarkable contribution to the restoration of
peace and stability in countries in crisis.

(spoke in English)

Peacekeeping operations are intended not to
replace host State authorities but rather to support them
within the framework of an exit strategy that is based
on an inclusive and credible political process. Indeed,
wherever United Nations peacekeeping operations have
been able to engage in dynamic cooperation with host
State authorities and local communities on the basis of
mutual trust and the pursuit of realistic and consensual
objectives, they have created the conditions for a return
to lasting peace and security, thereby paving the way
for national reconstruction and prosperity.

There are many challenges to these efforts,
including the slow pace of the security sector reform
process and ensuring an integrated and coordinated
approach to security issues, border management and
continued funding for the capacity-building of the
Malian defence and security forces. Nevertheless, I
am convinced that, in the long term, our integrated
efforts will contribute to strengthening protection and
restoring State authority through the development of
the resilience of communities at the grass-roots level
and the improvement of trust between the population
and State authorities, especially the security forces.
The President: I thank Mr. Yacouba for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council. Should members have a question, I ask that
they indicate whether it is directed specifically to any
one of today’s briefers or whether it is a general question.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the convening of this
annual informative meeting in the framework of an
interactive and informative dialogue with Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, and the respective Police Commissioners
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei.
My delegation thanks Ms. Marie-Joseph Fitah-Kona,
Adviser to the Mayor of the Third Arrondissement
of Bangui, for her contribution. Their enlightening
briefings have informed the Council of the progress
made and allow it to remain seized of the opportunities
and challenges facing the respective police units of
those United Nations missions in the implementation
of their mandates.
This is an appropriate moment for my country — a
former host country of a peacekeeping mission — to
commend once again the actions of the men and women
of the police components deployed in United Nations
missions and to pay them another deserved tribute
8/28

Good-quality relations between host countries
and the population fosters their adherence to United
Nations action, ensuring strong national ownership
and the effective implementation of essential priorities,
such as the protection of civilians, the restoration
of State authority and security sector reform. In a
deployment environment marked by the persistence
of security threats and violence against civilians and
sexual violence, the police components of United
Nations peace missions constitute indispensable pillars.
They contribute to strengthening the security of the
population and restoring the capacities of local police
institutions, enabling the host country’s Government
to carry out its sovereign functions throughout its
national territory.
In the light of all that, and in recognizing the
importance and complementarity of the Strategic
Guidance Framework for International Police
Peacekeeping, my country would like to stress that,
based on its recent experience, greater emphasis should
be placed on the application of guidelines regarding the
strengthening and development of the capabilities of
police components, as well as their role in the protection
of civilians.
At this point, I should like to seek the insight of
the Police Commissioner Yacouba on the support
provided by the MINUSMA police component for the
capacity-building of the Malian police in collecting and
harnessing information in order to improve its ability
to protect civilians, particularly in central Mali. What
is his assessment of the support provided by the United
Nations police units in restoring the Malian State’s
authority throughout its national territory, including the
redeployment of police and judicial institutions? What
19-35473

06/11/2019

S/PV. 8661

United Nations peacekeeping operations

is the connection between the role of the United Nations
police and the self-defence groups on the ground?

statement delivered by the civil society representative
from the Central African Republic.

Women’s contribution to peace and security is
today at the heart of the concerns of the international
community. My country believes that women
deployed in United Nations peace missions make
a major contribution to the promotion of national
reconciliation. However, it is clear that the goal of
increasing their numbers is far from being achieved.
We therefore call on the Council to work diligently with
a view to strengthening the presence of women within
these missions.

In the 71 years since their first deployment, police
peacekeepers have played an integral and active part in
United Nations peace missions. Deeply committed to
their missions around the world, police peacekeepers
have made outstanding contributions to the maintenance
of international peace and security. In total, 280 police
officers have made the ultimate sacrifice in the service
of United Nations peace missions, including eight
Chinese police officers in Haiti. I pay my highest tribute
to all of the fallen police officers and their families.

In that regard, I would like to ask for Mr. Awale
Abdounasir’s point of view on the support provided by
the MONUSCO police component for the Congolese
police force in the fight against sexual violence and
the civilian-police activities to raise awareness of that
violence. What is his assessment of the contribution
of women to the MONUSCO police component in the
fight against sexual violence and in peacebuilding?
This is also an opportunity for my delegation to extend
its warmest congratulations to Major Seynabou Diouf,
who was this year named United Nations Female Police
Officer of the Year for her role in combating sexual
exploitation and abuse in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

In the context of the increasingly complex and
challenging external environment and security
situation, it is imperative to bolster and improve United
Nations policing in peacekeeping missions. In 2018,
Secretary-General Guterres put forward his Action
for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative, and to date 152
States Members of the United Nations have signed the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, giving new impetus to the
reform of United Nations peacekeeping operations and
paving the way for improved United Nations policing in
peacekeeping missions. China supports the SecretaryGeneral’s A4P initiative and stands ready to work with
other Member States to advance peacekeeping policing
and peacekeeping operations on the whole.

United Nations missions are comprised of a mosaic
of contingents and personnel who, while driven by a
common quest to achieve peace and stability in countries
in conflict, come from different countries and cultures,
which necessarily influences their perception of their
obligations in the context of peacekeeping in difficult
settings. The great merit of the Police Commissioners
who have just briefed us, as well as that of their
colleagues in other United Nations missions, lies
justifiably in their daily efforts to maintain the cohesion
and unity of action of their forces so that, despite the
many challenges they face, they can continue to be the
most effective instrument of the United Nations in the
service of peace. That is the core meaning of resolution
2447 (2018), of which Côte d’Ivoire contributed to the
drafting and adoption, in close collaboration with the
Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix and the three Police Commissioners
for their briefings. We also listened attentively to the

China would
three proposals.

like

to

make

the

following

First, with regard to upholding the basic principles
of peacekeeping operations, policing in peace missions
must always be guided by the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the basic
principles of peacekeeping operations, including
consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of
force except in self-defence and defence of the mandate.
The Council must fully respect the sovereignty and
aspirations of the host country, heed its views and those
of police-contributing countries (PCCs), define clear
and explicit mandates tailored to the situation on the
ground and leverage the advantages of peacekeeping
police officers in maintaining the social order in the
host country and creating a secure environment for its
development. Long-term investments must be increased
in such areas as political dialogue and economic
development to ensure lasting peace. China will
facilitate the holding of the third United Nations Chiefs
of Police Summit, thereby making our contribution

19-354739/28

S/PV.8661

United Nations peacekeeping operations

to peacekeeping policing in a new era. In that regard,
China is working closely with the Department of
Peace Operations.
Secondly, bolstering capacity-building and
increasing efficiency in the discharge of duties and
enhancing the capacity-building of PCCs is the
utmost priority at the current stage. The international
community must continue to lend strong support to
ensure that peacekeepers receive adequate and targeted
training and possess the necessary equipment and
other resources. PCCs must strictly follow the selection
criteria for personnel and equipment, strengthen
management and continue to improve the efficiency,
credibility and effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping policing. China is actively delivering on
the commitments made by President Xi Jinping at the
2015 Leaders Summit on United Nations Peacekeeping
by establishing the world’s first-ever standby police
contingent for peacekeeping and training over 800
police officers from other countries.
Thirdly, better safety and security guarantees for
peacekeepers must be provided. Human life is priceless.
Peacekeeping police officers work at the forefront and
their safety and security have a bearing on the effect and
credibility of peacekeeping operations. The Council
must take stronger action on peacekeeping operations
and the safety and security of peacekeepers and speak
with one voice in that regard.
The Secretariat and the missions must give high
priority to preserving the safety and security of their
personnel, provide strong support and guarantee and
enhance the capabilities of peacekeeping operations in
the face of complex situations. Preventive measures,
as well as security and medical supplies, must be put
in place with a view to improving early warning and
response capabilities in dealing with emergencies.
China supports the idea of properly increasing
the ratio of women peacekeepers, but at the same time
we wish to emphasize that while efforts are made in
that regard, it is important to take targeted protection
measures, including careful predeployment securityrisk assessments, to ensure the safety and security of
women police peacekeepers.
Since 2000, in nine mission areas in TimorLeste, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Afghanistan,
Liberia, Haiti, the Sudan, South Sudan and Cyprus,
China has dispatched a total of over 2,600 peacekeepers
as part of our efforts to deliver on our commitments
10/28

06/11/2019

to peacekeeping. As always, China will continue to
support United Nations peacekeeping efforts and
explore further opportunities to support peacekeeping
policing through the China-United Nations Peace
and Development Trust Fund, take concrete action to
deliver on China’s commitments and contribute more to
peacekeeping policing.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I would like to begin by thanking the five briefers, who
have presented their respective perspectives on the role
of the police in peacekeeping operations. The Action
for Peacekeeping initiative remains our road map for
focusing our efforts in the coming years. Allow me to
follow the five “Ps” in my statement and my questions
to the briefers: prevention, performance, protection,
partnerships and peacebuilding.
First, an increased role is given to United Nations
police expertise in the context of prevention. We are
pleased that the Police Division is increasingly being
called upon not only in special political missions but
also in some cases outside missions. As highlighted
by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2016/952),
the police play an important role in early warning.
The Police Division can provide the Security Council
with valuable information by analysing the state of
police and other law enforcement institutions in a
particular country and recommending responses to
emerging issues.
Secondly, mission performance goes hand in hand
with responsibility and accountability. In that context,
we are pleased that, under the new management
paradigm promoted by the Secretary-General, the
chiefs of police components in operations are now
part of the senior management teams and that they are
accountable for the performance of their component. In
that context, I would like to ask Mr. Lacroix to share
with us the lessons learned since the beginning of the
implementation of the comprehensive performance
assessment system, in particular on the police
components and their contribution to the strategic
objectives of the missions.
Thirdly, community policing and community
policing initiatives, among others, offer unparalleled
opportunities for the protection of civilians. That is the
case, for example, in South Sudan, where the police
component of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
is successful in some locations by working in unique
proximity with the population, relying in particular on
19-35473

06/11/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

women components and unarmed patrols. In general, it
would seem appropriate to provide increased support in
the area of negotiated public space management, which
includes aspects of dialogue, respect for human rights
and a moderate and proportional use of constraint.
Fourthly, partnerships are at the heart of police
components in the field. They often work jointly and
in good understanding with those who lead parts
of security sector reform or conduct national police
training activities. Synergies exist on the ground with
civilian missions deployed by the European Union. My
question is for Commissioner Abdounasir, who has
had the opportunity to experience the partnership with
the European Union in both Mali and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Can he illustrate that partnership
and its added value for the work of the United Nations?
Lastly, with respect to peacebuilding, while
police have a role to play across the peace continuum,
support for the transfer of policing functions remains
crucial in transitions. Haiti provides a recent example.
It is important for that phase to continue to provide
police advisory support when the host State considers
it necessary.
One of the future medium-term transition projects
could be the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), and we look forward to discussing the
results of the strategic review. In that context, how does
Commissioner Abdounasir see the role of MONUSCO’s
police component evolving in the coming years? Does
he see any areas or provinces in which a formed police
unit presence could usefully replace a military presence?
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): We would like
to start by again thanking Mr. Lacroix for his very
pertinent and in-depth briefing, as always, in addition to
conveying our thanks to the Police Commissioners who
briefed us today, as well as to our briefer from Bangui.
In line with the presidency’s instructions, we will
try to be a bit more interactive in terms of engaging
on this very important issue. We would like to start by
recognizing the important role that the United Nations
police plays in promoting stability and long-term
development in conflict-affected countries. We also
note its significance, which is amplified by changing
conflict dynamics. In our view, there is therefore a
growing role for United Nations policing, and we
further recognize the success stories in many postconflict countries.

S/PV. 8661

As a police-contributing country (PCC) ourself,
we strive for increasing the role of women not only
in peacekeeping but also in terms of police serving in
peacekeeping missions and conflict countries. We have
achieved a gender parity of 50 per cent, which exceeds
the provisions of the current strategy that works towards
greater gender parity in police and peacekeeping troops.
We welcome the continued efforts of the United
Nations to build its police capabilities, as well as
the contribution that they can make to local lawenforcement capacity. We regard that as a very
important element in terms of responding to local
priorities and building local capacity. We also commend
efforts undertaken by the Police Division to promote
greater female representation, as mentioned earlier,
which is an important element that we strive for. This
is conducted through regional female senior police
command development courses to improve senior
leadership training overall. We would like to appeal
to the Secretariat to work with PCCs to increase the
number of female police officers.
The continued presence of United Nations
police on the ground gives them the responsibility
to ensure effective transitions from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding, which is an important bridging role that
police play in terms of bringing normalcy to countries
that are affected by conflict. I believe that the sight
of police can bring a sense of normalcy back to the
public and the population in terms of peace, justice
and addressing criminality, which are sometimes
overlooked in the bigger picture when it comes to
peacekeeping and bringing stability to countries. We
would like to acknowledge the critical role that the
United Nations Police continues to play in ensuring
stability and sustaining peace in local communities. It
is important to ensure that the Police Division is better
placed within the United Nations system to meet that
growing demand.
Finally, we would like to thank the Police
Commissioners and the Police Division for the good
work that they are doing in the field and to pose two
questions to our commissioners.
First, we would like to ask the Commissioner of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
a question that particularly relates to female officers
in the field. Could she give us an indication, from her
vantage point, as to the challenges that women police

19-3547311/28

S/PV.8661

United Nations peacekeeping operations

officers in peacekeeping missions face? And how can
the Council assist in addressing those challenges?
Secondly, we have a question for the two
Police Commissioners from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Building on the reforms of the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, in their view,
what more can the United Nations do to ensure that
the United Nations Police is better equipped to carry
out these duties? Their views on that would be very
much appreciated.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank all of today’s briefers for their
assessments. We would also like to ask the Heads of the
peacekeeping missions’ police contingents to convey our
thanks to all Blue Berets for their conscientious service
and for carrying out the difficult task of maintaining
peace and security. We pay tribute to their bravery.
The importance of police peacekeepers in modern
United Nations peacekeeping activities is beyond
doubt. As one of the channels of peacekeeping efforts,
police play a significant role in helping national
authorities to protect civilians. They do this not
only through traditional formats such as patrolling,
surveillance and dealing those who violate public
order, but also by building the capacity of national
law-enforcement bodies in the countries where they
are deployed and assisting with security-sector reform,
thereby improving host countries’ ability to tackle the
challenges they encounter.
More and more often, United Nations Police have
to provide assistance in solving problems related to the
fight against organized crime, the illegal drug trade,
human trafficking and other security threats. They also
serve as a liaison both between populations and the
peacekeeping presence and between populations and
host country Governments. It is important to ensure
that their efforts help to build citizens’ confidence in
the institutions of power and create the preconditions
for achieving national reconciliation and lasting peace.
In providing that assistance, like all United Nations
peacekeepers, police should adhere strictly to the
Security Council’s mandates and comply with the
Charter of the United Nations and the basic principles
of peacekeeping.
12/28

06/11/2019

The key to effectively implementing these
tasks is establishing constructive relations with the
host country. This process must be guided by the
principle of national responsibility, full respect for
the sovereignty of host countries and consideration of
their individual requirements. It is extremely important
to take a country’s concrete national specifics into
account. Attempts to apply a universal approach to
reforms in the areas of law enforcement or the rule
of law are unlikely to produce results or enjoy the
support of populations, whatever their country. The
effective fulfilment of police tasks requires appropriate
logistical, technical and personnel support. Missions
should improve their planning and management and
avoid unnecessary costs and duplication of efforts.
In the framework of these processes, is important to
ensure that the Secretariat pays close attention to the
opinions and recommendations of police-contributing
countries. Attempts to promote different types of thirdparty initiatives or concepts that do not have the support
of all States members of the General Assembly’s
Special Committee for Peacekeeping Operations are
counterproductive. In that regard, we believe it is
essential to maintain a constant dialogue between the
Security Council, police-contributing countries and
host Governments on every aspect of peacekeeping
activities, including at the planning and mandate
development stages. However, we do not believe it
makes sense to allocate functions to the police that are
not inherently theirs, such as those related to political
or human rights issues, which could distract them from
the tasks they specialize in and make their activities
less effective generally.
We believe firmly in the importance of
strengthening cooperation with regional organizations,
including for United Nations policing. We believe it
is important to broaden support for United Nations
activities aimed at building the capacities of police
peacekeepers among regional actors, including the
African Union, and assisting them in maintaining
regional peace and stability.
As a police-contributing country, the Russian
Federation has continued to increase its contribution to
United Nations peacekeeping efforts by sending staff
with the relevant skills to missions. Since 1992, more
than 500 employees of Russia’s internal affairs bodies
have worked as police peacekeepers, and it is gratifying
that United Nations representatives have frequently
remarked on their high level of professionalism. We
19-35473

06/11/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

continue to comply strictly with our commitments
undertaken at the United Nations Chiefs of Police
summits, in accordance with which Russia has doubled
the numbers of the police peacekeepers it contributes.
Russian police are currently deployed in South
Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Colombia, Kosovo and Cyprus. Almost 30 per cent of
them are women. The number of women involved in
police activity in Russia itself is also steadily increasing.
The United Nations-certified Peacekeeping Training
Centre of Russia’s Ministry of the Interior regularly
graduates police peacekeepers, including foreigners,
many of whom are women, to professional standards.
It is pertinent to point out that more than 30 of the
specialists among them are French speakers. Since
2000, the Centre has trained more than 1,600 Russian
officers and 500 foreign police peacekeepers, including
commanders, from more than 50 countries around the
world. The group of women officers specially trained to
participate in the police components of United Nations
missions deserve particular attention. Approximately
40 women from Russia and a number of African
countries have taken the course.
We are also willing to send experts to participate
in the work of specialized police groups in United
Nations missions. We are interested in considering the
participation of Russian police in such groups’ projects,
including working jointly with other countries.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to begin by paying tribute to the men and
women police officers and commanders working today
in United Nations peacekeeping missions in what are
sometimes very difficult security situations. Listening
to Mr. Lacroix and the testimonies of our briefers
today, we see clearly that it is particularly important to
ensure that populations really feel the benefits of our
peacekeeping operations, especially when it comes to
improving their daily lives. We clearly see that police
forces have a key role to play in that regard. The account
provided by Ms. Marie-Joseph Fitah-Kona, Adviser
to the Mayor of the Third Arrondissement of Bangui,
whom I warmly thank for her participation today, is
illustrative of that.
France intends to be a willing and constructive
partner in that area, and that is why we fully support
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, including the
commitment, in that framework, to make the United
Nations police more efficient and effective and better

S/PV. 8661

able to respond to the needs of the people. To that end,
it is necessary that the United Nations police dispose of
the appropriate capacities in terms of planning, force
generation, crisis management and guidance. In that
regard, I will focus on three priority issues for us.
First, the police and gendarmerie personnel
provided by contributing countries must offer genuine
added value in terms of technical competence
and operational capacity. The United Nations also
needs their expertise within command structures.
Accordingly, France is deploying a team of police
officers specialized in explosives and forensic science
to work within the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. We also
provide experts in the areas of formed police units and
planning within the Secretariat.
Secondly, we believe that the role of police units
must be reappraised. While the Blue Helmet military
contingents represent the bulk of uniformed personnel
in any peacekeeping operation, police officers have a
specific and indispensable role. Their presence sends a
different message, which is that of a gradual return to
normalcy linked to a reduced threat level and positive
developments in the security situation. In that regard,
local populations are generally well able to see that.
The extremely special role of police units takes on
special meaning during the transition phases. Indeed,
as the number of Blue Helmets gradually decreases, the
host State strengthens its sovereignty and the armed
forces gradually take over, United Nations police units
demonstrate that United Nations investment is not
limited to the deployment of units, but that concern for
local populations remains at the heart of the Security
Council’s priorities. The Democratic Republic of
the Congo comes to mind. In some provinces, as the
Permanent Representative of Belgium underlined,
police units can take over from peacekeeping units.
The last point that I want to emphasize is that
increasing the female presence among contingents
and police personnel is essential. We must continue
to make progress in that area in accordance with the
ambitious but obtainable, goals set by the SecretaryGeneral. As several United Nations police missions
have pointed out, there is a positive correlation between
the participation of women in police forces and the
stability and sustainability of peace processes. We have
seen that in Liberia, where the inclusion of women
in police forces helped to reduce sexual and gender-

19-3547313/28

S/PV.8661

United Nations peacekeeping operations

based violence during the day and especially at night.
We regret that, despite those positive statistics, the
inclusion of women in police forces remains glaringly
insufficient, while we nevertheless welcome the efforts
of the Department of Peace Operations to increase the
number of women deployed.
I should like to conclude by asking several questions.
My first question is general and addressed to each one of
the briefers. What, broadly speaking, are the principle
difficulties in carrying out their missions? My second
question is addressed to all briefers and concerns the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in
particular. How do they assess the capacities available
to respond to the needs of victims of sexual and genderbased violence?
Lastly, I have a question for Mr. Abdounasir,
Police Commissioner of MONUSCO. His reference to
MONUSCO’s efforts to counter organized crime by
prioritizing the strengthening of the penal system was
very useful. I would be equally interested to know what
other information he might be able to share with us
with regard to the activities that the police component
of MONUSCO is carrying out in helping deal with the
Ebola crisis.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
the Police Commissioners from various peace missions
and Ms. Marie-Joseph Fitah-Kona as the representative
of a host country.
The police component is an integral part of the
peace and security architecture, and we must therefore
enhance its role in that regard. We recognize the major
role that police units play on the ground in bridging
the tasks related to United Nations peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, which demonstrates the need for
coordination between police and military components,
together with humanitarian and civilian components.
We also stress the importance of developing close
cooperation with national authorities, communities and
civil society in order to reach all sectors of society in
promoting the rule of law, which is why we believe it
important to increase the percentage of police officers
in peacekeeping operations.
We appreciate the United Nations efforts to ensure
that police-contributing countries meet required
standards, in the knowledge that deployment and
training challenges remain. As has been highlighted
14/28

06/11/2019

in the latest reports of the Secretary-General on police
activities, training and adequately equipping police
personnel prior to deployment and the selection of
qualified police units are crucial. By “training”, we
also mean a people-centred approach to justice, the rule
of law and due process, as well as human rights, child
protection, conflict-related sexual violence and genderbased violence, without forgetting the importance
of communicating with communities in their own
language. Police-contributing countries must redouble
their efforts in shouldering their responsibility in
that regard.
I should like to ask Mr. Lacroix where he believes
major gaps exist in the predeployment training required
for police personnel and what impact such shortcomings
might have on the ground?
Peace operations must be inclusive and responsive,
and therefore the oversight of gender issues must be
ensured in the design, planning, implementation and
evaluation of peace operations. We appreciate the fact
that the number of female chiefs of police components has
increased. However, women remain underrepresented
in positions at the senior level. Increasing their presence
in police forces opens channels of communication for
women and girls on the ground, while addressing their
protection concerns and immediate needs.
We therefore take this opportunity to congratulate
Major Seynabou Diouf — an officer in the Senegalese
National Police who is deployed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, leading a force to counter
sexual abuse and exploitation — on having recently
received the United Nations Female Police Officer of
the Year Award.
We would also like to ask Mr. Lacroix to tell us
about initiatives of the United Nations Police Division
to increase the number of female police officers and to
integrate a gender perspective into the operations of the
police component?
Lastly, we express our commitment to and support
for the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and its shared commitments. We believe
that the achievements of United Nations policing are
intrinsically connected to the realization of the ideal of
sustaining peace. However, all the goals that we have set
and committed ourselves to cannot be achieved without
a genuine understanding of the root causes of conflicts,
supported by prevention and early-warning efforts.
19-35473

06/11/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

We would like to conclude by thanking United
Nations police personnel for their dedication, where they
risk their lives daily to protect the most vulnerable and
in the pursuit of lasting and sustainable peacebuilding.
Mr. Barkin (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the Police
Commissioners for their briefings.
We talk quite a lot about peacekeeping in the
Council, although our conversations tend to focus on
the contributions of military personnel. We are grateful
for the courageous Blue Helmet troops, but I am glad
that today we have an opportunity to recognize the
important contributions of the police to strengthening
the rule of law, which is ultimately the basis for a
peaceful society. We must honour those whose work
builds the foundations of that peace.
I would like to congratulate Major Seynabou
Diouf of Senegal on receiving the prestigious 2019
United Nations Female Police Officer of the Year
award yesterday. We commend her outstanding work
as an officer and her dedication to her duties as a
leader of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). Additionally, we were pleased to meet
with the Police Commissioner of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan during our recent trip as the
Council to South Sudan. We strongly support the
Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy 2018-2028, and we
urge police-contributing countries to embrace policies
that increase women’s participation.
I would also like to praise the police officers
who served in the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti and paved the way for the Mission to
transition to a special political mission. They trained
and professionalized the Haitian National Police, which
is now a bright spot in Haiti’s development, taking on
even more responsibility for peace and security in its
own country.
Our understanding of the importance of the rule
of law is why we provide extensive capacity-building
training to empower police-contributing countries.
The training helps them to deploy well-trained police
to United Nations missions. Since 2010, the United
States International Police Peacekeeping Operations
Support programme has trained more than 12,000
police peacekeepers from more than 12 countries. We
have also worked with the United Nations to develop
new training courses and strengthen performance

S/PV. 8661

standards, including a long-standing partnership with
Italy’s Centre of Excellence for Stability Police Units to
train police trainers and leaders.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we will
explore similar opportunities to improve the role that
United Nations police play in support of the protection
of civilian and security reform efforts of MONUSCO.
In Abyei and along the border between the Sudan and
South Sudan, we remain concerned about the stability of
the rule of law. We encourage the Sudan to immediately
grant visas for United Nations police as a first step to
establishing a joint police force in Abyei.
To maintain peace and a global security environment
that is becoming more complex, it is important for
police forces to deploy with the right equipment. In
Mali, we are concerned that, as the last quarterly report
on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (S/2019/782) indicated,
two formed police units lack mine-protective vehicles.
Those units play a crucial role in building local lawenforcement capability. Without the right equipment,
their safety is threatened and their effectiveness
is limited.
One year after the unanimous adoption of resolution
2436 (2018), we reiterate our support for the United
Nations commitment to implementing an integrated
performance policy, which should be based on clear
standards for all United Nations civilian and uniformed
personnel working in and supporting peacekeeping
operations. We count on Police Commissioners to ensure
that police deployed in the field have the proper training
and equipment to carry out their mandated tasks.
We fully support initiatives to brief the Security
Council on peacekeeping performance, and we
look forward to hearing candid assessments about
performance, including shortfalls, success stories and
how Member States can assist. We also appreciate the
Secretary-General’s July assessment report on the Police
Division (A/74/223). We appreciate the commitment to
ensuring the effective performance and accountability
of police personnel in the field as one of the Division’s
core functions. We commend the Division’s launch of an
online tool for the assessment and evaluation of formed
police units, which saw 34 evaluations of 49 deployed
units and developed 11 performance improvement plans
to address identified shortfalls.
Finally, we want to take advantage of the fact
that the Police Commissioners are with us today. We

19-3547315/28

S/PV.8661

United Nations peacekeeping operations

06/11/2019

would like to hear more about the challenges they
face with respect to equipment. I will end with three
specific questions, some of which have already been
asked. First, how is performance data used to decide
the rotation and deployment of police-contributing
countries? Secondly, I join my colleagues in asking
how we can ensure greater numbers of women in police
rotations and deployments. And, thirdly, what should
be the priorities for developing and implementing
the Strategic Guidance Framework for International
Police Peacekeeping?

to develop a common vision of the main goals and the
main assessment criteria.

The President: Just as we ask United Nations
Secretariat colleagues and those in the field to
constantly innovate, our presidency is innovating with
regard to interaction. I will now turn to our briefers
to respond to the questions put so far, of which I have
counted approximately 15. I hope that will prompt those
who have not yet spoken to pick up on those responses
or related issues. I ask the briefers to be brief in their
responses so that the work on the Council can continue.

Following the implementation of those tools, I
think that first we are now able to have a very clear
picture of the situation regarding the different units and
to increase the efforts of troop- and police-contributing
countries in terms of training, both of the leadership of
the units and of their personnel.

I now give the floor to Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix to
respond to the comments and questions raised.
Mr. Lacroix: I believe there was a question on the
performance assessment tool that we have rolled out
from the representative of Belgium.
(spoke in French)
Regarding the performance assessment tools,
there are two relevant categories. The first is the
comprehensive performance assessment system, which
covers all relevant aspects for evaluating mandate
implementation. The assessment system is already
being implemented in six missions. It will be rolled out
in four more missions by next spring. It is a holistic
evaluation. That is to say, based on various evaluation
elements, it allows us to assess the way in which the
mission is discharging its mandate. With respect to
the police component, the tool allows us to evaluate
the performance of the different units in terms of the
entire mandate. In other words, it is a comprehensive
tool that illustrates the outcomes of each of the mission
components in the overall implementation of the
mandate. That is the first thing.
Despite the fact that this tool has been deployed
within missions relatively recently, it allows each of the
mission’s stakeholders to have a more overall picture
of the criteria that allow us to evaluate whether the
mission is fulfilling its mandate and to what extent and
16/28

We now have a second tool that has been developed
and implemented for police units more specifically.
That also exists for military units. It is a specific tool
for evaluating police units. It allows us to assess the
strengths and weaknesses of each unit and, following
that assessment, to have a dialogue with the troopand police-contributing countries to overcome any
shortcomings or possible weaknesses.

We have also seen an improvement in our
equipment levels, although more progress is needed in
that regard. We must also improve our ability to protect
our personnel and further raise awareness of personnel
behaviour and discipline, which has led to a reduction
in allegations made against police and in the number
of victims of hostile actions. There is still work to be
done in several important areas: review of standard
operating procedures, review of specific policies and
guidelines on bolstering the security and safety of units.
More generally, we are in the process of organizing a
workshop next month in Entebbe in order to take stock
of our efforts with regard to the effectiveness of our
police units.
(spoke in English)
There was a question about our efforts with
regard to women. I think that there is now greater
awareness among police-contributing countries
regarding the importance of providing us with more
women peacekeepers. Most of our police-contributing
countries are gradually increasing the number of
women formed police units. We have a number of heads
of police components who are women. There is already
awareness of the issue. What is important now is to
continue to encourage the police-contributing countries
to maintain those efforts and to make sure that there is
adequate training, not only for female police officers
and senior leadership, but also to make people aware
of the importance of having a female-friendly work
environment and to include women in our police and
military contingents.
19-35473

06/11/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

There was another question regarding the gender
perspective. I think this has to do with training and
analysis. We are making ongoing efforts to enhance
gender-sensitive training, which I mentioned previously,
and have gender advisers and other staff in our mission
who are engaged in gender-sensitive conflict analysis.
The representative of the United States asked
a question about major shortcomings we still find in
units we wish to deploy. I will mention a few. First of
all, I think it is fair to say that we still have equipment
deficits. There was a reference to the shortcomings of
some units with regard to key protective equipment,
including, in some cases, mine-protected vehicles. On
that issue, the percentage of units with severe equipment
deficits has decreased globally, but we still have to
continue in that direction. As the Council knows, we
are promoting all kinds of innovative ways of filling
those gaps, including with the concept of equipmentcontributing countries or any kind of partnership.
I would also mention two important areas. I
already mentioned the first area — the importance of
continuing our efforts to increase the number of women
in our units. The second deficit we are facing has to do
with language. We are too often confronted with not
enough formed police units and, particularly police
officers, with adequate skills in the languages that
are common in the areas where we have peacekeeping
operations deployed. In that regard, I would mention
French and Arabic. We do encourage our troop- and
police-contributing countries, especially those where
neither French nor Arabic is commonly spoken, to make
a specific effort to train at least some of their officers
in those languages. Of course, having additional skills
in local languages is also very important. I think
the question of language is generally important in
our peace operations, but it is even more so when it
comes to police, and we are strongly encouraging our
police-contributing countries to continue their language
efforts. Moreover, this area lends itself to partnerships.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for the
clarifications he has provided.
Mr. Lacroix talked a bit about the challenges facing
women police, which was a question put to Ms. Mary
Gahonzire. I ask her to share her thoughts on that and
give her two or three minutes to do so.
I now give the floor to Ms. Gahonzire.

S/PV. 8661

Ms. Gahonzire: I was asked about the challenges
that female uniformed personnel are facing in peace
missions. First of all, I would like to thank our leadership
for the uniformed gender-parity strategy, which the
Police Division is implementing. We have a road
map and, hopefully, we can achieve our objectives by
placing women with the right skills and qualifications
in the right places.
However, as I was asked, in the field, some of the
specific difficulties are related to health, given the
nature of women and the infrastructure, which, in most
cases, does not favour women. As for the rest, I can
say that there are stereotypes perpetuated by Member
States, despite the fact that they are part of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. Other than that, efforts are
ongoing and we are on course.
The President: I thank Ms. Gahonzire for her
clarifications. I am sure that action is being taken on
this issue in all possible missions.
A number of questions were asked of Mr. Abdounasir
and I ask him to take about one minute to respond
to each.
I now give the floor to Mr. Abdounasir.
Mr. Abdounasir (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to thank the various members who welcomed
the United Nations Female Police Officer of the Year
award given to a colleague from the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). Women police
officers provide added value. That can be seen not only
in cases of sexual violence, but also when it comes to
care for victims and following up on cases.
I would also like to add that despite our best
efforts, sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo continues to be a challenge. We are focusing
on supporting local authorities, such as the Congolese
National Police and the judicial system, in order to
prosecute the responsible parties. I also note that we
have very limited capabilities. The size of the United
Nations police is less than 1 per cent of that of the
Congolese National Police. That is why we are focusing
on priority zones, so that we can have an impact.
With regard to the question on criminal justice
system, in general, we are working with the correctional
justice system under the rule of law portfolio, alongside
other partners like the European Union, in order
to support the Congolese authorities in developing

19-3547317/28

S/PV.8661

United Nations peacekeeping operations

strategies and action plans, especially at the local and
provincial levels.
As for the Ebola virus raging in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in areas where there are armed
groups, the MONUSCO police has been working
since the beginning of the outbreak. We are seeing a
steady decline in the virus and the MONUSCO police
continues to add value when it comes to following
up with contacts. We are supporting the Congolese
authorities in following up on high-risk contacts, which
so far has allowed us to prevent displacement. There
are some cases, but we can follow them precisely and,
of course, bring them to treatment centres.
Turning to the question from the representative of
Belgium about the added value of the European Union,
in my previous experience in Congo, Mali and Côte
d’Ivoire there was close cooperation with the European
Union. That allowed us to develop the training sector
for the defence and security forces and in particular to
develop a framework for leadership training. Whether
it be in Côte d’Ivoire, Mali or Congo, the European
Union has helped us to develop training centres and
training courses.
My last point concerns the possibility that police
units could replace the military. As I understand it,
the protection of civilians is a public security issue.
We think that this is an issue that is more within the
scope of the police in general and of MONUSCO police
officers in particular. In provinces such as the Kasais,
Tanganyika and a part of Ituri, the United Nations police
have a role in boosting the various units and carrying
out quality work, with, I am convinced, better results.
The President: I thank Mr. Abdounasir for the
clarifications he has provided.
I shall now give the floor to Mr. Yacouba to respond
to the questions raised.
Mr. Yacouba (spoke in French): I thank the
representatives for their questions. The first question
related to capacity-building of the Malian security
forces. In my statement I said that we have multifaceted
support. That is because there are huge needs. The
training that we provide therefore depends on the needs
and the kind of activities that the police, gendarmerie
and national guard tasked with civilian protection have
to carry out. We have undertaken a level of training but
also construction projects to enable their deployment
of equipment in the north and the centre. The training
18/28

06/11/2019

is now also very focused towards countering organized
crime. We currently have specialized teams on the
ground. There are three such teams at the moment.
There is a specialized German team, a specialized
French and German team and a third team that carries
out all the technical and forensic training. Those are the
areas in which we work.
We also provide support in terms of advice. In many
areas we work in partnership with EUCAP Sahel Mali
because we have the same clients. At that level, there
is support in the form of advice as well as operational
support on the ground, such as, for example, when there
were the massacres in Koulougon Peul, Ogossagou and
Sobane Da and even an attack on the military camp.
The only existing capacity, as was rightly said, in
the technical and forensic areas is that of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), where we have helped
to have a presence on the ground and to collect data and
analyse that information. The analysis that we carry out
is at two levels: first, for prosecution needs through our
units that support countering cross-border organized
crime but also for prevention needs. In that regard,
the Ministry of Internal Security and Civil Protection
established a centre to analyse and collect intelligence,
whose staff we trained. We are also working with
EUCAP Sahel and the French security adviser to help
us to better respond in such situations because often we
hear reports but we do not know what has not worked.
People say that they have reported an incident but the
forces arrive only the next day. That is why we also
provide such support to our Malian partners.
We were also asked about the contribution made
by the formed police units. In that regard, I would
like to take the example of the Mopti region, where,
while awaiting the arrival of a second formed police
unit, we cover all areas except, of course, those that are
flooded. We have patrols there jointly with the Malian
forces, particularly the gendarmerie. In that context, I
would point out that an operation was undertaken in
partnership with the Malian security force but there is
also a region where MINUSMA operates. I think that
we can say that there has been less crime in the areas
held by MINUSMA.
In review of what we have done, I would say that in
terms of training and support to the Malian authorities,
during the recent elections, which saw the fewest
incidents and went smoothly, thanks to the work we did
with EUCAP Sahel Mali to train security units, there
19-35473

06/11/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

was a security presence. That is the added value that
we can bring.
Another aspect that was raised was the interaction
with armed groups. There are two levels to that
question. First, there are armed groups that signed the
agreement and there are organizations through which
we work. For example, with regard to territorial policy,
we had to explain to them what it is and its potential in
the context of security sector reform. In sum, those are
the concerns that we shared in that regard.
There was a question regarding the non-involvement
of police in the area of human rights and policing. It
should be acknowledged that the police also have quite
a key role there. Resolution 2382 (2019) recognizes
that security sector reform is highly political. So police
officers must be able to support elections because what
they are supporting can have a political impact if there
are incidents.
Human rights are at the heart of policing and the
protection of people. We must promote respect for
human rights in all our activities, including addressing
violence against women and minors. We must also
adhere to the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy in
the work that we do.
Those are the issues where representatives requested
some clarifications. Regarding the difficulties, I think
that Mr. Lacroix has already provided appropriate
responses. In terms of our needs, we need the necessary
expertise. Given the central role of the police and
its cross-cutting nature, the needs are tremendous.
We have seen that we need to change the military
approach. We have seen its limits everywhere, but the
security approach also needs to change by encouraging
community-based policing. That is to say, we cannot act
from a distance. We need to address security at a local
level. That means we must deploy within communities
for the best possible outcomes. That also involves
issues of inclusiveness to ensure that all sectors of
society are represented. It is not a matter of having
forces alongside the population but the quality of the
deployment depends on people’s perception to ensure
better cooperation and intelligence.
The President: I thank Mr. Yacouba for the
clarifications he has provided.
I shall now give the floor to members of the Security
Council for further questions.

S/PV. 8661

Mr. Schulz (Germany): At the outset, let me thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and, in particular,
all our briefers from the field for their insightful
briefings. We are very grateful and sincerely thank
them for the invaluable contribution they are making
to United Nations missions. The many thousands of
police peacekeepers deserve our deepest gratitude
and recognition, and we would be very happy for the
briefers to convey that to all those who work with them.
The briefings have once again underlined the
multifaceted role that the police play in peace operations.
Police are indispensable in stabilizing fragile States and
building security structures. Germany is convinced that
the need for United Nations police is growing. Germany
remains a steadfast advocate of strengthening United
Nations police. Germany currently deploys police
personnel to various peace operations, including, as
mentioned just a few minutes ago, to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), where we provide a specialist
police team. We also gladly support United Nations
police beyond contributing personnel — for instance,
through financing the recent United Nations police
commanders course in Berlin and the United Nations
Standing Police Capacity in Brindisi. We are also very
proud to chair the Group of Friends of United Nations
Police here in New York City.
We heard in all the briefings about the importance of
United Nations police and how they play a tremendously
crucial role in United Nations peacekeeping, which is
almost a truism. However, if the Security Council were
to ask whether we have exhausted the full potential of
United Nations police, then the answer probably must be
no. I think that we can do better and that we still have not
tapped into the full potential of United Nations police
across the board. Police have many unique advantages.
United Nations police play a crucial role in all conflict
phases, which I think is very important to underline.
They play an important role in prevention, stabilization
and post-conflict peacebuilding. Therefore, United
Nations police need to be ready to advise Governments
and the United Nations system in non-mission contexts
as well. I think that is also a very important point. Let
me offer a few ideas on where we could think about
improving and strengthening United Nations police.
First, strengthening United Nations police advisory
capabilities and services is important with regard to
prevention. United Nations police offer a first-class

19-3547319/28

S/PV.8661

United Nations peacekeeping operations

prevention tool that remains underutilized and should
be used more systematically and strategically.
Secondly, police commissioners play an important
role that should be further strengthened. It is crucial
that we integrate that into mandates as early and as
comprehensively as possible.
Thirdly, the level of police advice should be
raised within the United Nations system. The Police
Division must be adequately placed within the system.
Police are not just an appendix; they are essential to
sustaining peace, which must be duly reflected in
United Nations structures. Significant steps in that
direction have been taken, but we think that much more
should and could be done.
Fourthly, as many others have already said, the
number of women police peacekeepers should be
increased. It is particularly important for community
policing and peacekeeping operations. Agendasensitive policing is crucial in order to address the
different security needs of women and men, girls and
boys. The current rate of 18 per cent is good, but not
good enough. We can certainly all do better. We very
much welcome the ambitious goals of the SecretaryGeneral in that regard.
Fifthly, police play an essential role during
transition phases of peace operations. It is important
that police advice be taken on board more strategically
by the Council from the very outset.
Before concluding, let me ask Mr. Yacouba, from
MINUSMA, one question. We have already heard
a couple of insights and recommendations, but I am
particularly interested in the following issue. We have
unfortunately seen a very steep increase in terrorist
attacks in Mali in recent months. So far, I think the
issue has been dealt with primarily by the military. I
would be very interested in his views on whether he
sees or recommends a stronger role for United Nations
police in combating terrorism in Mali.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I wish to thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix and all the briefers for their
very comprehensive briefings. I would also like to pay
tribute to all police peacekeepers for their remarkable
work, service and dedication to advancing peace.
Police peacekeeping has become an important
element of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
As the challenges for such operations have become
more complex, their tasks have expanded to include
20/28

06/11/2019

protecting civilians, fighting transnational crime and
building the capacity of local police. In that context, let
me underline three pertinent points.
First, to fulfil their mandate effectively, United
Nations police peacekeepers must actively engage the
local community. Community engagement is crucial
to gaining the trust of the local population. Close
engagement with local communities also helps to
develop early-warning systems, better monitoring and
police intelligence. Police peacekeepers therefore must
invest in building relationships with the communities
they serve. For that purpose, they must be equipped with
communication skills and an understanding of local
culture, in addition to basic policing skills. Those should
be part of our comprehensive measures to continue
improving the capacity of our peacekeeping operations
personnel. It is in that framework that Indonesia
initiated presidential statement S/PRST/2019/4, relating
to training and capacity-building for peacekeeping
operations, during our presidency of the Security
Council in May.
Secondly, the role of United Nations police in
peacebuilding and sustaining peace needs to increase.
Strengthening the rule of law through police reform is
one of the key tasks of United Nations police in postconflict situations. The highest consideration must be
given to the needs, capacities and priorities of host
States, as well as to ensuring national ownership. We
also need to recall the broad and comprehensive scope
of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, ranging from
advancing political solutions and enhancing the political
impact of peacekeeping to strengthening partnerships.
All elements should be mutually reinforcing. Indonesia
stands ready to share its experience and contribute to
that important undertaking.
Thirdly, we must redouble efforts to increase the
participation of women in police peacekeeping. The
presence of women police officers will improve the
performance of United Nations police units, including in
protecting civilians and responding to sexual violence.
Indonesia is a strong supporter of greater representation
of women in peacekeeping. More efforts certainly
need to be made to increase their representation at all
levels of United Nations police — for instance, what
we underlined a few days ago with Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed (see S/PV.8657) concerning
the need to pay special attention to the needs of women
police in the field, including with regard to deployment
kits, housing and home leave rules.
19-35473

06/11/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Indonesia has been a longstanding contributor
to United Nations police peacekeeping. Currently,
there are 326 Indonesian police officers serving in
six United Nations peacekeeping missions, including
two formed police units in the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and individual
police officers in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan and the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hudaydah Agreement. We stand ready
to deploy police officers with special skills in areas
such as investigation, serious and organized crime,
sexual and gender-based violence and communityoriented policing.
Allow me to ask the briefers some questions. To the
three Police Commissioners, what are the most pressing
challenges facing their respective missions in terms of
policing mandates? What can the Council do to address
those challenges? What has been done to improve
community outreach? What are the challenges in that
domain? To what extent do they hinder the achievement
of mission mandates?
Lastly, I would like to underline that every time
we put our men and women in harm’s way as part of
any United Nations mission, we tell them to always
be proud to wear the Blue Beret or Blue Helmet with
honour and dignity, for they are all serving humankind
and saving lives. I salute all the Blue Berets and Helmets
in the Chamber, as well as those who are serving on
the ground.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
today’s briefers for their contributions to our discussion.
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix provided
us with a strategic outlook that reveals the broader
perspective that the Security Council needs in its
deliberations. The Police Commissioners’ follow-up
briefings gave us a picture of the everyday challenges
and achievements of police officers in the field. I
would also like to thank the presidency for inviting
Ms. Marie-Joseph Fitah-Kona, who shared with us the
highly valuable perspective of a host nation, crucial
to building partnerships, which from the perspective
of United Nations Police is the key element to
understanding current and emerging challenges and

S/PV. 8661

eventually delivering efficiently on the mandate of the
missions of the United Nations.
The importance of the United Nations Police in
peacekeeping was highlighted in the 2016 external
review of the functions, structure and capacity of the
United Nations police mandated by resolution 2185
(2014), and recently reiterated in the Secretary-General’s
report assessing the Police Division (S/2018/1183).
It is also reflected in one of the themes of this year’s
United Nations Police Week in its vision of the United
Nations Police as the system-wide service provider.
And while we may see that growing importance as an
improvement in the system, it comes with a heavy load
of tasks and responsibilities for the Police Division here
at United Nations Headquarters. In that regard, my first
question is for the leadership of the Police Division.
Is the United Nations Police already well equipped in
terms of numbers and quality to provide that service?
And what are the three capabilities or tools that are
most needed to take on that task?
For my second point, I would like to touch on
the responsibility to protect and the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations and to ask whether the Police Commissioners
can already see results for them on the ground. That
said, and bearing in mind the commitments that were
made by police-contributing countries a year ago, I
would be interested to hear if the Police Commissioners
have the necessary capabilities and skills at their
disposal to carry out their missions’ mandates
effectively. I am referring in particular to such crucial
capabilities as language and communications skills, as
well as the meaningful participation of female police
officers in community policing. But I thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix, who has already responded
to my question.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize the importance
of the role of the police component in contributing to
resolving crises and sustaining peace. Unfortunately,
we do not have unlimited resources, and the mandated
tasks of police, which can be instrumental, should
therefore be a part of a systematic approach, which
would help to more effectively utilize missions’ limited
resources through a synergy effect.
Mr. Asumu Abeme (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I would first like to commend Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, for his comprehensive and excellent

19-3547321/28

S/PV.8661

United Nations peacekeeping operations

briefing to the Security Council, which has once
again given us detailed information on the current
evolution of peacekeeping operations through the
reforms introduced by the Secretary-General, aimed at
comprehensive improvement and structural innovation
with regard to equipment and human capabilities, with
a view to dealing with new challenges in an agile,
effective and coherent manner.
I would also like to express our appreciation for the
commendable work of Ms. Marie-Joseph Fitah-Kona,
Adviser to the Mayor of the Third Arrondissement of
Bangui, Ms. Mary Gahonzire, Police Commissioner
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei, Mr. Issoufou Yacouba, Police Commissioner
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, and Mr. Awale
Abdounasir, Police Commissioner of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We also thank the presidency of
the United Kingdom for including this important item
on the agenda of its presidency. It is an opportunity for
all of us to discuss and analyse the development and
ongoing progress of peacekeeping operations in the
wake of the Secretary-General’s reforms.
As we well know, police in peacekeeping operations
are one of the most effective tools that the United
Nations has for ensuring, maintaining and building
peace. To that end, it is clear that United Nations police
peacekeepers must have the best possible training and
equipment and the highest standards of personal conduct
considering the level of their responsibilities. At the
global level, my Government therefore commends the
work of the police in peacekeeping missions in building
and strengthening peace at every stage of a conflict,
because we understand that the police embody and
sustain people’s survival in conflicts by monitoring,
applying, protecting and supporting the law, working
as they do alongside the civilian population and facing
the same challenges on the front lines in carrying out
their job of ensuring citizens’ security. For that, police
services must be effective, efficient, representative,
receptive and responsible so that they can serve and
protect populations.
The Action for Peacekeeping initiative strengthens
peacekeeping by mobilizing collective action by
peacekeeping actors, including all States Members
of the United Nations, the Security Council, the
General Assembly, financial contributors, troopand police-contributing countries, host countries,
22/28

06/11/2019

intergovernmental,
regional
and
subregional
organizations, civil society and the Secretary-General
of the United Nations. In that context, Equatorial Guinea
appreciates all the reforms and actions that have been
undertaken by the Secretary-General, as well as the
improvements that have been made in the balance of the
capacities of peacekeeping operations. That represents
a successful transformation with considerable progress
in terms of political solutions to conflicts and in
improving the political impact of peacekeeping.
In the spirit of this meeting, we have some
questions. Some of them have already been brought
up by a number of other speakers, so I will ask those
that no one has posed yet. First, generally speaking,
what are the obstacles to women’s full integration
into peacekeeping operations? Have there been any
assessments made of the obstacles that they face in
different geographical areas? Secondly, what is the
impact of peacekeeping operations on the ground in the
wake of the new changes made through the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative?
In conclusion, Equatorial Guinea remains firmly
committed to continuing its support for all peace
initiatives, from prevention to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding at every level. We also pay tribute
to the brave men and women who fight every day in
peacekeeping missions in order to ensure international
peace and security, while also securing and saving the
lives of others.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
We thank Under Secretary-General Lacroix,
Ms. Fitah-Kona and the Police Commissioners from
the peacekeeping missions in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Abyei and Mali. I would like to address
three issues during our discussion today — the pivotal
work of the United Nations Police, their anticipated
role and the importance of women’s participation in
peace operations.
With regard to the work of the United Nations
Police, the presence of the Commissioners in the Council
with us today during the annual holding of United
Nations Police Week is a testament to the continuing
confidence of the Security Council in the growing
importance of policing in peace operations, whether
by effecting smooth transitions for countries emerging
from conflict or in capacity-building and reforming
the security sector, including correctional institutions.
Such multidimensional operations have been created
19-35473

06/11/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

to respond to conflicts that themselves have multiple
dimensions with similarly multiple effects on society,
which necessitates the diversification of peacekeeping
instruments to suit individual countries. That was the
reason for the Security Council’s adoption of resolution
2382 (2017), which acknowledges the importance of
including policing as an element when considering the
establishment of peacekeeping operations.
Turning to the anticipated role of the United
Nations Police, peacekeeping is evolving as the nature
of conflicts evolves, and the needs and expectations of
policing also change in line with the three principles of
peacekeeping. That is why it is worth considering the
issue of not leaving the deployment of United Nations
police to the end of peacekeeping operations. We
should be guided by resolution 2382 (2017) in ensuring
police work, based on each individual situation, when
we consider establishing peace operations. It should
be emphasized that we very much appreciate the role
of troop- and police-contributing countries and their
efforts to rehabilitate peacekeepers and sustain their
training. We also emphasize the principles of discipline
and accountability at all levels.
With regard to the importance of women’s
contribution to peace operations, women play a vital
role at all stages of a conflict. Women in United
Nations Police can also make a particularly significant
contribution in the work of communicating with local
communities and victims of violence or abuse, as well
as by providing the kind of sympathy and protection
that only women’s participation in peacekeeping
operations can ensure, and we must therefore maintain
and strengthen that participation. In that regard, we
would like to congratulate Senegal and Major Diouf on
her award as female police officer of the year, which
in itself testifies to the effectiveness of women police.
In conclusion, many important questions were
raised by my colleagues and we listened to the briefers’
responses. I would like to emphasize what my colleagues
have said regarding the role that the Security Council
should play in ensuring that the United Nations Police
can fully carry out their responsibilities.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We too
would like to express our thanks for the convening
of this meeting and for the important briefings by
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, the respective
Heads of the police components of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in

S/PV. 8661

Mali (MINUSMA), the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), and the Municipal
Adviser from Bangui.
First and foremost, we want to recognize the
relevant functions that police personnel play in United
Nations peace operations and their capacity to act in
the maintenance, consolidation and upholding of peace
in the countries where they are deployed. In that vein,
the Strategic Guidance Framework for International
Police Peacekeeping of the United Nations Police
(UNPOL) constitutes a central tool for generating
common action guidelines that can be replicated in
management, recruitment and training processes and
in performance evaluation mechanisms. In that regard,
we want to emphasize the fundamental role of the work
of promoting, protecting and respecting international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
a principle that is incorporated into each of the aspects
of UNPOL’s work. That is particularly evident in the
strengthening of national institutions and capacities
aimed at restoring and maintaining security and
public order and at ensuring access to justice and
accountability for crimes.
In the case of MINUSMA, the protection of civilians
and the most vulnerable is an essential function that
also helps to reduce intercommunal violence and restore
the presence of the State throughout the country. Police
Commissioner Yacouba referred to some strategies for
contributing to expanding the numbers and presence of
police in various areas across the country. I would like
to ask him what the main difficulties are in achieving
that objective.
We also underscore the importance of fostering
capacities for improving involvement and interaction
with civil society and its respect, with a view to building
greater trust among the population. That is central to
helping create conditions that support ongoing political
processes, such as for example the efforts to explain
national agreements to the local population in the
Central African Republic, an imperative in the current
context, with a view to reducing the persistent violence
across the country and at the same time promoting the
involvement of local authorities. In that regard, I would
like to ask Ms. Fitah-Kona what her experience was of
the police personnel deployed in Bangui in their efforts
to generate a close relationship with the local population
in order to come up more efficient plans for prevention,

19-3547323/28

S/PV.8661

United Nations peacekeeping operations

early warning and police intelligence. How could those
links be strengthened in order to attain those objectives?
Also, as some other delegations have pointed out, the
contribution of women to these processes has moved
from being merely a useful recommendation to a
paradigm of efficient and necessary implementation,
particularly in ensuring rapprochement with local
communities and civil-society organizations, both of
women and young people.
We appreciate the information shared by the Police
Commissioner of UNISFA, Ms. Gahonzire, on the
coordination with joint security committees to address
the presence of armed groups. We would like to ask her
about the role played by female police in that context,
particularly in promoting dialogue and rapprochement
with local communities. Another central element
of UNPOL’s role is providing support in combating
organized crime, which erodes the institutionality
required to sustain peace and often has a transnational
scope and in many cases fosters corruption and forms
a nexus with terrorism. Given all that we have heard,
we would like to ask Mr. Abdounasir, the Police
Commissioner of MONUSCO, how he has been
coordinating at the regional and subregional levels with
a view to generating effective synergies to tackle that
scourge, which also entails disrupting the dynamics of
logistical support.
We would like to conclude by reiterating our tribute
to the thousands of police personnel who carry out
complex and important work for peace and security in
various missions mandated by the Council in conflictaffected countries, particularly those who have
sacrificed their lives in the cause of peace.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
Policing is vital, and as we further consider and
develop our understanding of peacebuilding, it is now
more important than ever, given that police are often
more effective in that context than the traditional
reliance on troops. Mr. Lacroix talked about the State
liaison functions of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur in his introductory remarks
on the Sudan. In that context, I think that as we look
at the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding
in the Sudan, a policing component will be vital in
the follow-on mission. It would be good to hear any
comments he may have on that point.
24/28

06/11/2019

If United Nations policing is to remain effective,
then whether we are members of the Council,
police-contributing countries or police commanders,
we need to listen to the experiences of police officers
on the ground and consider how reform can make a
practical difference. Our German colleague talked
about United Nations policing not yet being at its full
potential, and I agree with that. As the United Kingdom,
we are of course strong supporters of resolutions 2185
(2014) and 2382 (2017) and of the 2016 external review
of the functions, structure and capacity of the United
Nations Police Division, although more should be done
regarding the outstanding recommendations of that
review. We believe that the recent report on policing
by the Secretary-General (S/2016/952) provides an
opportunity to take stock of the various strands of
reform and set out a clear plan for the future. There are
two areas that I want to briefly highlight.
First, the United Kingdom wants to see the full
integration of policing advice into mission planning
processes to ensure that policing expertise is included
in decision-making throughout the life of a mission.
That means, in simple terms, that police experts should
be at the table and should be listened to. That needs to
be underpinned by a strong analytical capability.
Secondly, we want to see United Nations
missions continue to support the development of law
enforcement in host States — we heard from some of
our commanders today about that — and to do that
based on an assessment of host State needs and capacity.
We believe that to maximize impact, the police need
to have the right specialists with the right disciplines
in the right places. We therefore encourage the Police
Division to improve efficiency in recruitment and
subsequent deployment. Recruitment can be slow and
bureaucratic. It should be based on skills, capabilities
and expertise. It should be transparent, fair and open,
and it should differentiate between formed police units
and individual police officers or specialized teams. Of
course, police deploying into missions should be trained
to the highest standards. We therefore want to see the
Strategic Guidance Framework setting out the doctrine
for policing finalized as soon as possible, including all
guidance manuals.
I would like to conclude by noting that I was struck
by what Police Commander Yacouba of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali had to say about the relationship with
the population and the importance of human rights
19-35473

06/11/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8661

and trust. To succeed in their mission, officers clearly
need to be able to police locally in order to understand
communities. A police officer by definition is an officer
of the place where he or she serves. I believe that trust
is more readily formed if police officers reflect the
diversity of the world to which they are sent to protect.

that there is an awareness of the critical importance
of increasing the number of women in United Nations
Police among Member States, and certainly among
ourselves. But we still have to work on those biases
and misperceptions, which have to do with providing
adequate training and improving sensitization.

Like our colleague from Peru, I would be interested
in Ms. Fitah-Kona’s views on best practices regarding
the issue of community policing and establishing trust.
As others have said, and echoing what the Commissioner
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei,
Ms. Gahonzire, had to say, we would like to see action
against the obstacles that prevent women from entering
the United Nations Police. I have one specific question
for Mr. Abdounasir, the Commissioner for the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is about
what the most pressing challenges for United Nations
Police are in the context of the recent strategic review
of 24 September, and how he intends to meet them.

The Police Division has also made it easier for
women to deploy for a shorter length of time, which
is something that the Office of Military Affairs has
done for female police officers as well. We hope that
the possibility of reducing the length of deployment to
six months will make it easier for women, particularly
women with families, to consider deploying in the
United Nations Police.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
We had a good round of questions and answers
halfway through, and we have had a few more questions
since then. I will again turn the floor over to the
briefers to respond to the questions posed or make
further comments.
I give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I will be brief. There were a few
additional questions on women, and I am sure that
there will be many elements in the answer to that
question by the Heads of the police component. But I
think that on the issue of what needs to be done, we
should not only be increasing the number of women
in peacekeeping and the United Nations Police but
also making the environment more welcoming and
appropriate for them. The first question in that regard
was about accommodations and facilities. I think that it
is quite clear that although a lot of work has been done
in that regard, for which I would like to salute the role
of the Department of Operational Support, more needs
to be done to make the physical environment of our
peacekeeping operations fully welcoming to women,
particularly in the police.
The second element has to do with the continuing
issue of bias and misperception, which I believe was
raised by my colleague to my left. As I said, I think

The Police Division has rolled out a number
of training programmes and encouraged women to
apply to them, with a view to enhancing the capacity
of female police officers to apply for a position in
the United Nations Police. There are also a number
of training sessions that are only for female police
officers. I attended one in China last year and was very
impressed not only by the level of training but also by
how motivated the female officers being trained were
and how eager they were to be deployed. I would also
like to highlight that the last United Nations Police
Commanders course, which was organized with the
support of Germany, had 50 per cent female attendees.
I think that there is therefore a lot being done to
further open the possibility for women to apply and be
deployed, including in senior positions.
The President asked a question about the followon presence of the United Nations and the African
Union (AU) in the Sudan, and Darfur in particular. The
State liaison functions certainly have a very important
rule-of-law component, including a police component.
They are very active in capacity-building. The State
liaison functions are a vehicle for transitioning from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding. As the Council
knows, we are in the process of working with the
Sudanese authorities within the tripartite task force
that we created with the AU to determine, in very close
consultation with the Sudanese authorities, what the
modalities and key priorities of a follow-on presence
could be. It is a bit early to say more about that, but it
seems to be quite clear that it is likely that this follow-on
presence could have a strong capacity-building element
following what the State liaison functions are doing.
When we talk about capacity-building in peacekeeping
or peacebuilding, I think that we are essentially talking

19-3547325/28

S/PV.8661

United Nations peacekeeping operations

about the key State capacities that have to do with
security and the rule of law, and therefore the role of
the police is very important.
I would also like to address what the representative
of Indonesia referred to regarding some of the key
elements that we would like to enhance in order
to improve the skills and capacity of our police
component. I already mentioned the issues of language,
facilities and accommodations and further increasing
the role and participation of women, but I think it is
also important to highlight the increasing need for very
specific skills in the United Nations Police and which
some statements have referred to. They include skills
in criminal investigation, gender-based violence and
organized crime, among a number of other things.
What I would like to say in that regard is that the
Police Division has developed very specific training
groups and programmes to address this increasing
need for some of the skills that I mentioned, inter
alia. Therefore, these training programmes have been
developed in very close consultation with Member
States and by listening carefully to what our mission
has to say in that regard. Of course, we are also making
more and more requests to our police-contributing
countries to provide us with police officers with
those specific skills, which are increasingly needed in
our mission.
The President: I now give the f loor to
Ms. Fitah-Kona.
Ms. Fitah-Kona (spoke in French): I would say
that it is precisely because patrols are unarmed that
they are able to win the trust of the people. I would
also like to add that there are only three women in the
patrols in the Kilomètre-5 district, so we also need to
strengthen the presence of women in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). They patrol
the entire district on foot and without weapons, which
fosters the people’s trust in community-based policing.
I would also like to mention that, since that crisis, our
internal security forces have not been operational and
are not present in the Third Arrondissement. However,
thanks to MINUSCA, conditions have improved in the
PK5 neighbourhood, where I am a Municipal Adviser.
Allow me to offer my final thoughts. I would like to
say that greater efforts must be made to protect women
involved in community-based policing and even to
encourage them. I also wish to state that disarmament
26/28

06/11/2019

must take place in our country, because we have lived
through war. That would allow to promote development
and respect for human rights. We also need to hold
democratic elections in our country and ensure
acceptable security conditions.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming that the
Central African Republic is counting on the international
community. They are our brothers and sisters and must
help us by supporting the peace process.
The President:
Mr. Abdounasir.

I

now

give

the

floor

to

Mr. Abdounasir (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank all of the speakers for their kind
words about United Nations police.
Regarding the question on organized crime, I
would like to add that the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) police is working to support local
authorities in establishing mechanisms at the national
and provincial levels and to create synergies with
regard to cross-border crime. A lot has been achieved,
but I must say that much remains to be done, in light of
the fact that a vast swathe of the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where armed groups operate,
maintains direct links to organized crime.
Turning to the question on the different challenges
posed by the strategic review, I would like to raise three
points that we believe are crucial.
The first is the demilitarization of the response, in
the understanding that the protection of civilians across
much of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is an
issue more of security than of defence.
Our second challenge with regard to the strategic
review was to reconcile the population with State
institutions, because the people have lost confidence in
the State authorities. We were essentially tasked with
establishing community-based justice and with fighting
all forms of impunity and other root causes of the gap
between the population and State structures.
The third challenge posed by the strategic review
is the matter of restoring State authority across the
country’s entire territory which, of course, involves the
police, the judiciary, the prison system and the territorial
administration. We believe that these are functions that
the United Nations police could very easily fulfil and
that is why we hope that the Council will recommend
19-35473

United Nations peacekeeping operations

06/11/2019

increased functions for the MONUSCO police force so
that we can achieve these results.
The President:
Ms. Gahonzire.

I

now

give

the

floor

to

Ms. Gahonzire: I am talking about promoting
dialogue based on sustaining peace, which is being
done throughout all phases of the mission. It is
understood that the involvement of all actors in this
regard is essential.
For the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA) to do this, we had to involve
everyone, particularly women and children, in the
understanding that, when it comes to violence, they
are the ones who suffer most. We mobilized everyone
across different segments of society, including women,
children, youth and traditional and religious leaders.
It is through this full participation of society that,
along with the community protection committees, we
were able to engage everyone in crime prevention and
reduction campaigns.
However, the problem remains that we do not have a
host police force. Without a host police force, we cannot
do much. The United Nations police has mobilized
and strengthened community protection committees,
in which we currently have 600 participants, 89 of
whom are women, as well as crucial partners and even
schoolchildren. However, there is no host police force.
The other point is that, alongside our duties that are
well prescribed in the initial mandate, we have to carry
out reform and restructuring. In 2017, the reform and
restructuring document was completed. In line with
resolution 2445 (2018), we were supposed to meet the
parties and conduct a joint integrated planning exercise.
So far, the parties have been invited four times with
a response from the Sudan only. We have mobilized
the community, but there are decreasing numbers of
individual police officers to mentor and advise them.
Alongside that, we are witnessing increased levels of
criminality and disorder.
In 2017, the reconfiguration of UNISFA was headed
by General Agwai, who is now retired. The findings
were that the mandate did not match the situation on the
ground. That was the reason for the reconfiguration.
Through the adoption of resolution 2445 (2018),
the Council increased the number of police personnel
by 640, including three formed police units and 148
individual police officers. To date, none of them has

S/PV. 8661

been deployed. At same time, the number of individual
police officers is decreasing. The situation warrants
more law enforcement, but the United Nations police has
done a lot, and I am glad to report that the communities
appreciate and are demanding a greater United Nations
police presence.
Similarly, I wish to respond to question asked by
the representative of Indonesia concerning the most
pressing problem at the moment. We realize that the
United Nations police is a system-wide provider and
is the force’s face for the community. We are there.
Crime is on the increase. It is as if we were walking on
a tight rope. In 2011, the Security Council established
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
with a personnel ceiling of 50. Later, the situation
demanded more. To date, there is insufficient force to
respond to the increasing level of criminality. While
Abyei is a contested area, we lack a host country police
force. Overall, those are the challenges facing us as
police officers.
The President: I thank Ms. Gahonzire for her
additional comments and honesty about the challenge.
I now give the floor to Mr. Yacouba.
Mr. Yacouba (spoke in French): I thank Security
Council members for their questions.
I received a question on the primary role that the
army plays in managing issues related to terrorism and
on the support that the United Nations police can provide
in that aspect. On the ground, the analyses done by all
of the various partners point, first and foremost, to
security issues that require appropriate responses. Mali
has already adopted a national prevention strategy to
counter violent extremism, terrorism and transnational
organized crime, which is truly a comprehensive
approach. All the various parts of the structure have
their role to play.
From a security perspective, we have civil defence
missions within the framework of national defence. The
army has a role to play, but it is limited to supporting
the security services, which work with the justice
system to ensure the legal framework for operations. At
that level, I believe that the police of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, and the Mission in general, have worked to set up
appropriate structures, including the specialized police
and the specialized investigative brigade, which are

19-3547327/28

S/PV.8661

United Nations peacekeeping operations

wholly responsible for dealing with all issues related
to terrorism.
At the core of the structures of the police and the
gendarmerie, we established investigative brigades with
the ability to work on the ground to collect evidence
of criminal activity, which is often very ephemeral. At
any given time, we have people ready to be deployed
on the ground at the request of the specialized brigades
or of police officers already on the ground. I therefore
believe that we have our role to play in that regard. We
often receive requests from investigative judges to help
them with their investigations.
Two other questions that more or less can be
answered as one concerned, first, the difficulties
involved in the deployment of the Malian defence and
security forces and obstacles hindering communitybased policing. In that area, a national strategy on
security sector reform has also been adopted. There
is a secretariat responsible for the implementation of
security sector reform, but unfortunately, although the
structure has been established, I believe that the issue
of political will remains.
A new Permanent Secretary was appointed
approximately two weeks ago. We hope that she will be
able to move things forward. We are doing everything,
as we wait, in responding to the most urgent cases
in anticipation of the implementation of the security
sector reform. As I said, community-based policing is
essential to peace and security. Even if we deploy people
on the ground, if they lack an accurate perception of the
situation and trust is absent, they will not be able to
enjoy the cooperation of the local population or collect
the intelligence needed.
That is why we are making the case for creating
an environment of inclusivity. I think that the case we
made before Ministry of Security was successful. Since
then, a recruitment drive has been carried out based
on a quota system by region. The Ministry of Defence
has also, for the first time, authorized a quota for the

28/28

06/11/2019

Malian army and the national guard, and we hope that
the presence of people from those communities in
those forces will create the necessary conditions for
improving the security situation on the ground. Those
are the aspects that I wanted to speak to.
The other aspect concerning deployment involves,
first, the lack of equipment. Even if people are ready
to be deployed, if the necessary infrastructure and
equipment are lacking, we cannot deploy them, as their
mere physical presence is not enough. They must be
provided with the means necessary to protect themselves
and the population. I take this opportunity to thank the
countries that contribute to the Trust Fund in Support
of Peace and Security in Mali, which has allowed us
to accomplish much in terms of the redeployment of
security and defence forces in both the north and the
centre of the country.
The President: I thank Mr. Yacouba for the
clarifications provided.
I thank all colleagues for what has been an excellent
and thoroughly interactive discussion. I am particularly
grateful to our three Police Commissioners for finding
the time to brief the Security Council. Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix is a more regular fixture, but it was
good to have him, as well. I thank Ms. Fitah-Kona for
joining us from Bangui, where, I know, it is now quite
late, and for staying with us.
It has been a rich opportunity to get information
from those working on the ground. With particular
regard to the Police Commissioners and those who
serve under them, they have the gratitude and respect
of the Council, which sends them on deployment and
is very conscious of its obligations when it does so.
I would also like to thank our interpreters for their
excellent work, as always, our colleagues from Security
Council Affairs Division and our conference officers
for all they do.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

19-35473
