United Nations

S/PV.9285

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9285

th meeting
Thursday, 16 March 2023, 3.05 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Afonso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Parga Cintra
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Asare
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Security sector reform
Letter dated 1 March 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/168)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-07783 (E)
*2307783*

S/PV.9285

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

Let me start by outlining the progress we have
achieved in implementing the priorities set out in the
report. I would then like to share with members some
of the key challenges that we have encountered, before
turning to avenues for joint action.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Security sector reform
Letter dated 1 March 2023 from the
Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2023/168)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Slovakia and South Africa to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Alexandre
Zouev, Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law
and Security Institutions in the Department of Peace
Operations, and His Excellency Mr. Bankole Adeoye,
African Union Commissioner for Political Affairs,
Peace and Security.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/168, which contains the text of a letter
dated 1 March 2023 from the Permanent Representative
of Mozambique to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zouev.
Mr. Zouev: I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Council on the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/280) on strengthening the United Nations
approach to security sector reform. The SecretaryGeneral outlines a new, bold vision for security
sector reform, focusing on the primacy of politics and
governance and on concrete recommendations for
the work of the United Nations in implementing the
Security Council’s landmark resolution 2553 (2020), on
security sector reform, fully in line with the Action for
Peacekeeping Plus initiative and Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982).
2/19

16/03/2023

Regarding progress, much has been achieved
since the adoption a little more than two years ago
of resolution 2553 (2020). As I just mentioned, the
Secretary-General issued his first report on security
sector reform in March 2022. For the first time, through
the Inter-Agency Security Sector Reform Task Force,
a system-wide programme of action on security sector
reform was launched to guide the implementation of the
report. Strategic partnerships have been strengthened,
including with the African Union, the European Union,
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development and the World Bank.
Next, we established our Security Sector Reform
Unit standing capacity in Brindisi. In a very short time,
our nimble team has become indispensable in ensuring
flexible, timely and high-quality support to peace
operations, country teams and national institutions,
particularly in the context of crises and mission
downsizing. In the Democratic Republic of Congo,
for example, our experts helped the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to mobilize resources and
capacities for the transition and facilitated consultations
with the World Bank on the need for a public
expenditure review of the security sector. But while
these achievements are certainly worth celebrating,
our work is not done. As the Secretary-General
noted, the Organization is facing major challenges in
accomplishing the tasks mandated to it by the Security
Council in resolution 2553 (2020), particularly at the
country level.
First, we often encounter situations where inclusive
national ownership and leadership of security sector
reform is lacking. Without buy-in from the highest
national authorities, the United Nations lacks a foundation
for its support and for sustainable peace more broadly.
Secondly, national parties and international partners
are often reluctant to integrate security sector reform
into the early stages of mediation and peace processes,
risking a recurrence of conflict when key questions
around security sector reform remain unresolved for
too long. Thirdly, too often critical progress in reforms
cannot be financially sustained after a drawdown of
peace operations, risking relapses into conflict. Lastly,
23-07783

16/03/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

we see too many barriers to women’s participation,
as gender stereotypes are deeply embedded in the
institutional cultures of security services, undermining
people’s trust in them.
Addressing those challenges requires strong
United Nations leadership. It needs predictable
mandates by the Council for our peace operations to
assist security institutions and build democratically
governed, accountable, inclusive and people-centred
services. It will also require strategic and effective
interventions informed by political and economic
analysis that identifies barriers and articulates
incentives for national actors to commit to security
sector reform.
To tackle those shortcomings, the SecretaryGeneral advised us first of all to strengthen the role
of United Nations leadership in building and fostering
national ownership of security sector reform, which
we are committed to doing, including by developing a
security sector reform policy and delegated guidance
and tools for United Nations principles.
Secondly, we must improve our efforts to facilitate
dialogue, share lessons learned, offer technical advice
on security sector reform to parties during mediation
processes and prioritize the implementation of security
sector reform provisions in peace processes.

S/PV.9285

needed to fulfil them undermine the credibility of the
United Nations and undercut our support for the people
we serve. We need Member States’ support for the new
United Nations programme of action on security sector
reform designed to implement their priorities, including
for our newly established Security Sector Reform Unit
standing capacity in Brindisi, which I mentioned. In
that respect, we sincerely thank the Governments of
Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Norway and Slovakia for
their financial support to our standing capacity.
Finally, I want to stress the oversight role of the
Council and the importance of consistent reporting. We
believe that a fixed cycle of the Secretary-General’s
thematic reports on security sector reform, every five
years, for instance, would strengthen the Council’s
consideration of the topic and therefore our collective
support to national security sector reform efforts. Every
aspect of strengthening United Nations engagement on
security sector reform will continue to depend on all
of us working together to address the challenges and
priorities outlined by the Security Council and the
Secretary-General.
The President: I thank Mr. Zouev for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Adeoye.

Fourthly, we must develop the first-ever global
report on the status of women in the defence sector. I
would like to thank Germany and Switzerland for their
generous contributions to that end.

Mr. Adeoye: The African Union (AU) is pleased
to participate in today’s debate on the maintenance of
international peace and security, with a special focus
on security sector reform. We consider this discussion
very relevant, as it coincides with the tenth anniversary
of the launch of the African Union Policy Framework
on Security Sector Reform, adopted in January 2013.
The AU policy underscores that security sector reform
is an integral part of its peace processes and an
essential element in conflict prevention, early recovery,
peacebuilding and indeed sustainable development.

In closing, I would like to thank Mozambique
for organizing today’s meeting, as well as South
Africa for its leadership in facilitating the adoption
of resolution 2553 (2020), on security sector reform.
The implementation of such a critical resolution starts
with well-tailored and prioritized mandates. In that
regard, the Security Council could more systematically
integrate into its instructions the key tenets of the
resolution, such as national ownership, the primacy of
political solutions and the need for governance-focused
and gender-sensitive approaches at all stages of security
sector reform. Furthermore, mandates on security sector
reform without the financial and human resources

For a continent afflicted by recurring conflicts,
security sector reform is a key component of the AU’s
efforts to silence the guns. It is as a prime enabler for
building resilience and achieving peace dividends. The
African Union Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to
Silence the Guns in Africa by 2030 acknowledges the
challenges in developing an African defence and security
sector that is professional and disciplined and capable
of creating national security institutions with balanced
civilian oversight and control. However, we still often
continue to see the eruption of conflicts or relapses into
them, perpetuating cycles of violence and sometimes
disrupting stabilization and peacebuilding efforts.

Thirdly, we must ensure the financial sustainability
of security sector reform, including through publicexpenditure reviews, which we conduct, as I mentioned,
in partnership with the World Bank.

23-077833/19

S/PV.9285

Maintenance of international peace and security

16/03/2023

The core principles of the African Union’s security
sector reform policy align with the United Nations
security sector reform principle. In that regard, I would
like to highlight first, African solidarity; secondly,
regional integration; thirdly, national ownership;
fourthly, context specificities; and fifthly, security
sector reform as part of a broader democratization and
reform process that will include the role of women in
partnering for peace.

knowledge-exchange platform to bring together all
knowledge communities when it comes to think tanks
and do tanks aimed at concretizing our peace efforts.
I would like to conclude by assuring the Council that
through our efforts to re-energize national commitments,
we can achieve a clearer, more comprehensive, more
consistent and focused whole-of-society approach to
security sector reform, which will drive resilience and
build peace both on our continent and globally.

The AU is therefore pleased that the report of
the Secretary-General on security sector reform
(S/2022/280) provides an excellent strategic overview
of the global security sector reform and governance
landscape. Indeed, it inspires the AU Commission to
undertake a critical analysis of all concrete outcomes and
to address the challenges after 10 years of implementing
the AU security sector reform policy. It is important
to emphasize that our member States continue to face
challenges when it comes to the implementation of
security sector reform, owing to inadequate resources,
the absence of operational national security sector
reform coordination mechanisms and the competing
priorities of Governments. The African Union itself has
extended technical support through the Commission
to a number of member States, including the Gambia,
the Central African Republic, Ethiopia, GuineaBissau, Lesotho, Madagascar and Mali, to name only
a few. We are also scaling up a number of initiatives
that relate to entrenching and consolidating security
sector reform in some of those member States through
the nexus approach, which focuses on peace and
security and development. That includes an African
facility to support inclusive transitions, which is
being put together by the United Nations Development
Programme and the AU Commission, as well as the
enhanced operationalization of the African Standby
Force. At the regional level, we are also partnering
with the regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms on the African continent on early warning
and conflict prevention through the interregional
knowledge-exchange platform.

The President: I thank Mr. Adeoye for his briefing.

Let me assure the United Nations that the African
Union remains a steady partner. We are committed
to mainstreaming security sector reform norms and
working methods in all of our endeavours, in particular
with the regional economic communities. That is why
we launched the African Union-led Lessons Learned
Forum on AU Peace Support Operations in 2022.
We have also continued to work towards using the
4/19

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Mozambique.
At the outset, I wish to thank our
briefers — Mr. Alexandre Zouev, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Rule of Law and Security Institutions of
the Department of Peace Operations, and Ambassador
Bankole Adeoye, African Union Commissioner for
Political Affairs, Peace and Security — for their
important contributions to this debate.
Mozambique attaches great importance to the
strengthening of security sector reform. which is a
crucial prerequisite for States to enhance their ability
to provide security, manage and resolve conflicts, and
promote social and economic development, as well as
to protect human rights and ensure the participation of
civil society at large. In that regard, we highly commend
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/280), which
highlights critical elements on the way forward to
strengthening the comprehensive approach to security
sector reform. The report reiterates the importance
of ensuring that the development of security sector
institutions adheres to the same governance principles
and standards applied to any public services institution.
Ensuring accountability, transparency, effectiveness
and efficiency in the delivery of security services in a
participatory, inclusive and responsive manner is critical
for fostering sustainable peace and stability and enabling
societies to move towards achieving their development
goals. We are cognizant that security sector reform
is a complex process, particularly in the context of
transitions from protracted conflicts to peacebuilding. It
is critical to combine factors that can contribute to the
success of security sector reform — chief among which
is the ownership of States in defining their strategies
and priorities.
Today, the world is confronted with new challenges
to peace and security as a result of events such as climate
change, cyberthreats and the increasing proliferation
23-07783

16/03/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

of terrorism and violent extremism leading to terrorist
acts — with a particular incidence in Africa. In our opinion,
that requires a shift in the security sector response to
those challenges. A bottom-up approach is critical in that
regard. We need to reinforce complementarities through
cooperation and partnership at the national, regional
and international levels. In that regard, we welcome the
Secretary-General’s efforts to strengthen the integration
of United Nations security sector reform in assistance in
the field, including through the new standing capacity
on security sector reform and governance in Brindisi.
We also emphasize the importance of improving the
participation of all segments of civil society, with a focus
on women and young people, who can play an important
role as key transformative agents for the prevention and
resolution of conflicts at the local level.
Mozambique recognizes the linkage between
security sector reform and socioeconomic development.
In that regard, we hold the view that reform efforts
should have a holistic vision and be more comprehensive
so as to address the root causes of conflicts.
We believe that reforms implemented through
national dialogue, wide consultations and participation
by various actors are likely to be more successful. From
that perspective, it is vital to understand the political and
economic role of institutions, the dynamics of powersharing, the distribution of resources, the local culture
and the formal legislation that governs our societies.
We welcome the continuing strong cooperation and
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union Commission in implementing the United
Nations-African Union Joint Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security.
Let me conclude by reiterating Mozambique’s
support for the role that the Security Council can and
must play. It can ensure a greater integration of efforts
in aligning and coordinating broader international
support by regional and bilateral partners behind
national priorities. It can also ensure transparency and
accountability. In addition, we believe it can avoid
gaps and contradictory roles in this important area,
particularly in the context of post-conflict situations
such as our own.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements.

S/PV.9285

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): Allow me to start by
expressing my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting on such a timely topic. I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Alexandre Zouev and
Commissioner Bankole Adeoye for their briefings. I also
welcome the presence of the representatives of South
Africa and Slovakia in their capacities as co-Chairs of
the Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform.
For sustainable peace and stability, building inclusive, effective and accountable institutions across the
sectors is of primary importance. The security sector, in
particular, is at the heart of national authority, and its institutional reform is therefore first and foremost a political
endeavour. If it is to succeed, we need both careful political consideration and well-crafted capacity-building.
With that in mind, I would like to highlight two points.
The first is the importance of inclusive ownership.
A clearly defined blueprint must come from national
leaders and be owned by their peoples through a broad
political process. The participation of the people at all
levels is a key driver of reform in this area. Transparency,
accountability and respect for human rights and the rule
of law are fundamental to security sector governance in
order to gain people’s trust. With that in mind, reforms
must be tailored to and aligned with the values and
norms that shape each country. The reforms themselves
are an inevitably arduous task, and it takes a long time
to consolidate their achievements. Discontinuing the
process in the middle of reform has a significant and longterm impact on people’s daily lives. Mobilizing sufficient
national resources for strengthening institutions through
necessary budgetary arrangements must be a part of
the reform process. Technical capacity-building in that
area to make the process more sustainable deserves
more attention.
Secondly, international partnership is essential
for boosting national efforts. Assisting security sector
reform is a major mandated task for United Nations
peace missions. With their long record of engagement,
they are best placed to play a critical role in coordinating
international efforts for more results in line with national
priorities. Addressing the complex humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus of security sector reform
efforts requires a comprehensive approach. Close
communication and information sharing at the technical
level should be further encouraged, with the United
Nations entities at the centre on the ground. An integrated
strategy shared by all the relevant stakeholders will lead
to greater predictability and further mobilization of
financial resources.

23-077835/19

S/PV.9285

Maintenance of international peace and security

Last week the Council paid a visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Japan has been a long-term
partner of countries striving to carry out the formidable
task of security sector reform. Professional, accessible
and accountable law-enforcement forces are vital in that
country, which is battling illegal armed groups and rampant
conventional crimes. Fully in line with the Government’s
priorities, Japanese experts are closely working on site with
the Congolese National Police to introduce a communitypolicing model. Our support includes capacity-building
for police officers in areas such as budgetary management
and the development of infrastructure for accessible police
posts, as well as building the trust of the local people.
In collaboration with the International Organization
for Migration, the work will expand into the area from
which the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
already withdrawn in accordance with its transition plan.
Japan remains committed to working with all
partners to further support security sector reform and its
governance for international peace and security.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I too would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Zouev,
African Union Commissioner Adeoye and Ambassador
Joyini for today’s briefings.
The United States Government is deeply
committed to security sector reform as a tool for
promoting international peace and security. The
Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/280) lays out
several challenges and recommendations for improving
security sector reform globally, and a few key themes
emerge, which I would like to highlight and amplify.
The first is the importance of inclusive national
ownership to the long-term success and sustainability
of security sector reform and good security sector
governance. The United States fully supports the
Secretary-General’s focus on ensuring the meaningful
participation and representation of local communities,
women, young people and civil society in the development
of national security strategies and plans. We recognize
that local security mechanisms and practices can
provide viable entry points for building trust with local
populations and encouraging cooperation with State
security institutions. Locally driven civil and military
consultative mechanisms, such as those cited in Côte
d’Ivoire and Liberia after peacekeeping transitions, can
also play a critical role in sustaining and strengthening
reform efforts in transition contexts.
6/19

16/03/2023

We endorse the importance of putting human
rights-focused and gender-responsive approaches at
the centre of engagement in security sector reform. As
the Secretary-General said, demonstrable human rights
compliance is a key indicator of the professionalism
of security forces and the exercise of responsible
command. Without it, security sectors will not gain the
trust of populations.
The second key theme is the need to address the
governance of the security sector and the necessary
security sector reform during early phases of United
Nations engagement, as well as the real risks that come
with rushing or deferring long-term agreements on
security sector reform in governance. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report points out, leaving security-related
disputes unresolved and putting in place temporary
arrangements that are doomed to fail only undermines
and delays long-term reform efforts. Similarly, deferring
those tasks to newly established mechanisms or technical
bodies also appears to reduce the timely development
of durable security arrangements. Experience shows us
that these processes take longer and are less successful
than processes that outline longer-term national
security architecture arrangements upfront.
The third key theme is the importance of developing
strategic partnerships, integrated and joint planning
processes, joint assessments and more transparent
cooperation and coordination among partners working
in the security sector reform and governance space.
We support the recommendations in the SecretaryGeneral’s report for the United Nations to conduct
security sector reform assessments in cooperation with
national and international partners in order to inform
planning, monitoring and evaluation of security sector
reform efforts. The report highlights useful examples
of joint planning in which strategic partnerships have
provided a solid foundation for long-term sustainable
security sector reform and governance efforts. We
commend such collaboration and fully support the
Secretary-General’s recommendation to further
strengthen it.
We also take note of the many opportunities for
capacity-building highlighted throughout the report. It
is clear that there is much work to be done in order to
continue to learn from our experiences in security sector
reform and to strengthen the practice of security sector
reform as a tool for international peace and security.
23-07783

16/03/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank Mr. Zouev, Assistant Secretary-General for
Rule of Law and Security Institutions, and Mr. Adeoye,
African Union Commissioner for Political Affairs,
Peace and Security, for their briefings. I also welcome
the Permanent Representatives of South Africa and
Slovakia. I would also like to thank Mozambique for
putting this theme on the agenda.
This meeting allows us to address the important
points in the Secretary-General’s report on security
sector reform (S/2022/280). We appreciate the
Secretariat’s efforts to develop the programme of action
to implement resolution 2553 (2020) and acknowledge
the initiatives undertaken by the African Union and its
member States with an eye to strengthening security
governance capacities.
Switzerland believes that governance and
security sector reform are essential to peace, security
and sustainable development. Beyond our efforts
within bilateral cooperation, the cornerstone of our
commitment in this sphere is the Geneva Centre for
Security Sector Governance. The Centre carries out
programmes involving more than 70 States, and its
contribution to the areas of governance and security
sector reform are globally recognized.
I would like to make three remarks here.
First, investing in institutions for effective,
responsible and professional security means investing
in lasting peace and conflict prevention. Every peace
process redefines the balance of forces in society. That
must be fully considered during peace negotiations,
and clear implementation processes that are mutually
agreed among all stakeholders must be followed in
order to avoid a relapse of tensions.
Secondly, supporting security sector reform
means strengthening the rule of law. The security
sector must integrate the specific security needs
of the population as a whole. The full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in all institutions
and all decision-making, accountability and monitoring
mechanisms must therefore be guaranteed. It is in that
spirit that Switzerland is engaging with the Gambia,
for example, alongside the Immigration Department,
in order to improve the quality of services provided in
local communities by strengthening its management
and accountability, with a focus on gender.

S/PV.9285

Thirdly, United Nations peacekeeping and special
political missions can play a role in improving security
governance. It is essential that support be part of a
national political process that develops the capacity
of security institutions. Regional and subregional
instruments, such as that the African Union Policy
Framework on Security Sector Reform, provide
important information that can guide those efforts.
Successful security sector reform is often a key
factor in enabling a mission to minimize its presence
and, in time, withdraw. The Council should therefore
strengthen the mandates of missions with regard to the
role of security sector reform and encourage enhanced
cooperation between peace operations or political
missions and the United Nations country teams.
Resolution 2553 (2020) recognizes that a
representative,
reactive,
effective,
efficient,
professional and responsible security that operates
without discrimination and in full respect of human
rights and the rule of law is the cornerstone of peace
and sustainable development. That is why Switzerland
is committed to promoting good governance in the
security sector in the framework of its priority of
building sustainable development.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Mr. Alexandre Zouev, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Rule of Law and Security Institutions,
for his briefing on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/280), as well as Mr. Bankole Adeoye, African
Union Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and
Security, for his valuable briefing this afternoon.
But above all, I thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened such an important meeting in order for us to
address a critical theme for peacebuilding and ensuring
stability in post-conflict situations.
The weakness of the institutions tasked with
guaranteeing security diminishes a State’s capacity
to maintain public order and the rule of law. In States
in which political processes have been established
with the support of peace missions, that shortcoming
creates conditions for the resurgence of violence and
the reversal of peace processes, making it sometimes
necessary for certain missions to return, despite having
seemingly attained their objectives.
Peace and sustainable development can be achieved
only if States have a professional, efficient and effective
security sector that protects all members of society and
acts in accordance with the principles of responsibility

23-077837/19

S/PV.9285

Maintenance of international peace and security

and non-discrimination, within the framework of the
rule of law and in full compliance with the protection
of human rights. That is why the security sector reform
support that the United Nations offers to countries that
require it is so valuable.
In that sense, the Peacebuilding Commission is a
tool that supports peace efforts in countries in conflict
or in transition. Its advisory role to the Security Council
can provide important elements for the withdrawal
phase of peace missions and can promote consistency for
a global analysis of the issue. Moreover, its convening
power facilitates dialogue among the actors concerned
and proposes strategies, including financial ones, in the
necessary reconstruction and institution-building efforts
for the conflict-recovery phase.
We thank the Secretariat for its efforts in that area
and for its report on strengthening security sector
reform, published in March 2022, which reiterates
the principles of the support provided, including
inclusive national ownership, the primacy of politics
and the central importance of good governance. That,
in turn, bolsters transparency, responsibility and
accountability as an essential part of efforts to achieve
Sustainable Development Goal 16 — peace, justice and
strong institutions.
The institutional capacity of States in the management
of security sector resources, as well as transparency and
accountability — as we have said — are all essential for
security sector reform. In that regard, as we undoubtedly
need resources, we call on the international and regional
financial institutions to provide support to countries in
need, as set out in Sustainable Development Goal 17.
International cooperation in this field and South-South
cooperation are also essential.
We are convinced that the participation of all actors
strengthens processes of transition to peace. In particular,
the contribution of women in the security sector fosters
social cohesion, which is undoubtedly necessary for
development and the prevention of violence. We agree
with the Secretariat on the need to incorporate the
gender perspective in security sector reform as well
as the importance of having effective oversight and
accountability mechanisms to end impunity for all related
forms of violence. We also advocate the mainstreaming
of child protection in security sector reforms, through
appropriate military training and vetting systems to
prevent perpetrators of violations and abuses against
children from joining national security forces.
8/19

16/03/2023

Finally, I would like to mention such emerging
threats as transnational organized crime and arms
trafficking, and note that demobilization, reintegration
and reconciliation efforts must be accompanied by
disarmament measures and goals, national management
of small arms and light weapons, and the enforcement
of arms embargoes.
Council resolution 2553 (2020) has already
stressed the importance of security sector reform in
better integration of, inter alia, the functions of police,
justice and corrections, defence, and border services,
management and security. As members of the Security
Council, we must therefore introduce this aspect into
the mandates of peacekeeping missions, particularly
for transitional phases.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): At the outset, I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zouev and African Union
Commissioner Bankole Adeoye for their briefings. I
would also like to thank Mozambique for organizing
today’s meeting on this important topic.
One of the primary purposes of the United
Nations, as stated in its Charter, is the maintenance
of international peace and security. It is a keystone of
the Organization’s daily work in peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, including conflict prevention and
post-conflict stabilization.
The strengthening of the United Nations
comprehensive approach to security sector reform
and broader support for this approach are essential
for the establishment of sustainable, secure and stable
institutions and environments around the world.
Security sector reform is a long-term and political
process that needs to be nationally driven and requires
political commitment and leadership. It also depends
on inter-institutional cooperation and broad stakeholder
participation to achieve the widest possible buy-in.
Security sector reform governance is central to
the women, peace and security agenda. Knowing who
is at greatest risk of perpetration and victimization
is essential for meeting the security needs of men,
women, boys and girls. Translating this operationally
will require training and capacity-building across the
armed forces, police, border guards and intelligence
services. Vetting and codes of conduct are crucial for
ensuring that the security sector is a trusted partner.
Gender-responsive legal, judicial and security sector
reform can help overcome obstacles in women’s access
to justice.
23-07783

16/03/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

An intersectional understanding of security sector
reform would gradually provide individuals and the
State with more effective and accountable security
that takes a human rights approach and strengthens
democracy, the rule of law and good governance. A
professional, effective and accountable security sector
and an accessible and impartial law-enforcement and
justice system are necessary to lay the foundations for
peace and sustainable development.
Security sector reform is a core element of
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development. While
ensuring national ownership, the United Nations has
strengthened the assistance to national authorities to
undertake critical and complex security sector reform
processes. Malta welcomes the progress made in
mainstreaming child protection in military training,
standard operating procedures, and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes. Childprotection units in national security forces and effective
age-assessment mechanisms to prevent underage
recruitment have helped advance this agenda. Malta
stresses that reforming the security sector in postconflict environments is crucial to the consolidation of
peace and stability, promoting poverty reduction, rule
of law and good governance to prevent countries from
relapsing into conflict.
While the United Nations has played a valuable role
in promoting security sector governance and reform,
national and local-driven processes remain essential
for successful outcomes. Moreover, a holistic approach
is needed to encompass the security and justice needs
of the local population, ensuring that security sector
reform results in State security and human security.
Engagement with civil society is crucial as a key vehicle
for transparency, accountability and oversight.
If we strive to build a better future, accountability
must be our cornerstone. Security sector reform
is crucial to addressing impunity and promoting
accountability for violations and abuses of human rights
and international humanitarian law, and undoubtedly
contributes to upholding the rule of law and access to
justice. By incorporating security sector governance
and reform into strategic partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations, as well as through existing
mechanisms, the United Nations could strengthen
security sector reform.
Finally, for these long-term political processes to
be effective, Member States should promote the equal
representation of women at all levels in all security

S/PV.9285

institutions, include gender expertise in field operations
and guidance, and ensure that the workplace environment
is free from sexual and gender-based harassment and
discrimination. It has been proven that women’s full,
equal and meaningful participation has helped to build
inclusive, accountable and legitimate institutions that
promote lasting peace and sustainable development.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I also thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zouev and African Union
Commissioner Bankole Adeoye for their briefings.
As Mozambique’s helpful concept note for this
meeting (S/2023/168) sets out, security sector reform
and governance play an important role in State-building
and peacebuilding. The United Kingdom has invested
in security sector reform and governance at home and
overseas. We have done so because we believe that
a democratically accountable and well-functioning
security sector is an integral part of a broader system
of government that provides protections for its citizens,
based on the fundamental principles of universal human
rights and respect for the rule of law.
That is what makes security sector reform relevant
not just in post-conflict reconstruction, but also in
conflict prevention, because trust between citizens and
the State is premised on the existence of institutions
that serve and protect the needs of those citizens. For
example, today the Security Council has just issued
a presidential statement on Libya’s electoral process
(S/PRST/2023/2) (see S/PV.9284). We welcome the
5+5 Joint Military Committee’s engagement with
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and
their commitment to coming together to create a safe
environment for free and fair elections. As a co-Chair
of the Security Working Group for Libya, the United
Kingdom will continue to support efforts for the joint
working and eventual unification of Libya’s militaries
into one State military that is accountable to an elected
Government and able to comprehensively tackle Libya’s
security challenges.
Allow me to make three additional points.
First, the United Kingdom welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts aimed at strengthening the United
Nations comprehensive approach to security sector
reform, including in his particular focus on security
sector governance. In this regard, the United Nations
has a strong comparative advantage underpinned by
experience and an approach that prioritizes integrity,
transparency and accountability.

23-077839/19

S/PV.9285

Maintenance of international peace and security

We are grateful to Mr. Zouev for his update on the
implementation of the United Nations programme of
action on security sector reform. The United Kingdom
continues to support a more integrated and coherent
United Nations approach to security sector reform
and governance.
Secondly, the Security Council plays an important
role in driving the application of best practices on
security sector reform by the United Nations and its
partners. That includes Council cooperation to shape
fit-for-purpose mandates to guide the engagement
of United Nations peace operations and improve the
coordination of international support.
Thirdly, we all need to do more to advance
women’s inclusion in security sector reform processes.
The United Kingdom’s new action plan on women
and peace and security underscores precisely that
point, which will guide our domestic and international
policymaking in that area.
The United Kingdom will continue to be an
advocate for security sector reform and governance,
working with the United Nations and other partners,
including the African Union, to maximize the impacts
of our support.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes Mozambique’s initiative to hold this
important meeting. We thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Zouev and African Union (AU) Commissioner
Adeoye for their briefings. I welcome the presence of
the Permanent Representatives of Slovakia and South
Africa at today’s meeting.
Security sector reform in post-conflict countries is
an important task in consolidating peace and achieving
development. During its term as a non-permanent
member of the Council, South Africa pushed for the
Security Council to adopt resolution 2553 (2020) on
that issue. We should take this meeting, initiated by
Mozambique, as an opportunity to explore effective
ways for security sector reform and effectively improve
the capacity of the countries to maintain peace, stability
and development. China would like to share four points
of view.
First, we should adhere to the right direction
of country ownership. The report of the SecretaryGeneral of last March (S/2022/280) emphasized that
country ownership is the basic principle of security
sector reform and that countries have various histories,
10/19

16/03/2023

political environments and cultures and are at different
stages of security sector development. Only by adapting
measures to local conditions can reform be successful.
South Sudan has made steady progress in implementing
the security arrangements under the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan and has completed the first
phase of the graduation of the necessary unified forces.
The Central African Republic has strengthened the
deployment of local security forces to consolidate and
extend State authority. Mali has actively implemented
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
and has promoted the integration of 26,000 former
combatants. Such practices are in line with the political
and security situation and the realities of the security
sector in the countries concerned and are conducive
to maintaining peace and stability in the relevant
countries. Imposing the so-called common standards
and best practices without regard for the basic national
conditions and urgent needs of the countries concerned
may be counterproductive and not conducive to building
the security sector in those countries.
Secondly, we should attach importance to integrating
the two major issues of security and development. In
many post-conflict situations, countries face security
threats, such as armed groups, violent extremism and
ethnic conflicts. A professional, efficient and dedicated
security sector is an important guarantee for national
development and construction. At the same time,
security sector reform is a multifaceted and formidable
task and cannot be achieved overnight. Security sector
reform must be aligned with national development
planning and the socioeconomic development level,
coordinate with reforms in other areas, such as
economy and the rule of law and require a balanced and
adequate allocation of resources in order to gain lasting
momentum and win the support of all parties. Increased
investment in poverty eradication and sustainable
development will help to provide more concrete
material guarantees for security sector reform. The
disarmament and demobilization of former combatants
is a challenge for security sector reform in many postconflict countries. The Office of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo adopted a
development perspective in tackling that challenge and
have jointly developed and implemented a communitybased disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme to help former armed personnel find
23-07783

16/03/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

livelihoods, thereby removing the profit motive for
them to rejoin the armed conflict. That work must
continue in the future.
Thirdly, we should deepen the building of
partnerships. Post-conflict countries face challenges,
such as insufficient capacity-building and limited
resources to promote security sector reform. The
international community and the relevant United Nations
agencies should actively provide constructive assistance
and should focus such assistance on intelligence,
early warning, emergency response, equipment and
logistics, et cetera, so as to support African countries in
improving their counter-terrorism capacities and ability
to maintain stability. The United Nations missions in
Central Africa, Mali, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, South Sudan and other countries have been
tasked with supporting security sector reform. They
should strengthen communication with the countries
concerned and carefully develop support programmes,
in accordance with Security Council mandates.
With regard to mission drawdown and withdrawal,
the relevant missions should strengthen their dialogue
with the security authorities of the countries concerned
and draw up orderly and responsible plans to prevent
a security vacuum. African countries and the African
Union have accumulated rich experience in security
sector reform, resulting in the AU Policy Framework on
Security Sector Reform and other achievements. China
advocates an African approach to resolving African
problems, supports African regional organizations
in playing a leading role and encourages countries to
strengthen experience-sharing to form synergies.
The China-United Nations Peace and Development
Fund has prioritized support for security sector reform
in Africa in recent years. It has provided support for
projects, such as support for criminal justice responses,
the development of national counter-terrorism
programmes and training courses, and achieved positive
results. China is willing to deepen cooperation with
other international partners and strengthen support
for Africa.
Fourthly, we should eliminate the negative impact
of sanctions. In recent years, countries such as the
Sudan, South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Central African Republic have firmly
requested that the Security Council lift arms embargoes
and other sanctions, stating that such measures have
seriously hindered their national security capacity-

S/PV.9285

building and security sector reform processes. The AU
has repeatedly adopted relevant resolutions and formed
a common position. The Security Council should listen
to Africa’s voice, pay attention to its concerns, act with
the greatest sense of urgency and promptly adjust and
lift the Council’s sanctions that do not meet the needs of
the situation and remove obstacles to building security
sectors in African countries.
At the same time, some countries have initiated
unilateral coercive measures and applied long-arm
jurisdiction indiscriminately. The relevant practices are
in serious violation of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and seriously undermine
the promotion of development and maintenance of
security in African and other developing countries. It is
a long-standing and consistent call of the international
community to oppose unilateral coercive measures.
We urge certain Western countries to immediately
lift unilateral coercive measures and prevent
further negative impacts on the peace, stability and
humanitarian situation of the countries concerned.
Mr. Asare (Ghana): I would like to begin by
thanking Mozambique for having convened this
briefing on security sector reform. We believe that
the briefing is timely. We would also like to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General of the Department of Peace
Operations, Mr. Alexandre Zouev, and the African
Union Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and
Security, Ambassador Bankole Adeoye, for their useful
perspectives. We also appreciate the participation of
the Permanent Representatives of South Africa and
Slovakia, co-Chairs of the Group of Friends of Security
Sector Reform, in this meeting.
We take note with appreciation of the SecretaryGeneral’s March 2022 report (S/2022/280) and
acknowledge the Council’s own useful contributions,
made through resolutions 2151 (2014) and 2553 (2020),
in coming to a common understanding on the principles
and expectations for security sector reform (SSR),
including inclusive national ownership, the primacy
of politics in security sector reform and the need for a
governance-focused approach.
As the Council, we have on our agenda several
conflicts that are intra-State in nature, as well as
some that have relapsed after past efforts to resolve
them. At the heart of the Council’s effectiveness in
supporting sustainable peace in such conflict settings,
there should be an approach that centralizes security

23-0778311/19

S/PV.9285

Maintenance of international peace and security

sector reform in order to enhance the implementation
of peace agreements between Governments and
armed groups, and that contributes to the stability
of fragile societies by taking measures to rebalance
State power, professionalize security institutions
and law enforcement practices, protect the rights of
all citizens, and forge social cohesion among diverse
national groups.
In responding to the question as to what the
Council can further do to ensure the inclusion of SSR
in peace processes, it is necessary to underscore that
the Council’s increasing role and involvement should
not undermine the centrality of national ownership and
leadership for peace efforts. Through its resolutions
and mandates, the Council should reinforce the existing
commitments of national actors and help to unlock the
resources required for advisory and technical assistance
by national Governments to undertake what is usually a
difficult and sensitive reform.
Furthermore, we believe that through its periodic
consideration of the SSR agenda, the Council could
assess performance across different peace operations
in order to understand practices that have yielded the
best results and have presented challenges that are
unique. In that regard, we also believe that further
leverage could be mobilized by the Council from the
Inter-Agency Security Sector Reform Task Force for a
whole-of-United-Nations approach to SSR that spans
the peace spectrum, including prevention, conflict
resolution, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, sustainable
peace and development. The Council’s encouragement
for a whole-of-society approach towards security
sector reform is also especially useful in contexts
in which non-State institutions and establishments,
such as traditional and religious leaders, play a
role in maintaining order, protecting societies and
resolving disputes.
We would encourage the Council’s continued
interest in SSR, even after a peace operation has
transitioned, including through its engagement with
the Peacebuilding Commission and other relevant
bodies that support the development of expertise and
capacity at the national and local levels. Similarly,
support for efforts that enhance trust and confidence
among national authorities, national security actors
and institutions, and the population would be
relevant, including through the programmes of United
Nations country teams. In that regard, we call for
the maintenance of an inclusive process that benefits
12/19

16/03/2023

from the contributions of women and young people. In
re-establishing the norms of fragile societies around
proper security sector management, it is important to
be mindful that they are long-term commitments and
that the resources required for capacity-building need
to endure beyond the short and medium term, if we
are to achieve results that move such societies away
from a negative and divisive orientation of political
contestation and an oppressive security approach.
Funding commitments in alignment with Sustainable
Development Goal 16 would be a useful way to ensure
the sustainability of the commitment.
I would like to emphasize the important contribution
and support that regional and subregional organizations,
such as the African Union, can further make towards
security sector reform and governance on the African
continent. The African Union, through its Peace and
Security Architecture and associated doctrines, the
African Governance Architecture and the African Peer
Review Mechanism, can play a major role in reorienting
the security sector of the countries of the continent in
a manner that positively impacts sustainable peace and
development. We encourage the provision of dedicated
resources to support such regional endeavours and the
sustained engagement of stakeholders in that regard.
Lastly, we wish to highlight the importance of
applying lessons learned from past and ongoing
security sector reform mandates in order to better
inform future SSR mandates. The Council’s mandates
for the promotion of national dialogue, the enhancement
of civilian oversight and public financial management
in countries such as Libya, Guinea-Bissau and Somalia,
for security sector governance, police reform, prison
reform and defence sector reform in the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Libya, and for capacity-building and the establishment
of national security coordination mechanisms in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Libya, Mali and
Somalia, contain essential elements for inclusion in the
Council’s future mandates.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
We appreciate the importance and timeliness of this
briefing on security sector reform in the context
of peacekeeping, at a time when the risks of postconflict countries relapsing into the vicious cycle of
violence are becoming ever greater. Gabon welcomes
such an approach aimed at preventing the resurgence
of conflicts, while improving the effectiveness and
coherence of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions.
23-07783

16/03/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

We thank Assistant Secretary-General Alexandre
Zouev and Commissioner Bankole Adeoye for their
substantive contribution to today’s discussion, and I
also welcome the representatives of South Africa and
Slovakia to this meeting.
Security sector reform is one of the pillars on which
we must focus our efforts to achieve a sustainable
peace, especially for post-conflict countries. In
adopting its first resolution on security sector reform
(resolution 2151 (2014)) on 28 April 2014, the Security
Council acknowledged the vital need to help fragile
States to strengthen their capacity for the management
and oversight of security services in order to ensure
their stabilization and ability to build peace. Moreover,
the adoption of resolution 2553 (2020) reaffirmed
the stakes involved in security sector reform and
gave impetus to a new dynamic, thereby offering the
opportunity to strengthen the means and strategies of
action at all stages of the peace process — conflict
prevention and resolution, peacekeeping and postconflict reconstruction — by focusing on destabilizing
factors, such as poverty, inequality, social exclusion
and violent extremism. For Gabon, successful security
sector reform ensures stability and development. It
enables not only the strengthening of a country’s
resilience but also the restoration of State authority
throughout its territory. However, the effectiveness of
such reform necessarily depends on two fundamental
pillars: human security in all its forms and the
imperative ownership of the State concerned.
The meaningful participation of communities in all
their diversity, with the full participation of women and
young people, is vital to achieving that goal. Lasting
peace can be built only with the participation of local
communities, which must be able to participate in
all phases of the peace process. State ownership of
security reform must therefore be predicated on the
latter in order to develop reforms that are based on a
solid community foundation, while taking into account
the specific needs and characteristics of every State. In
that regard, the role and involvement of regional and
subregional organizations remain crucial. It was to
respond to that demand, among others, that the African
Union adopted its Policy Framework on Security
Sector Reform in 2013, the primary goal of which is to
provide a platform for member States and subregional
organizations to implement, monitor and evaluate
security sector reform processes, which are decisive for
stabilizing the continent.

S/PV.9285

It is undeniable that cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, through strategic partnerships and
predictable and adequate funding of AU peace
operations, is part of the dynamic that is essential
to creating an environment in Africa conducive to
sustainable peace. It is also important to ensure that
the mandates of United Nations peace operations and
special political missions continue to place a special
emphasis on security reform. The Council needs to
build on that momentum to develop more responsive,
realistic and adequately funded disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes.
Given the importance of DDR to peacebuilding, it is
crucial to integrate it into the overall reform process.
Successful security sector reform requires input
from all, including international financial institutions,
the private sector and civil-society actors, stakeholders
whose contributions should be well coordinated in
support of the efforts of States. The fact is that fragile
States often have very little leeway in their budgets.
Facing multiple challenges with limited resources, they
have to make difficult trade-offs and have less funding
to devote to security sector reform. We therefore
need to intensify the support for building such States’
institutional capacities so that they can responsibly plan,
mobilize, budget, allocate and spend national resources
for defence and security. I would like to emphasize the
important role of the Peacebuilding Commission in
that regard.
In conclusion, as the United Nations embarks
on a new common agenda aimed at rebuilding trust,
redressing inequalities and strengthening the social
contract between Governments and societies, the
international community must redouble its efforts
through dialogue and cooperation to strengthen the rule
of law and ensure that States’ security sectors serve
their peoples.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Alexandre Zouev, Assistant
Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security
Institutions in the Department of Peace Operations,
as well as Mr. Bankole Adeoye, African Union
Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security,
for their informative briefings. We also welcome the
participation in today’s meeting of the representatives
of South Africa and Slovakia in their capacities
as co-Chairs of the Group of Friends of Security
Sector Reform.

23-0778313/19

S/PV.9285

Maintenance of international peace and security

We believe that a sound public policy establishing
competent authorities and a functioning security
sector, particularly an effective army, is key to building
a stable State and society. The security sector is an
important aspect underpinning State sovereignty,
which is why security sector reform should always be
seen as a follow-up to the national political process.
The most effective security sector is one that takes
into account a society’s unique historical, cultural and
political characteristics and serves the interests of the
entire population. In a number of developing countries,
especially in Africa, one of the challenges is the fact
that institutions and customs there have often been
transplanted into post-colonial societies without regard
for their national specificities.
If security sector reform initiatives are to be
successful, they must be implemented by national forces
through actual deeds, not words. National ownership is
critical to the legitimacy, sustainability and effectiveness
of such reform programmes. However, even minimal
progress in transforming the security sector can
bolster citizens’ trust in the authorities, as well as
create conditions conducive to a return to normalcy, a
peaceful social and economic life and a safe education.
Unfortunately, in many cases post-conflict countries
are not in a condition to maintain their security and
restore viable and effective State institutions without
external support. In such situations, the international
community’s assistance is especially important and
should be based on fundamental principles that include
the consent of the host country and respect for its
national sovereignty and political independence.
We agree with the Mozambican presidency’s
concept note (S/2023/168) that proposals on security
sector reform should not be based on provisions hastily
inserted into agreements that do not take into account
broader political arrangements on power-sharing and
the historical and country-specific context for the
formation of armed forces and security bodies, or that
are derived from externally imposed prescriptions.
We often see rigid timelines imposed by donors
or formulaic approaches undermining the fragile
process of building State institutions for maintaining
security. Sanctions, including those authorized by the
Security Council, should never get in the way of reform
processes. All of these issues can lead to a reluctance to
accept innovations and in the worst-case scenario to the
14/19

16/03/2023

undermining of agreements previously reached, further
fragmentation of the security sector and relapses
into conflict.
There is no question that security sector reform
should be carried out in the context of broader
reconstruction processes and include comprehensive
efforts on the political and socioeconomic tracks. Only
a holistic approach can give rise to a hopeful and lasting
peace and security and ensure a sustainable outcome.
Security sector reform is a resource-intensive process
in itself, and it is often closely linked to the equally
complex process of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration. Timely financial support makes
it possible to better address existing and emerging
challenges, but obviously the allocation of funds must
be long-term and sustainable.
The United Nations, above all through its
peacekeeping and special political missions,
plays an important role in providing appropriate
international assistance to States. For example, many
early peacebuilding issues are now included in the
multidimensional mandates of peacekeeping operations.
Peacekeepers play a key role in supporting security
sector reform, as well as disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, and in restoring law-enforcement
bodies and the rule of law in general. We note the
special role within the United Nations system played
by the Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions,
which provides assistance to United Nations missions
on the ground and to States at their request.
We also note the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in post-conflict recovery and in security
sector reform in particular. Developing a comprehensive
approach to consultative and financial support for postconflict countries significantly improves the reliability,
accountability and professionalism of national security
structures. We should not underestimate the potential
of the Peacebuilding Fund as a flexible instrument for
financing projects in the area of security sector reform.
When providing assistance with reforms, it is important
for the various stakeholders to coordinate their efforts to
ensure that the reforms and the training of personnel are
based on the same approaches and principles throughout
the country. And of course the international community
must understand that complex processes — especially
in post-conflict environments — such as reform of the
security sector and the rule of law require painstaking
effort, patience and a sufficiently long period of time to
ensure their full restoration and functioning.
23-07783

16/03/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Mozambique for taking the initiative to organize
today’s meeting, which is long overdue.
Improving security sector governance is a key
feature of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982) and the African Union’s
Silencing the Guns initiative, as well as many peace
operations mandated by the Security Council.
I also thank Assistant Secretary-General Zouev
and African Union Commissioner Adeoye for their
valuable briefings, and I welcome the participation of
South Africa and Slovakia in this meeting.
A security sector based on the rule of law,
integrity and accountability can provide the bedrock
for a resilient country. Ideally, it supports stability,
helps to address external and internal threats and
responds to the needs of the people in moments of
emergency. For countries emerging from conflict, an
effective, inclusive and accountable security sector
is a precondition of sustaining peace. While failed
security sector governance has contributed to the
resurgence of conflict in the past, successful efforts
have enabled peacebuilding and reconciliation. For
instance, South Africa leveraged security sector reform
to cement peace at home in the 1990s. Security sector
governance considerations remain a critical priority in
a broad range of situations, from Mali to South Sudan
and from Colombia to Guinea-Bissau. I would like to
make three points here today in order to help move that
agenda forward.
First, security sector reform must be nationally
owned and led. While international actors can
play a critical role in helping to set up frameworks
and support their implementation, they must be
co-designed with the priorities of national stakeholders
at the centre. Since peace operations eventually end
and aid programmes are redirected, it is critical that
international engagement focus on strengthening
national capacities and supporting context-specific
solutions. The governance-focused approach suggested
by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2022/280)
provides a useful framework that can encapsulate the
perspectives of a broad array of stakeholders. In order
to be effective, those strategies must consider the
social and cultural norms that, in addition to formal
legislation, enable successful and context-specific
reform efforts. An inclusive approach is vital in the
context of peacekeeping transitions in order to ensure

S/PV.9285

that the United Nations can continue to provide adequate
support. The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example, has worked with the Congolese Government,
local partners and regional organizations to integrate
security sector reform into the Government’s national
action plan. As the peace operation draws down,
national institutions will be able to drive that process
forward to consolidate hard-won gains with support
from the United Nations country team.
Secondly, the security sector cannot be genderneutral, because the impact of insecurity is not genderneutral. Not only do we need to increase the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women in national
security sectors, but the Council should also include
gender-related language in its mandates on security
sector reform. We must use the unique opportunity
that security sector reform provides to strengthen
both women’s representation and the implementation
of gender-responsive regulations and policies, thereby
leading to better and more sustainable outcomes.
Thirdly, security sector reform is an eminently
political process, not just a technical one, and must
be considered as such. We often see mediation efforts
discussed in this Chamber that differentiate between
the political and the security tracks. That approach
works only if there is open communication between
the diverse set of stakeholders negotiating the different
arrangements. Too often, peace agreements fail to be
implemented because outstanding security-related
issues remain unresolved, or because they are left for
follow-up technical committees to finesse. Political
buy-in is essential, and the logistics of processes such
as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and security sector reform must closely follow the
political lead. As the Secretary-General encourages
in his report, adopting that approach will support the
consolidation of sustainable political conditions that
underpin successful security sector reform.
To conclude, let me take a moment to celebrate the
efforts of the many women and men in uniform who
are decisively contributing to peace and stability. The
United Arab Emirates is proud to host the Sheikha
Fatima bint Mubarak women and peace and security
training initiative. Since 2019, the programme has
contributed to more gender-responsive national
security sectors, with more than 500 participants from
Africa, Asia and the Middle East. As an Iraqi cadet
recently told a journalist upon her graduation: “I joined

23-0778315/19

S/PV.9285

Maintenance of international peace and security

16/03/2023

the training course because it was the first time Iraqi
woman officers got to train abroad. I believe I can
make a difference”. As a Council, let us harness that
optimism to make a difference and consolidate peace
after conflict.

security sectors, including through its peacekeeping
operations and political missions. We also commend
the important efforts that regional and subregional
organizations make to support and guide country-led
efforts in that respect.

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to thank you, Sir,
and the Mozambican presidency for including this item
in our discussions, and I also thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Zouev and Mr. Adeoye for their briefings.

We believe that promoting the full, equal and
effective participation of women in the security
sector contributes to the establishment of inclusive,
accountable and legitimate institutions. We encourage
States to develop security sector reforms, strategies
and programmes that systematically take gender issues
into account. Mainstreaming a gender perspective into
the justice and security sectors is the right and smart
thing to do. We have done so in Albania and have
seen clear benefits. Another key element of delivering
effective security to citizens is the strengthening of the
rule of law at all levels. Justice and accountability are
fundamental elements of security sector governance
and reform. An effective and fair justice system means
better respect for human rights, and it also means
greater accountability.

In our view, the reform of the security sector
represents a comprehensive process for enhancing
the provision of security by making it more effective,
transparent, accountable, inclusive and consistent
with the principles of human rights, the rule of law
and good governance. In various countries, effective
security reform has often played a vital role in political
processes, national reconciliation. transitional justice,
stabilization and reconstruction. It has also been key to
the consolidation of peace and stability in post-conflict
settings. We have seen many times that effective
security sector reform strengthens institutions and
leads to increased transparency and accountability, just
as we have witnessed how corruption and insufficient
political will undermine efforts for reform.
External assistance, including from the United
Nations, has proven to play an important role in
promoting security sector governance and reform.
However, it is ownership at the national and local levels
that remains key. Local government, civil society
and non-governmental organizations provide critical
contributions to both initial reforms and successful
long-term governance. Regional organizations and
bilateral frameworks can be successful only by
providing added value to dedicated and genuine efforts
at the national level.
Peacekeeping operations can play an important
role in helping country authorities to develop inclusive
national strategies and priorities for security sector
reform. Peacekeeping operations operate in very
complex environments, and it is undeniable that their
role is often misunderstood, as they are expected to
perform beyond their mandates. To be able to fulfil
their mandate and contribute to security sector reform,
those missions need to be provided with sufficient,
predictable and sustainable funding and to improve
their communication and public outreach. Indeed, the
United Nations has a key role to play in supporting
Member States to develop robust, credible and effective
16/19

Let me conclude by highlighting that experience
has proven beyond any doubt that societies rooted in
freedoms give people more power, choices and rights.
That in turn leads to better governance and progress,
thereby allowing societies to become more prosperous,
educated, healthy and happy,
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mr. Zouev and Mr. Adeoye for their
briefings and to underscore three points.
First, the security sector reform needed to promote
lasting peace should be part of a project encompassing
political and governance issues as a whole. France
welcomes the United Nations programme of action
on governance and security system reform for 2022
to 2025, which has a global approach and will result
in a new strategy this year. France is careful to ensure
that major peacekeeping operations make security
sector reform an essential component of their political
support. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which the Council visited last week, support for
security sector reform is one of the priority tasks of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The country
needs trained, equipped, organized and coordinated
armed forces to protect the population and defend its
integrity and sovereignty.
23-07783

16/03/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Secondly, security sector reform can be achieved
only with the political will of the host State. That is a
prerequisite for gaining the confidence of international
partners and is founded on respect for the mandates
handed down by the Security Council. It also depends
on respect for human rights, the rule of law and the
guarantee that the processes are inclusive and meet the
needs of all members of society, especially women and
young people. Finally, it requires mobilizing the host
country’s own financial resources, which complement
those of its partners.
Thirdly, coordinating action on the ground is a
major challenge and is first and foremost an internal
issue for the United Nations, essential to ensuring that
the support that peacekeeping operations provide for
security sector reform continues in the context of the
transition to country teams. However, there must also
be coordination between the United Nations and other
actors while maintaining respect for the fundamental
values of the United Nations and its Charter. In that
regard, we welcome the action of regional organizations,
which play an essential role, as, for example, in the work
of the Economic Community of West African States in
support of security sector reform in West Africa.
As President Macron recalled in a statement in
February on the partnership between France and Africa,
one of our aims is to position Europe as a key partner
on defence and security issues for Africans. We would
like to point to the role played by the European Union
on the continent through the European Union capacitybuilding and training missions. France is also engaging
on a bilateral basis. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we are encouraging the authorities in their
efforts to train and strengthen their military personnel
through our support for officer training schools, in
particular the Kinshasa military academy. We are also
participating in training the country’s armed forces in
jungle combat.
It is vital to prevent security fragilities and gaps from
undermining the foundations of States and favouring
harmful actors, and it is therefore our collective duty to
support security sector reform processes.
Mr. Parga Cintra (Brazil): At the outset, let me
congratulate the presidency of Mozambique for the
initiative of convening the Council to discuss the
important issue of security sector reform. I also thank
the briefers, Mr. Alexandre Zouev and Mr. Bankole
Adeoye, for their insightful remarks.

S/PV.9285

Efficient, professional and fully functional
security sectors are fundamental elements of countries’
governance systems. In many post-conflict situations,
security sector reform is paramount in consolidating
and building peace and is also an important basis for
achieving sustainable development. With that in mind,
I would like to raise five points.
First, national ownership must be the underlying
principle guiding all initiatives concerning security
sector reform. The intentions and priorities of the
countries concerned must be respected. The imposition
of blanket solutions that do not take into account specific
realities on the ground can be a recipe for failure and
result in the reversal of hard-won achievements.
Secondly, security sector reform is an intrinsically
political process. It involves not only the implementation
of governance rules and the reorganization of
institutions, but also the distribution of power and
resources within a society. It is therefore essential as
a way to advance sustainable and inclusive political
solutions for conflicts.
Thirdly, deficiencies in the security sector may
become a root cause of conflict. Security institutions that
are unaccountable and unrepresentative can contribute
to fostering grievances in certain communities and
sectors of society. Moreover, inefficient and outdated
security institutions are often incapable of dealing with
terrorist and other illegal armed groups as they emerge.
Security sector reform is therefore fundamental not
only to consolidating peace in post-conflict situations
but to addressing conflict itself. That is why a number
of United Nations peacekeeping missions have
provided an important role in assisting security sector
reform, which lies at the crossroads of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.
Fourthly, security sector reform must be
understood not as a solution in itself or as a selfcontained endeavour, but as part of a comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy that also encompasses economic
and social aspects. Reconstruction and development
resources should be used in a balanced way so as to
ensure that the security sector has the budget it needs,
along with the social spending needed to alleviate
poverty and promote sustainable development. That
helps to eradicate breeding grounds for conflicts.
It is failure to deal with basic development needs
that runs the biggest risk of dragging a country back
into conflict. The disarmament, demobilization and

23-0778317/19

S/PV.9285

Maintenance of international peace and security

reintegration of former combatants are integral parts
of this process. Moreover, security sector reform in
itself can be a source of employment opportunities and
a driver of economic growth, especially in deprived
regions and communities.
Finally, security sector reform requires coordination
and cooperation on the part of multiple stakeholders.
In addition to peacekeeping missions, special political
missions and country teams should play active roles, in
accordance with their mandates, to assist the countries
concerned in advancing reforms. The African Union
and other regional and subregional organizations
also have a role to play in these processes. And the
Peacebuilding Commission is an important platform
for garnering international support for security sector
reform initiatives. The African Union and other regional
and subregional organizations have made great strides
in helping post-conflict countries introduce reforms
of their security sectors. Taking advantage of their
experience, the United Nations must strengthen its
coordination and cooperation with them, and Brazil
stands ready to contribute to those efforts.
The President: I would like to once again welcome
the Permanent Representatives of South Africa and
Slovakia and commend their contributions to the
holding of this meeting.
I now give the floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): I would first of all like
to thank you, Mr. President, and your country for
organizing this important briefing, which provides a
great opportunity for various actors to share their views
on the implementation of resolution 2553 (2020), as well
as on the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/280) on
strengthening the United Nations approach to security
sector reform. I would also like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zouev for his efforts and for his
informative briefing, as well as the Commissioner of
the African Union.
I am pleased to start with the first part of the joint
statement by the co-Chairs of the Group of Friends
of Security Sector Reform. We greatly appreciate the
opportunity to engage with the Security Council and
very much look forward to further cooperation with
Council members, as well as with all other interested
Member States.
For the first time, the United Nations has developed
a coherent implementation framework for the work of
18/19

16/03/2023

the Organization on security sector reform (SSR). We
congratulate the inter-agency SSR task force for the
programme of action for SSR, which plans concrete
actions flowing from resolution 2553 (2020) and the 18
recommendations set out by the Secretary-General in
his report.
The programme of action carries those most
critical initiatives that the United Nations, Member
States and partners are required to undertake if they
are to generate impact at the country level, including on
emerging security challenges, such as climate change,
peace agreements, public expenditure reviews, national
security planning, gender and youth, and through the
newly established standing capacity on security sector
reform and governance, based in Brindisi.
I find it particularly relevant that this briefing is
taking place shortly after the recent Security Council
mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
has been mentioned by many Council members.
From a national perspective, I am happy to announce
that Slovakia will be making its second financial
contribution to the programme of action. I encourage
all Member States to consider making financial
contributions to this important work of the Secretariat.
With the adoption of resolution 2553 (2020),
through which Member States strengthened their
commitment to security sector reform and the priorities
set out by the Secretary-General, the expectations and
tasks for United Nations assistance have significantly
expanded, but sufficient resources have not yet been
made available.
I echo Assistant Secretary-General Zouev’s
remarks in that regard and reaffirm that mandates given
without the funding for implementation undermine
the credibility of the United Nations and undercut our
support for the people we serve. In addition to Member
State support for the programme of action, Member
States should also officially establish and resource
the standing capacity on security sector reform and
governance, from either the regular budget or the
peacekeeping support account.
The rest of our joint statement will be delivered by
my colleague, Ambassador Mathu Joyini, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of South Africa.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
23-07783

16/03/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Ms. Joyini (South Africa): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting to discuss the
Secretary-General’s report on security sector reform
(SSR) and governance (S/2022/280). I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zouev and Commissioner Adoye for
their insightful briefings.
The statements delivered at the meeting today
confirm the centrality and importance of security
sector reform as part of the continuum of peacebuilding
and peacemaking. The report of the Secretary-General
reminds us that security sector reform and governance
needs to be addressed early on in peace processes. It
should not be put aside, to be given attention only after
peace agreements have been signed. That approach
leads to security sector reform programmes that lack
adequate resources.
We cannot stress enough the importance of national
ownership of security sector reform and governance. It
is the prerogative of each State to determine its approach
and needs. It is important that the support provided by
the international community respond to the needs of
the affected country. We heard in today’s debate that
there is no one-size-fits-all approach to security sector
reform and governance, but it is always context specific.
Importantly, it is largely a political process.
We have learned, from our experience in South
Africa, that security sector reform is also successful
when it is inclusive. There are many actors who need to
be involved, including private security actors, traditional
leaders, religious communities, women and youth.
That is to ensure the needed political support, given
the importance of the security sector in all countries.
The involvement of women and youth is one of the
core elements of the women and peace and security
agenda, as well as of the youth, peace and security

S/PV.9285

agenda. As we prepare the New Agenda for Peace,
we need to place security sector reform at the centre
of the discussions, given the importance of security
sector reform for peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
including conflict prevention.
My co-facilitator and I welcome suggestions for
establishing a consistent time frame within which
the Secretary-General would present a report on
the implementation of resolution 2553 (2020) to the
Security Council. We look forward to discussing with
Mozambique and Council members how we could make
that recommendation possible.
I conclude by urging all members of the Security
Council and the Group of Friends of Security Sector
Reform to join efforts in implementing the following
three main priorities brought up in this meeting: first,
to integrate the tenets of resolution 2553 (2020) into
country-specific mandates on SSR, ensuring that
they are aligned with the new United Nations vision
of SSR; secondly, to establish a consistent time frame
within which the Secretary-General would report on
the implementation of resolution 2553 (2020) to the
Security Council; and lastly, to mobilize financial
support for the implementation of the programme
of action on SSR, as indicated by my co-facilitator,
including for the standing capacity on security sector
reform and governance, based in Brindisi.
The President: I thank the Permanent
Representatives of Slovakia and South Africa, as
co-Chairs of the Group of Friends of Security Sector
Reform, for their statements and, more importantly, for
their contribution to our proceedings and for the way
forward regarding this important report (S/2022/280).
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

23-0778319/19
