S/PV.7054

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7054th meeting

Wednesday, 30 October 2013, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mehdiyev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Azerbaijan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Ms. King
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. M’Beou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 14 October 2013 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2013/606)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolution 2077
(2012) (S/2013/623)

13-53767 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1353767*

S/PV.7054

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

I held extensive, open and highly interesting
meetings with Somalia’s President, Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud, the Prime Minister, the Speaker of
Parliament, the Foreign Minister and practically all
other members of the Government. I also met with
African Union and African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) representatives, security officials, the
diplomatic community, civil society and our dedicated
United Nations team. During the meetings, we spoke
much about national reconciliation. My interlocutors
highlighted the need to establish a culture of dialogue
and a new approach to regional engagement.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 14 October 2013 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2013/606)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to Security Council resolution 2077 (2012)
(S/2013/623)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the presence
at the Council table of Her Excellency Ms. Fowsiyo
Yusuf Haji Adan, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Somalia.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/623, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2077 (2012).
I also wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/606, which contains a letter dated
14 October 2013 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
I welcome the Deputy-Secretary General, His
Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, and I give him the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I am honoured
to address the Council today on Somalia. This is an
important briefing for me. I have a long relationship to
Somalia. Twenty-one years ago, I visited the country as
the United Nations first Emergency Relief Coordinator.
I still have vivid, painful memories of the massive
suffering at that time — the worst I have ever seen, I
should add.
For decades, it was difficult to see how Somalia
could lift itself out of conflict and misery. Last weekend,
I was finally able to visit Mogadishu again. The
difference from 1992 was remarkable. I saw hope and
I saw determination. I saw shops and cafés, fishermen
and traffic police, taxis and building sites. I saw what
everyone in the Council has heard about during the past
year — the beginning of a new Somalia.
2/7

30/10/2013

The Government reiterated its commitment to
federalism and power-sharing between the centre
and the periphery. I urged the President to continue
his efforts at political outreach and to take forward
inclusive dialogue on the future form of federalism
in the country. The United Nations plans to establish
a greater presence in the regions and to reinforce the
links between the regions and the federal Government.
I stressed the importance of building institutions, the
rule of law and respect for human rights. We agreed
that a United Nations team would travel to Somalia next
month to advise on the support required to prepare for
national elections in 2016.
We also spoke about the need for peacebuilding
and State-building. I congratulated the Government
on the conclusion of the “new deal” for Somalia
framework, which sets out Somalia’s priorities. The
United Nations will align its efforts fully to support
those goals. Together with President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud, I visited the new United Nations offices
nearing completion in Villa Somalia in Mogadishu,
where United Nations and Somali Government staff
will, appropriately, work side by side.
The African Union Mission in Somalia has done
much to enable Somalia to reach the current moment
of opportunity. Let me express my deep appreciation
for the work that AMISOM forces have done, of the
sacrifices they have made, and of the unique partnership
between the African Union and the United Nations in
Somalia. I would also like to recognize the substantial
support provided by the European Union to AMISOM.
Let me also express my great respect for the many
representatives of the international community and
civil society now working in Mogadishu and for our
United Nations staff, of whom over 100 internationals
are now working in Mogadishu under the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
13-53767

30/10/2013

The situation in Somalia

S/PV.7054

Nicholas Kay, as we prepare to establish an integrated
mission in January.

Somali national police can take over, with AMISOM
police support. It is of significant long-term importance.

I came away heartened by the commitment
of Somalia’s Government and people and their
international partners to peace and unity, as well as
to development and human rights. But I also found
reasons for concern. As the Secretary-General has
informed the Council in the letter before the Council
today (S/2013/606), and as I have heard from many of
my colleagues on the ground, this moment of hope in
Somalia is fragile. High expectations are directed at the
United Nations, the African Union and AMISOM.

Council Members will recall that we have previously
provided assistance along similar lines to national
forces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, under
the guidance of a human rights due diligence policy. In
fact, the Council took a decision recently on the Central
African Republic, I understand. The Government of
Somalia conceded that, without support to the Somali
National Security Forces, no significant progress
should be expected.

The findings of the African Union-United Nations
mission on security are clear. After 18 months of
successful operations that uprooted Al-Shabaab from
major cities, the campaign by AMISOM and Somali
forces has in recent months ground to a halt. The
AMISOM Force Commander told me that neither
AMISOM nor the Somali army has the capacity to
push beyond areas already recovered. Their hold on the
existing territory would be tenuous if the current status
quo were to continue, he claimed.
While these forces remain largely static, Al-Shabaab
is mobile. Al-Shabaab is training and recruiting
substantial numbers of frustrated, unemployed young
men. There has been a surge in deadly attacks. Although
weakened, the insurgency is still able to conduct terror
operations, not only in its areas of control but in
Mogadishu, Kismaayo and elsewhere, as we saw in last
month’s horrific attack on the Westgate Mall in Nairobi.
It is the joint recommendation of the Secretary-General
and the African Union that AMISOM and Somali
forces need a significant temporary boost to maintain
the basic security required for peacebuilding, as well
as to respond to the evolving threat from Al-Shabaab.
The letter of the Secretary-General of
14 October provides the details of those proposals.
The recommended enhancements for AMISOM,
including helicopters and other enablers, will allow
the force to regain the initiative against the insurgency
and to recover strategic locations that are exploited
by Al-Shabaab to generate revenue and to recruit and
train combatants. The recommendations for non-lethal
and logistic support to the Somali National Security
Forces are equally critical. It includes medical support,
transport, tents, food and fuel, and would enable the
Somalis to operate effectively alongside AMISOM,
improving their capacity to hold cleared areas until the

Against that background, I urge the Security
Council to find ways to adequately provide for that
support. It would also facilitate the crucially important
recovery and development efforts of the United Nations
and other actors on the ground. It is hard to ask for
additional resources in our present difficult financial
environment, but it is my duty to advise the Council
that, without increased support, our present and,
indeed, past investment in peace and that of millions of
Somalis may be lost.
Success in Somalia has been achieved through a
unique brand of multilateralism. The United Nations,
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the European Union have combined
together in a creative, responsible and effective way.
If we do not reinforce the progress with additional
resources and presence on the ground, we risk a
setback for a great example of multilateralism, as well
as exposing the Somali people to aggravated violence
and poverty.
I would now like to draw the Council’s attention to
the Secretary-General’s advice with regard to the safety
of United Nations staff in Somalia. In Mogadishu I met
with United Nations colleagues working with great
dedication in conditions of high risk. The surge in
attacks and threats in recent months places them under
great pressure. At the same time, that surge is a serious
obstacle to the implementation of resolutions 2093
(2013) and 2102 (2013), which mandated the SecretaryGeneral to establish an enhanced United Nations
presence in Somalia. It also risks setting back our vital
work for recovery and development on the ground in
the country.
Following the attack on 19 June, United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes have a severely
restricted capacity to plan and deliver programmes. I
visited the site of the attack in Mogadishu in order to

13-537673/7

S/PV.7054

The situation in Somalia

pay my respects to the victims and to personally thank
the courageous United Nations staff who protected our
colleagues that day. It was a sombre moment, and it made
me and my colleagues feel all the more determined not
to let extremists set the agenda and, by instilling fear,
stop our efforts to help the Somali people.
The security of the United Nations in Mogadishu
and Somalia requires urgent attention. We owe our
staff secure accommodation and the protected mobility
required to do their work. With AMISOM’s present
assets and with competing priorities, it is not realistic
to substantially step up the protection of United Nations
installations and operations, as those are to expand. I
therefore ask the Council to authorize the deployment
of a United Nations guard unit to protect United
Nations locations until national forces can assume their
responsibility.
At the same time, we need to invest in measures
that can increase the Somali Federal Government’s
capacity to protect international operations for the long
term. That is why we recommend supporting Somali
police units to provide mobile security for the United
Nations as part of security-sector development under
the new deal framework. I urge the Council to support
those recommendations.
It is essential that security efforts proceed
hand in hand with the political, peacebuilding and
developmental efforts. Security, reconciliation and
development must proceed in parallel in order to take
root and mutually reinforce each other. That is reflected
in the benchmarks that the Secretary-General has set
for the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. They cover advances in the campaign against
Al-Shabaab, the development of capacity for the Somali
national army and national police and progress on
reconciliation, as well as work on the constitution and
preparations for elections in 2016.
Those are the key steps for progress for the Somalis
and for the international community’s investment in
Somalia between now and 2016. The United Nations
will continue to work closely with the Government and
international partners to help create those conditions.
That requires an integrated strategy that combines
political engagement and support for peacebuilding,
the rule of law and development. Should the Council
so decide, the deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation could then mark an exit
strategy for the current operations, and a milestone in
our work for peace in Somalia.
4/7

30/10/2013

Let me now turn briefly to the report of the
Secretary-General on piracy and armed robbery off the
coast of Somalia (S/2013/623). The report is a timely
reminder of how effective security instruments can be
in fighting destabilizing forces. The number of piracy
incidents has decreased considerably. At the same time,
the report highlights the need for a comprehensive
strategy to sustain security gains. More work is required
to address the underlying causes of piracy in Somalia.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report, the
security, development and governance factors have not
changed sufficiently to deter criminals from attacking
ships and holding seafarers hostage.
We must remain vigilant. The international naval
presence remains vital for conducting counter-piracy
operations pursuant to resolution 2077 (2013), as does
Member States’ commitment to prosecute suspected
pirates. I also call on Member States to expand
efforts to develop Somalia’s maritime resource and
security strategy. That is the anchor for improving
the governance of Somalia’s maritime resources and
expanding economic opportunities for its citizens.
The report underscores the importance of
coordinated international action and of the selfprotection measures developed by the shipping industry.
I commend the work of the Contact Group on Piracy
in fostering cooperation, sharing information and
mobilizing resources. Looking ahead, the policy and
legal issues governing the deployment of contracted
armed security personnel on board vessels will require
continued close attention.
Let us not forget that Somali pirates are presently
holding hostage 60 seafarers. That is a matter of serious
international concern. We must continue to insist that
all hostages be released immediately.
In the long term, our shared goal is for Somalia to
assume full responsibility for its own security, within
the framework of the rule of law. The Council has
requested Somali authorities to report on the structure
of its security forces and on the measures to ensure
the safe management and accountability for weapons
and military equipment, under the terms of resolution
2093 (2013). I understand that a report on that matter is
expected to reach the Council shortly. I urge the Federal
Government to expedite its submission.
In conclusion, the Government and the people of
Somalia, as well as international partners, are on the
verge of rebuilding a shattered State and rescuing

13-53767

30/10/2013

The situation in Somalia

millions of people from conflict and poverty. The
international community’s commitment to Somalia
is reflected in the $2.4 billion pledged in Brussels in
September under the new deal. But without a sufficient
level of security, what we have worked so hard for could
be lost. The attack in June on the United Nations in
Mogadishu and the terrorist act in Nairobi in September
underline Al-Shabaab’s intent to force an international
retreat from Somalia and to inflict suffering on
Somalis in order to erode their confidence in the peace
process — and, indeed, in the future. That is why we
must support AMISOM and at the same time invest in
Somali national forces as well as in protecting our staff.
I appeal for the Council’s positive consideration of
those recommendations.
The President: I thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Ms. Adam (Somalia): I am sincerely delighted to
be here again today to share my perspective on the key
challenges and opportunities in Somalia. As the Council
deliberates on the conclusions of the joint United
Nations-African Union review and the subsequent letter
from the Secretary-General dated 14 October 2013
(S/2013/606), I again appeal for the Council’s support,
as I truly believe that there are immense opportunities
in Somalia as our State emerges from a fragile political
transition and its new Government asserts itself.
As the Deputy Secretary-General has said today,
Somalia is changing. I thank him for the time he took
from his busy schedule to see the reality on the ground
in Somalia.
We are much obliged to the Council and the United
Nations for sustaining international attention and focus
on the plight of the Somali people. I wholeheartedly
thank you, Mr. President, and the members of the
Council for their personal engagement in supporting
Somalia. We have no doubt that our collective desire for
peace and a stronger Somalia will prevail. The Council’s
commitment and sustained partnership in support of
critical priorities in Somalia is at a turning point, with
a view to advancing global peace and security.
Significant progress has been achieved in
Somalia, and the Somali Government and its people
are determined to further strengthen cooperation with
our friends and with the rest of global society. Somalia
is still vulnerable to domestic and external threats as

S/PV.7054

it builds its power to assert its authority and seeks to
strengthen the rule of law. In that context, the Somali
State has made significant progress within the past year.
The election of President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud has
given the Somali people hope and a sense of optimism.
The Somali Government is therefore guided by three
principles, namely, building national democratic
Government institutions with development priorities
that are fair, inclusive and sensitive to the diverse
interests of the country; fostering national unity based
on the principles of individual human rights, equality
and justice; and strengthening our partnerships with all
global actors on the basis of mutual interest, respect
and cooperation.
In the current international system under the
founding principles of the United Nations, functioning
and legitimate States are indispensable to international
security, trade and political relations. Somalia is no
longer a failed State. Many Somalis have returned to
the country to invest in it and rebuild it. In addition,
because of our partnership with the global community
and its steadfast support, together we have pushed
Al-Shabaab out of Mogadishu and other major cities and
towns. Many embassies and international organizations
have opened up their offices in Somalia. And, as the
Deputy-Secretary-General said today, the United
Nations has reopened its office in Mogadishu. Roads
have been rehabilitated and the provision of services
has been gradually revived. Democratic rule in Somalia
is slowly but surely taking root.
Following the success of the landmark London
Somalia Conference in May 2012, a “new deal”
conference for Somalia, co-hosted by the Somali
Federal Government and the European Union, was held
in Brussels on 16 September 2013, with the participation
of many friendly Governments, international
organizations and partners. The Conference endorsed
a new deal compact for Somalia that establishes
measurable goals for Somalia’s reconstruction and
requires specific commitments for implementation
from the Somali Government and its international
partners. That arrangement provides a more resilient
design for joint partnership between the Somali people
and the international community. Our Government has
moved swiftly to ensure the successful implementation
of the compact and has established a national security
council chaired by President Mohamud.
We understand that sustainable security in Somalia
depends on the development of a robust Somali

13-537675/7

S/PV.7054

The situation in Somalia

security sector that includes the involvement of the
people as an active component of reconstruction. Our
Government realizes that its citizens are not ciphers
but active participants. They must be convinced that
their security and development, and the Government’s
ability to provide both, exist in a reciprocal relationship
that must become ever more resilient. Furthermore,
we would like to note that Al-Shabaab’s recruitment
strategy targets urban centres and impoverished areas.
By including the participation of citizens, the seams
of weakness in Al-Shabaab’s organizational structures
and its asymmetrical advantage will be uncovered and
countervailed. That requires improving the capacity of
the security forces, strengthening the rule of law and
developing an effective judicial system. We cannot
expect peace in Somalia if peace is not owned by its
citizens.
We are grateful to the Security Council for partially
lifting the 20-year old arms embargo, so as to allow the
Somali defence forces, supported by the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), to fight Al-Shabaab.
Achieving that goal remains a top priority for Somalia.
We have been improving the necessary mechanism for
the successful accomplishment of that objective. When
our President joined his fellow African leaders earlier
this month in Addis Abeba, he sent a powerful message
to the world that demonstrated continental unity against
extremism.
Somalia is cognizant of the high cost involved in
providing new funding for the logistical supplies that
our troops critically need. We also understand the logic
and the thinking that may make some Member States of
the Security Council feel a bit reluctant about starting a
new chapter that may reverse the regular and traditional
funding system package. We urge those countries to see
things differently because, in the face of the scourge of
Al-Shabaab/Al-Qaida and their tactics of asymmetrical
warfare aimed at maximizing their mayhem, the status
quo is not an option. Hence, we also seek to provide
the Somali national army the timely logistical support it
requires to enhance its capacity and ultimately to defeat
Al-Shabaab.
The Somali Government wishes to remind everyone
that AMISOM’s decision, on 10 April, to suspend
operations due to severe logistical limitations — also
understandable — has provided Al-Shabaab with the
breathing room to regroup and take the offensive.
I wish to encourage and urge the members of the
Security Council to act swiftly so that Al-Shabaab is not
6/7

30/10/2013

provided further opportunities to regroup and infiltrate
urban centres and export their evil ideology. However,
it is no secret that we all risk the danger that Al-Shabaab
will be reinvigorated by the lack of sustained military
engagement. That group continues to be a global threat,
as evidenced by the recent attacks on our brothers and
sisters in Kenya. That shows that the gains made so
far in Somalia can quickly unravel if we continue with
business as usual. The international operational support
to Somalia should be enhanced given the unique current
conditions and the opportunities that exist.
The Somali people know full well that local
leadership is critical in defeating terrorism. According to
the letter of the Secretary-General, peace consolidation
requires that we improve the capacity and effectiveness
of the Somali army. That, in turn, requires the use of
“smart” power in both the short and long term, with a
training and capacity programme that has components
to improve both commissioned and non-commissioned
officer sectors. AMISOM and the United Nations
are convinced that the Somali national army has the
capability and the determination to secure major cities
and key infrastructure; what they require is increased
basic logical support. Again, that requires an inclusive
approach that develops the eyes and ears of the public
as a component of the public space in the campaign
against Al-Shabaab.
Citizens are the foundation of any intelligence
network and are both essential and necessary for
leveraging resources. The overarching strategy for the
provision of security after war may be conceptualized
in the phrase “welcome, build and defend”. The ultimate
strategic objectives of the current peace enforcement
operation in Somalia are to recover areas occupied by
Al-Shabaab, restore and secure the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Somalia, support the Federal
Government of Somalia in its struggle to disrupt,
degrade, weaken and defeat Al-Shabaab by providing
tangible and effective logistical support to Somalia that
will sustain the military operation on the ground to
enable them to expand, stabilize and control recovered
areas and deny Al-Shabaab any possibility of a relapse
into insecurity. A further goal is to provide AMISOM
the enablers and multipliers in needs in terms of troop
increases, military hardware and resources that will
allow them to significantly expand into new areas of
cooperation and recover the entire territory of Somalia.
It is critical for the Federal Republic of Somalia
and the international community to close the serious

13-53767

30/10/2013

The situation in Somalia

gap between the support given to AMISOM and the
tempo and scale of operations, so that we do not allow
the terrorists to use that gap to regroup, give the enemy
a free hand, recruit and intensify their infiltration into
urban centres and strengthen their ability to destabilize
the region. At the same time, we need to enhance the
capacity of the Somali national army forces and public
safety and law enforcement institutions, as well as to
support the establishment of effective governance, to
enable us to conduct a general election in 2016.
Therefore, to make the presence of the Federal
Government of Somalia felt in the recovered areas, it is
the plan and firm intention of the Somali Government to
immediately establish stability, peace and security, as
well as the provision of services. Providing non-lethal
and logistical support to the Somali forces, as proposed
by the Secretary-General, will surely guarantee shortterm capacity and long-term resiliency for the Somali
forces.
We believe that this new approach should be adopted,
and I request the Security Council today to give our
Somali National Army that support by authorizing the
provision of extensive non-lethal and logistical support.
By supporting that vision, Al-Shabaab/Al-Qaida will
be defeated, and as the Somali security forces regain
control of the country, the combat role of the AMISOM
forces can be reduced.
In conclusion, Somali troops are engaged in active
war against Al-Shabaab and in peace development

S/PV.7054

across the nation. Logistical support at the unit level
must be available in order to initiate sustainable
military and civilian operations. That logistical support
is needed immediately and thus should not be tied to the
timelines of troop increases and/or development.
Let me conclude by thanking the President and
Council members again for their tireless efforts in
supporting the Somali nation.
The President: Since this is our last scheduled
meeting for the month, I would like to express the
sincere appreciation of the delegation of Azerbaijan to
the members of the Council, especially my colleagues
the Permanent Representatives, their respective staffs
and the secretariat of the Council for all the support
they have given to us.
As we have said, it has been a busy month. We
could not have done it alone or without the hard work,
support and positive contributions of every delegation
and the representatives of the Secretariat, as well as the
other professionals who ably provide all of the various
meetings services required by the Council throughout
the month. As we end our presidency, I know I speak
on behalf of the Council in wishing the delegation of
China good luck in the month of November.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

13-537677/7
