S/2014/562

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 August 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Central African Republic
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2149
(2014), by which the Council established the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and
requested me to report to the Council on 1 August. The report provides an update on
the situation in the Central African Republic since my last report, of 3 March
(S/2014/142), and the implementation of the Mission’s mandate. It also provides an
update on preparations for the transfer of authority from the African -led
International Support Mission in the Central African Republic (MISCA) to
MINUSCA on 15 September and the mission concept, including a concept of
operations and benchmarks for the sequencing of the mandate, and on an exit
strategy.

II. Major developments
A.

Security, human rights and humanitarian developments
2.
While the situation in some areas of Bangui has improved, the overall security
situation in the Central African Republic remains highly volatile. Civilians are
targets of sectarian violence and reprisal killings in the capital and in other parts of
the country every day. Serious and unabated violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law are committed in a climate of total impunity,
including forced displacement of the civilian population, particularly Muslims; the
destruction of property; rape and other forms of sexual violence; the recruitment of
children by armed groups; and violations of the right to life and freedom of
movement, and to security and physical integrity, through assas sinations, summary
executions, and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment.
3.
The large majority of the country’s Muslim population has been displaced or
has left the country, while some 20,000 of them are trapped in nine locations in the
western and central parts of the country, aware that if they leave their sites they may
be attacked before they reach safety. In Boda alone, some 5,670 people are under
threat in an enclave that is subjected to anti-balaka attacks. These communities are
being denied access to food and basic commodities by anti-balaka. In Yaloke, over

14-58076 (E)

070814

*1458076*

S/2014/562

600 Peuhl Mbororo breeders who lost their cattle remained trapped in the town as a
result of attacks by anti-balaka. They have requested the support of the international
community to be relocated to Cameroon, where some 50 of them have already taken
refuge along with family members.
4.
In Bangui, although the security situation has improved, the remaining Muslim
communities continue to be largely confined to their neighbourhoods, mainly in
PK5. They are encircled by anti-balaka elements who regularly attack these enclaves
with firearms and grenades and are cutting off food and medical supplies. There
were also reports of anti-balaka targeting non-Muslim individuals believed to
provide supplies or services to these areas. Elements of the Central African Armed
Forces are involved in many of these incidents as part of the anti -balaka.
5.
Increasing violence and brutality against Muslim communities in Bangui
contributed to the formation of Muslim youth self-defence groups to protect their
communities. They have engaged in violent and radical action targeting the
anti-balaka and their positions as well as non-Muslim communities. They reportedly
enjoy the support of some elements of the ex-Séléka hiding among the local Muslim
population. Some 2,200 ex-Séléka elements remain in Bangui regrouped in three
sites under MISCA protection. A census is under way to register these elements as
part of a project to relocate them to their community of origin. At lea st two of them
were killed when leaving the sites to buy food.
6.
A number of violent clashes involved the international forces in Bangui and
elsewhere in the country. On 29 March, a senior Chadian army officer appointed to
MISCA was proceeding in a column to Bangui. When the column reached the
outskirts of Bangui, an exchange of fire ensued in PK12, during which at least
28 people were killed and many more wounded. Following allegations that Chadian
elements of MISCA opened fire on the population without provocation, the
Government of Chad announced, on 3 April, that it would withdraw its infantry
battalion of 850 troops from MISCA.
7.
As a measure of last resort, humanitarian actors facilitated the relocation of
1,352 internally displaced persons, mostly Muslims, from Bangui to Bambari on
20 April and to Kabo and Moyen Sido in the northern part of the country on
28 April, with the support of the international forces. On 28 April, a convoy was
attacked on the Dekoa-Kaga Bandoro axis by anti-balaka; the attack included the
use of grenades. Two people were killed and six injured before they arrived at their
destination the next day.
8.
The attack at the Church of Notre Dame de Fatima in Bangui on 28 May
illustrated the vicious cycle of attacks and reprisals with a radicalization of elements
of both the ex-Séléka and anti-balaka and the potential for escalation. Eleven people
were killed, including the priest, and 24 were wounded; three later succumbed to
their injuries. The attack followed the brutal killing b y suspected anti-balaka
elements of three Muslim youths on their way to an intercommunal reconciliation
football match earlier in the week. These incidents triggered popular demonstrations
against the perceived inaction to restore security by both the tran sitional authorities
and the international forces. A number of roadblocks were erected, which had to be
removed by the international forces. Bangui was paralysed for three days and
dozens more people are reported to have been killed.

2/18

14-58076

S/2014/562

9.
In the provinces, the security situation was marked by cycles of attacks and
reprisals between armed groups and communities resulting in a high number of
casualties. There was also a resurgence of attacks on villages by ex -Séléka and
affiliated heavily armed groups of members of the Peuhl community along the
border with Chad, including some who had reportedly crossed the border from
Chad. Many villages were set ablaze, causing the displacement of the population.
The increasing presence of the ex-Séléka in the western and central parts of the
country prompted the anti-balaka to reinforce their positions in these areas, which
led to a number of violent clashes between anti-balaka and ex-Séléka.
10. In spite of immediate efforts by MISCA to redeploy troops, the withdrawal of
the Chadian MISCA troops from Bossangoa at the beginning of April prompted the
remaining Muslim population regrouped in a site with MISCA protection to leave
Bossangoa. On 11 April, 540 people were relocated from Bossangoa to Chad by
road, escorted by departing Chadian MISCA troops.
11. On 13 May, a group of anti-balaka were ambushed in the village of Galo in the
western part of the country. Twelve people were killed, including a French journalist
who was travelling with the anti-balaka. The international forces subsequently
discovered her body with another corpse in the trunk of a car.
12. The situation in Bambari, where ex-Séléka established their military
headquarters in May, significantly deteriorated during the period under review. On
22 May, large crowds protested in Bambari against the activities of the forces of
Operation Sangaris in the town, perceived by the population as forcefully disarming
the ex-Séléka. Subsequent clashes resulted in three persons killed and several
vehicles destroyed.
13. On 23 June, in a village outside Bambari, some 50 armed anti -balaka brutally
killed at least 18 Muslims, including three children and one woman. In a reprisal
attack on the same day, eight Christians were killed by ex-Séléka elements in the
town itself. On 24 June, approximately a hundred armed elements affiliated with the
anti-balaka arrived in Bambari from Grimari, where they were prevented by MISCA
and Sangaris from entering the city. Subsequent exchanges of fire between the
international forces and the anti-balaka resulted in a number of casualties among the
anti-balaka. The events entailed random acts of violence against civilians and a
large number of displacements. In total, over 46 people were confirmed dead and
28 wounded, while some 12,000 people sought refuge in churches, the MISCA
compound and other areas in the vicinity of the Sangaris perimeter. On 7 July, the
internally displaced persons site at Saint Joseph Cathedral and the Bishop’s
residence were attacked, resulting in at least 27 deaths, includi ng women and
children.
14. On 26 June, Central African armed forces and Sudanese forces withdrew from
Birao following an ultimatum issued by an ex-Séléka group reportedly under the
control of Noureddine Adam, relocating to Am-Dafok on the border with the Sudan.
The Central African and Sudanese forces had been deployed to Birao as part of a
joint task force established to protect the common border further to a tripartite
agreement between the Governments of the Central African Republic, Chad and the
Sudan in 2009. The task force was reduced to a two-part entity as a result of the
departure of the Chadian forces from the Central African Republic in May.

14-58076

3/18

S/2014/562

15. On 29 June, in Bakouma in the Mbomou prefecture, the Uganda People’s
Defence Forces operating in the area were attacked by elements of the Lord’s
Resistance Army and ex-Séléka dissidents resulting in the death of one Ugandan
soldier and two ex-Séléka elements. On 30 June, ex-Séléka elements clashed with
Ugandan forces in Nzako, Mbomou prefecture, during which at least 15 ex-Séléka
elements were killed.
16. Rampant impunity remains a major challenge throughout the country. Rule of
law institutions are totally absent outside Bangui. Criminal procedure law does not
allow the Court of Appeal in Bangui to handle alleged perpetrators arrested outside
the Court’s jurisdiction. Security concerns, insufficient protection and political
pressure are preventing magistrates and lawyers from doing their work. Since my
last report, no major crime cases have been investigat ed, prosecuted or adjudicated
by the authorities and only minor offence case hearings have resumed at the
Tribunal de grande instance. The penitentiary administration continues to face
frequent escapes from the two prisons that are operational in Bangui as a result of
the lack of trained and competent prison staff, alleged collusion of security staff
with armed groups, corruption and weak physical security.
17. The situation of women and children remains of serious concern: sexual and
gender-based violence against women and girls is being committed by all groups in
the context of sectarian violence. The crimes include rape, gang rape, forced
marriage, sexual slavery and sexual mutilation. The Government estimates that in
2014 around 44.5 per cent of the population suffered sexual violence. Of these,
approximately 20 per cent are rape cases, 90 per cent of reported rape cases were
gang rapes by armed men and 10 per cent of the gender-based violence cases were
forced marriages. Children’s rights continued to be violated by the parties to the
conflict. There were reports of recruitment and use o f child soldiers by both the
ex-Séléka and anti-balaka, killing and maiming, rape, attacks against schools and
hospitals, abduction and denial of humanitarian assistance.
18. Humanitarian needs remained immense in all sectors. Two and a half million
people, over half of the population of the Central African Republic, are in dire need
of humanitarian assistance. More than 1 million people have been displaced by the
conflict and 400,000 Central Africans have sought refuge in neighbouring countries,
some 270,000 from December 2013 to July. Although in Bangui the number of
internally displaced persons has decreased to 105,300, owing in part to a relative
improvement in the security situation, outside of the capital some 530,300 are still
displaced. The percentage of the rural population facing food insecurity has almost
doubled since September 2013, to some 45 per cent. To date, only 37 per cent of the
humanitarian appeal has been funded.
19. MISCA and Operation Sangaris continued to respond to situations in high -risk
areas and make efforts to protect civilians, while humanitarian actors addressed the
critical needs of displaced persons. MISCA also increased its capacity to prov ide
escorts to logistics and humanitarian convoys and improved tactical communication,
which increased its overall capacity to conduct operations. The European Union
operation (EUFOR) reached full operational capability on 15 June and provided
security at the Bangui airport as well as in the third and fifth arrondissements of
Bangui, which allowed MISCA and Sangaris to enhance their deployments outside
of the capital. MINUSCA worked closely with these forces to coordinate the
international response and enhance the protection of populations under threat.

4/18

14-58076

S/2014/562

20. Following allegations that MISCA peacekeepers were implicated in the
enforced disappearance of civilians in Boali, MISCA announced on 17 July the
suspension of its commander in Boali and his unit pending the completion of the
investigation.

B.

Political developments
21. The challenging security environment led to increasing criticism of the
transitional authorities, which further accentuated the fragility of the transition. The
transitional authorities struggled to govern the country without security forces and
financial means. At the same time, the political elite was deeply divided and there
was a high level of political and social antagonism and distrust among political
actors and between communities. In the light of the growing criticism, on 6 May, the
Head of State of the Transition, Catherine Samba-Panza, announced in her address
to the nation marking her first hundred days in office that she would reshuffle her
Government. The initiative was put on hold following consultations with national
and regional partners.
22. On 27 June, the Head of State of the Transition addressed the informal meeting
of Heads of State of the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS)
on the situation in the Central African Republic, which was held on the sidelines of
the African Union Summit in Malabo. In a subsequent communiqué, the ECCAS
Heads of State reaffirmed their support for the Head of State of the Transition and
urged the transitional authorities to work towards national reconciliation, while
calling on all parties to cease all acts of violence and engage in efforts to find a
political solution to the crisis. The ECCAS Heads of State also called on the United
Nations, the African Union and ECCAS to urgently establish an international
mediation team under the leadership of the Mediator, the President of the Congo,
Denis Sassou Nguesso, to support the Central Africans in launching a political
dialogue process.
23. The Malabo meeting was preceded by a number of national and local
initiatives to pave the way for political dialogue. On 5 June, the Ministry of
Communication and National Reconciliation presented the urgent action plan for
national reconciliation, as part of the general reconciliation strategy that was
prepared with United Nations support. At the request of the Head of State of the
Transition, from 10 to 12 June, the Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue facilitated a
three-day seminar in Bangui on national dialogue and reconciliation. In addition, a
local non-governmental organization facilitated a series of meetings between
representatives of the ex-Séléka and the anti-balaka.
24. In her address to the nation on 4 July, the Head of State of the Transition
publicly endorsed the need for inclusive political dialogue, announcing that it would
commence with the holding of a forum in Brazzaville and that the transitional
authorities would be involved in the organization. She emphasized the need for a
threefold approach involving political dialogue, reconciliation at the grass-roots
level and justice. Referring to lessons learned from the past, Ms. Samba -Panza
emphasized the need to ensure that the political dialogue did not reward those who
had taken up arms and that it did not forget about the victims. S he also recognized
the need for a more balanced and inclusive national army.

14-58076

5/18

S/2014/562

25. On 9 April, the Head of State of the Transition signed a decree establishing the
Special Unit of Inquiry and Investigation to conduct preliminary inquiries and
investigations into cases of genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes
committed since 1 January 2004, which was inaugurated on 8 July. The Conseil
supérieur de la magistrature reassigned judges throughout all judicial instances and
appointed magistrates for the Special Unit of Inquiry and Investigation.
26. Overall, preparations for presidential and legislative elections and a
referendum on the constitution moved slowly, despite the signing on 24 June of a
decree on the organization and functioning of the National Electoral Authority. Key
policy decisions, including on the methodology for voter registration and the
sequencing of the polls, remain outstanding, while the legal framework has yet to be
completed.
27. On 10 June, the National Transitional Council reviewed and adopted the 2014
State budget amounting to CFAF 221 billion (approximately US$ 440 million), of
which CFAF 1 billion was allocated for elections. The Committee of the National
Transitional Council tasked with preparing the draft constitution part icipated in a
capacity-building seminar and initiated a workplan which envisaged the holding of
nationwide consultations on the draft constitution.
28. State authority remained largely absent outside Bangui. Ex-Séléka remained in
control of 8 of the 16 prefectures where they exercise State functions. On 27 April,
ex-Séléka elements prevented a Government delegation from installing a new prefect
in Ndélé, while a similar case was reported in Dimbi where the ex-Séléka dismissed a
mayor for allegedly supporting anti-balaka. In some areas, the anti-balaka provided
security and levied taxes.
29. On 9 and 10 May, the ex-Séléka held a two-day congress in Ndélé, which was
attended by approximately 1,200 participants. The ex-Séléka announced the
composition of the new military structure designated as the Forces républicaines,
including police and gendarmerie, led by General Joseph Zoundeiko. Condemning
the attacks against the Muslim population, the ex-Séléka called on the international
community to relocate communities under threat and to facilitate the partition of the
country. Following the congress, the ex-Séléka established its military headquarters
in Bambari and created a Committee for Political Coordination, tasked with the
organization of a general assembly to elect a Political Bureau. The attempt by the
ex-Séléka to unify its structures and the establishment of its headquarters in the
central city of Bambari were perceived by some as a provocation aimed at partition
of the country.
30. Political cohesiveness within the ex-Séléka remained weak. On 28 June,
General Noureddine Adam issued a communiqué announcing the suspension of the
coordination mechanism put in place following the Ndélé congress. This was followed
by the holding of an assembly of ex-Séléka leaders in Birao from 6 to 10 July. A
subsequent communiqué announced the transformation of the movement into the
Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique and the composition of its
Political Bureau led by the former Head of State of the Transiti on, Michel Djotodia,
while expressing the intention to participate in the Brazzaville forum.
31. There were also attempts by the anti-balaka to unify their highly fluid movement
and create an organizational and command structure under Patrice Ngaissona and
Sébastien Wenezoui. On 21 June, two rival factions of the anti-balaka in Bangui

6/18

14-58076

S/2014/562

agreed on the appointment of a national coordinator and his deputy, followed by the
announcement on 27 June of a 15-member team tasked with national coordination.
32. The International Contact Group on the Central African Republic met twice, in
Brazzaville on 21 March and in Addis Ababa on 7 July. The International Contact
Group stressed the need for inclusive political dialogue and encouraged the
transitional authorities to accelerate preparations for the elections. It also endorsed
the proposal for the holding of a forum on national reconciliation and political
dialogue in Brazzaville and the establishment of an international mediation team
which would include United Nations and African Union representatives, with
ECCAS as Rapporteur. The Brazzaville meeting, which was chaired by the
Mediator, President Denis Sassou Nguesso, was held from 21 to 23 July and was
attended by the Head of State of the Transition and a number of tran sitional
authority representatives, senior representatives of ECCAS member States,
international partners including ECCAS, the African Union, the United Nations and
the European Union, as well as Central African representatives of armed groups
including the ex-Séléka and anti-balaka, civil society, political parties and religious
groups. Following intensive consultations in advance of and during the Brazzaville
meeting, a cessation of hostilities agreement was signed by the Central African
representatives on 23 July. The agreement commits the signatories to an immediate
cessation of hostilities and establishes a follow-up monitoring mechanism made up
of representatives of political and armed groups, the transitional authorities and
members of the international community.

C.

Socioeconomic developments
33. The Central African Republic’s already weak economy continued to be
severely affected by the crisis, although efforts by MISCA and Sangaris to secure
the main supply route led to some free movement of goods through the
Douala-Bangui corridor. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
supported several cash-for-work initiatives aimed at providing immediate income generating opportunities to youth at risk, displaced population groups and women.
UNDP, in partnership with the Peacebuilding Fund, also supported the payment of
salaries of police and gendarmes from May to August. In parallel, the World Bank
supported the payment of salaries of the rest of the civil service for the same period,
while salaries for the armed forces were covered directly by the transitional
authorities. Interventions aimed at attaining a minimum budget, accounting and cash
management are gradually being implemented with funding from the European
Union, the World Bank and the African Development Bank. On 14 May, the
International Monetary Fund approved financial assistance under the Rapid Credit
Facility in the amount of nearly $13 million in support of emergency recovery
programmes.

D.

Subregional aspects
34. The subregion, under ECCAS leadership, remained actively engaged in
responding and finding a solution to the crisis, including through efforts led by the
President of Chad and Chair of ECCAS, Idriss Déby Itno, and the President of the
Congo and Mediator, Denis Sassou Nguesso. A tripartite meeting on 6 June in
Luanda brought together Presidents Déby and Sassou Nguesso and the President of

14-58076

7/18

S/2014/562

Angola, José Eduardo dos Santos, to discuss the situation in the Central African
Republic. In a subsequent communiqué, the Heads of State urged the transitional
authorities to work towards national reconciliation.

E.

Safety and security of United Nations staff
35. United Nations personnel continued to operate under difficult conditions,
facing various threats related to armed conflict, high rates of crime and civil unrest.
Eight national staff members were victims of targeted attacks. The MINUSCA guard
unit deployed in Bangui, Bouar and Bambari. It has proved to be a critical asset to
ensure the security of United Nations installations and personnel and to extricate
staff members under threat.

III. Update on planning in relation to the establishment
of MINUSCA
36. By Security Council resolution 2149 (2014), the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic was subsumed into MINUSCA
on 10 April. By the same resolution, the Council decided that the transfer of
authority from MISCA to MINUSCA will occur on 15 September. Until then,
MINUSCA is mandated to implement priority tasks outlined in paragraphs 30 and
31 of the resolution, through its civilian component.
37. A mission concept developed in consultation with United Nations partners to
guide the implementation of the MINUSCA mandate was approved on 30 May. The
mission concept foresees that the objectives and priorities of MINUSCA will be
adjusted over time to the particular conditions and needs of the country and its
people. During the early phase of its deployment, MINUSCA will focus on
providing a secure environment, particularly for civilians under threat of violence, a
sine qua non for progress in other areas. It will also concentrate on supporting the
transitional authorities to extend State authority and exercise basic State functions,
peace and reconciliation efforts, protecting basic human rights and facilitating the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. As conditions evolve in the country and, in
particular, as the security situation improves and members of armed groups are
engaged in disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and community violence reduction projects, and as national security capabilities develop, the objectives of
the Mission will shift to focus increasingly on supporting the State’s ability to
deliver public services, the consolidation of a stable political environment, the
reconciliation of communities and the return of people to their homes, the
development of rule of law institutions, and the protection and promotion of human
rights.
38. Specifically, the mission concept provides that MINUSCA will organize its
activities around three key interconnected and mutually reinforcing objectives,
namely, (a) security, the protection of civilians and human rights, (b) support to the
political process, reconciliation and elections, and (c) the restoration and extension
of State authority. The mission concept outlines five phases and includes detailed
planning for the first two. The first phase involves the establishment of MINUSCA
and the transfer of authority from MISCA to MINUSCA, from 10 April to
15 September. During this phase, MINUSCA will establish a multidimensional

8/18

14-58076

S/2014/562

presence in Bangui at the Mission headquarters, and three integrated sector
headquarters offices in Bria, Kaga Bandoro and Bouar. During the second phase,
from 15 September 2014 to 30 April 2015, which will bring MINUSCA to the end of
its current mandate period under Security Council resolution 2149 (2014), the
Mission will further increase its field presence and aim to contribute to minimum
security, and create room for a political dialogue leading to a basic national
consensus on the way forward with regard to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, the reconstitution of the national security apparatus and elections,
while reaching full operating capability. Military, police and support concepts of
operations based on the mission concept were approved in July.
39. The MINUSCA exit strategy will be based on progress made in each phase
towards the achievement of an end state in which the Central African Republic will
have completed a transition to a democratically elected legitimate government
which is broadly representative and capable of responding to the basic needs of the
population. The State would have the minimum capacity to maintain law and order
across the country, ensure basic respect for human rights, including the ability to
address impunity, and protect its people by preventing sexual and gender-based
crimes, manage resources and provide basic social services. Security and
governance conditions would have improved for the voluntary repatriation of
refugees and durable solutions for internally displaced persons, in their communities
of origin or elsewhere. Capacities to facilitate the peaceful manag ement and
resolution of conflict would be in place in communities that have suffered severe
intercommunal violence.

IV. Implementation of the mandate of the Mission
Support to the political process
40. In keeping with the MINUSCA mandate and with the support of the members
of the International Contact Group, my Special Representative consulted key
stakeholders in the Central African Republic and the subregion with a view to
revitalizing the political process. On the basis of those consultations, MI NUSCA
developed a proposal that envisages the launching of an inclusive, meaningful
political dialogue process in three phases. The three phases involve a cessation of
hostilities followed by community-based consultations and inclusive political
dialogue to reach agreement on key policy issues, including the reconstitution and
reform of the armed forces; disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants; governance, elections, decentralization, justice, reconciliation
and the return of refugees and economic development. These proposals have been
endorsed by both the transitional authorities and the International Contact Group
and constituted the basis for the discussions at the Brazzaville forum on national
reconciliation and political dialogue, as well as the subsequent steps of the political
dialogue process.
41. MINUSCA and UNDP provided technical assistance to the National Electoral
Authority in developing an electoral timeline, operational planning and finalizing its
internal rules of procedure. UNDP is working on a project document to support the
electoral process, including a “basket fund” to coordinate contributions from
international donors. From 8 to 10 July, a seminar was co -organized by the
United Nations and the International Organization of La Francophonie, aimed at

14-58076

9/18

S/2014/562

strengthening the capacity of key electoral stakeholders to manage the electoral
process in compliance with the legal framework. MINUSCA advanced with its own
electoral support planning. This will include transportatio n of electoral materials
from Bangui to 17 prefectures and 71 sub-prefectures with a view to supporting the
National Electoral Authority in preparing and organizing voter registration, other
pre-electoral operations and the different polls.
42. MINUSCA has developed a communications strategy aimed at providing an
impartial and credible voice, explaining the mandate and managing expectations.
Planning is under way for the establishment of a United Nations Radio that will
provide coverage across the country. Approximately 70 per cent of the country and
more than half of the population are not currently covered by any media. It is
envisaged that the radio will not only consist of a United Nations radio station but
also include a platform of community radios and other key media partners.
MINUSCA also enhanced its interaction with local and international media and
provided training to local journalists.
43. MINUSCA, UNDP and the Peacebuilding Fund are working closely with the
transitional authorities and civil society organizations to support the implementation
of the urgent action plan for national reconciliation. UNDP, with support from the
Peacebuilding Fund, is planning to support the establishment of a network of
mediators and local peace and dialogue committees as well as the establishment of a
national structure for mediation.
Protection of civilians
44. With many Muslim communities pressing to be relocated to the northern part
of the country or neighbouring countries, the international community contin ues to
face difficult trade-offs between prioritizing life-saving efforts and protecting
civilians, responding to legitimate requests, considering the threats, and contributing
to the de facto partition of the country. MINUSCA has further increased its
interaction with the humanitarian country team as well as the international forces,
including MISCA, Operation Sangaris and EUFOR, to enhance efforts to protect
civilians in high-risk areas, in particular in the western and central parts of the
country.
45. From 24 June to 1 July, an inter-agency team visited the Central African
Republic to support MINUSCA in the development of a Mission-wide protection of
civilians strategy. The draft strategy identifies non-State armed groups and
intercommunal violence as posing the main threats to civilians in the Central
African Republic. It proposes a Mission-wide protection response plan, taking into
account the capacities and complementary actions of national and international
protection actors, and specifying the roles and responsibilities of MINUSCA
civilian, police and military components in support of strategic planning,
coordination, information management, early warning and response, public
information and advocacy, and training. On the basis of the team’s
recommendations, MINUSCA has initiated the implementation of a set of protection
of civilians tools and mechanisms, along with a structure for coordinating action
within MINUSCA, as well as with humanitarian partners and international forces.
From 2 to 4 July, MINUSCA facilitated the first joint visit by members of the
MISCA-MINUSCA protection of civilians working group to Bambari to assess the

10/18

14-58076

S/2014/562

protection situation there and provide recommendations on preventing, pre -empting
and responding to violence against civilians in the area.
Child protection
46. The task force on monitoring and reporting on grave child rights violations
confirmed several allegations of recruitment and use of child soldiers. Efforts of the
task force resulted in the separation of 237 children from the sites where ex-Séléka
elements are regrouped in Bangui. Forty-three children were separated from the
ex-Séléka in Bambari and 76 children from anti-balaka in Bangui. The task force
also made progress with the ex-Séléka military leadership on child protection issues.
On 3 July, a command order prohibiting the recruitment and use of child soldiers
was issued by General Joseph Zoundeiko, military chief of staff of the ex-Séléka.
47. MINUSCA provided training to 350 MISCA formed police unit personnel on
child rights and child protection, as well as to other child protection actors,
including representatives of the coalition of Central African women’s associations,
with a view to enhancing their monitoring and verification capacity. In addition,
79 anti-balaka representatives were sensitized about child rights and child protection
in Bangui.
Conflict-related sexual violence
48. In collaboration with partners, MINUSCA began establishing a monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangement on conflict-related sexual violence, in order to
better target activities to prevent sexual violence and ensure accountability. The
Mission also supported the Association des femmes juristes centrafricaines in
building capacities for the monitoring and investigation of alleged violations against
women, the extension of psychosocial assistance to victims, and sensitization on
violations against women in conflict and post-conflict situations. At least 70 training
sessions for MISCA, civil society organizations, and national security forces
addressing protection from conflict-related sexual violence were carried out over the
reporting period by MINUSCA and its partners.
Promotion and protection of human rights
49. MINUSCA increased its capacity to monitor, report and investigate violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law, with support from the
Peacebuilding Fund. A number of visits were conducted to high -risk areas, including
Boda, Bambari, Bouar, Bossangoa and Yaloke. MINUSCA began deploying human
rights officers outside Bangui, including in Bambari and Bouar, while increasing
activities to promote human rights and to build the capacity of national and local
non-governmental organizations. MINUSCA also initiated training on international
human rights and humanitarian law for MISCA military personnel.
Efforts in support of the extension of State authority and preservation of
territorial integrity
50. While the central authorities made some efforts to deploy State authority in
some areas, including attempts to deploy préfets or police and gendarmerie, these
remain largely ineffective. In Bambari, for example, 10 police and 50 gendarmerie
officers were deployed from Bangui, although without equipment, and they have yet
to be accepted by the population and by the ex-Séléka on the ground. The justice

14-58076

11/18

S/2014/562

system and wider rule of law remain largely absent in the interior of the country.
Security and infrastructure will have to be significantly improved before the State is
able to provide even the most basic services. On 10 June, UNDP and the World
Bank held a meeting in Paris that included transitional authorities and other
partners, to assess the needs and challenges related to the redeployment of State
administration. In support of the Ministry of Territorial Administration, UNDP has
convened a working group on the redeployment of State administration to address
key State-building tasks related to security, administrative presence, the justice and
criminal chain, economic recovery and the delivery of basic social services.
Support for national and international justice and the rule of law, and
implementation of the urgent temporary measures
51. UNDP, MINUSCA and UN-Women finalized a joint project in support of the
re-establishment of justice and security in the Central African Republic under the
global focal point arrangement for the police, justice and corrections. The project
envisages support to the judiciary to fight impunity, the resumption of sessions by
the criminal chamber of the Court of Appeal in Bangui, mobile court sessions, legal
aid initiatives, assistance to victims, notably survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence, and capacity-building for national magistrates and prison personnel. The
project also envisages support to institutions in charge of internal security such as
the Ministry of Security, police, gendarmerie and prefectural administration, and
support to communities for managing conflicts at the local level.
52. A United Nations multidisciplinary team visited the Central African Republic to
develop recommendations with regard to the adoption of urgent temporary measures
to maintain basic law and order and fight impunity pursuant to paragraph 40 of
resolution 2149 (2014). The team confirmed an almost total lack of capacity of
national counterparts in the areas of police, justice and corrections. It also found that
there are no guarantees that national magistrates can render justice in an impartial
manner and without fear of political interference or physical violence. The team
recommended that, where national actors and institutions are unable to adequately
assume their roles and perform their functions, international personnel should have
the authority, exceptionally, to take over those roles and functions and perform them
directly, within the context of applicable national legal frameworks and without
prejudice to the overall responsibility of the transitional authorities. The Mission
underlined that dedicated resources would be needed to perform the range of tasks
foreseen under the urgent temporary measures mandate.
53. Following consultations with national and international partners, MINUSCA
developed a two-stage approach for the implementation of urgent temporary
measures. In the first stage, a team of international investigation and prosecution
experts would be deployed as soon as possible to advise and support national
magistrates in conducting investigations on serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, including conflict-related sexual violence as well as
grave violations committed against children, that constitute a threat to peace,
stability and security in the Central African Republic.
54. In the second stage, internationally recruited prosecutors and judges would be
authorized, together with national magistrates, to investigate and try serious
violations of human rights and international law, including conflict -related sexual
violence as well as grave violations committed against children, t hat constitute a

12/18

14-58076

S/2014/562

threat to peace, stability and security in the Central African Republic. This would
require the national authorities to amend the legislative framework.
55. On 4 July, my Special Representative presented these proposals to the
transitional authorities; this was followed by further consultations with the Minister
of Justice and national senior magistrates. The Minister of Justice proposed the
creation of a special jurisdiction created by national legislation, in which
international judicial and prosecutorial executive functions would be attached to a
national special body. Efforts are under way to identify and deploy experienced
personnel that would be part of this jurisdiction, which would need to be established
by national legislation.
56. With regard to the police, it is envisaged that specialized teams of United
Nations police would undertake a number of tasks under the urgent temporary
measures mandate. These would include proactive criminal threat assessments with
regard to individuals or groups inciting, planning, committing or having committed
criminal acts related to the conflict. They would also entail reactive measures that
would include responding to spontaneous incidents that threaten public order or
endanger the general public or vulnerable persons/communities, to ensure that
public order is maintained, serious incidents are responded to and crimes of
sufficient public interest are investigated in a timely and transparent manner. It is
further proposed that international corrections personnel be deployed as an
exceptional measure to perform some prison tasks, including operating as an
emergency response team during prison disturbances.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
57. MINUSCA deployed dedicated capacities to assist the authorities in
developing a national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme, as
well as community violence-reduction programmes. The national strategic and
technical disarmament, demobilization and reintegration committees resu med work
on 5 June and are preparing the development of a national programme, with
technical and secretariat support from MINUSCA. Pending the conclusion of a
political agreement with the armed groups, which will form the basis of the new
programme, MINUSCA, together with the transitional authorities, MISCA and
Operation Sangaris, has developed interim stabilization measures to address
immediate security threats. A project to relocate the 2,114 ex-Séléka regrouped in
three sites in Bangui was launched on 5 June, following the signing of a
memorandum of understanding between the ex-Séléka leadership and the
transitional authorities on 22 April. The project, which is being implemented by the
International Organization for Migration with funding from the Peaceb uilding Fund,
envisages the relocation of the regrouped ex-Séléka from Bangui and their
reinsertion in their communities of origin. MINUSCA also worked closely with the
authorities, MISCA and Sangaris to prepare a disarmament process, and community
violence-reduction projects, such as labour-intensive programmes, that could be
implemented at short notice, should a ceasefire agreement among the armed groups
be reached.
Weapons and ammunitions management
58. The Mine Action Service has identified approximately 130 tons of unsecure
and unsafe arms and ammunition, most being held in military camps and often at

14-58076

13/18

S/2014/562

risk of theft and accidental explosion. These items have been segregated for
destruction or temporary relocation to a safe storage facility in order t o protect the
civilian population from the threat of explosive hazards. The Mine Action Service
refurbished two facilities at the gendarmerie headquarters, which will safely and
securely house small-calibre weapons, as well as a limited amount of ammunitio n
and explosives. On 3 July, the Service oversaw the destruction of half of the known
volume of unsafe ammunition found in Bangui.

Update on planning in relation to security sector reform
and vetting
59. The reconstitution and reform of the national defence and security forces is
expected to be a key element of any political dialogue. The Government has yet to
reactivate the strategic and technical committees on security sector reform,
established in October 2013. The committees are expected to develo p an action plan
for the restructuring of the army.
60. In the framework of a registration exercise conducted with UNDP -donated
equipment, 6,752 elements of the armed forces (out of 8,416) were officially
registered, 632 were declared deserters and 302 deceased or disappeared. The majority
of armed forces personnel were regrouped in Camp Kassai in Bangui and an unknown
number are believed to be in Obo, Birao and Bouar. To date, 1,493 police and 2,425
gendarmerie personnel have been physically identified as part of a Government
registration exercise. Efforts to restore the operational capacities of the national
gendarmerie and police included the delivery of 11 pick-up vehicles on 31 May and
the rehabilitation of three police stations in Bangui as part of a UNDP project
funded by the Peacebuilding Fund which commenced in April. UNDP launched
activities aimed at establishing monitoring and oversight mechanisms of the police
and gendarmerie, jointly with United Nations police and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

V. Preparation for the transfer of authority from MISCA
to MINUSCA
61. Immediately following the adoption of resolution 2149 (2014), an
interdepartmental team led by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
including MINUSCA visited Addis Ababa and Brussels from 14 to 16 April to
discuss the modalities for the transition from MISCA to MINUSCA and develop an
action plan. In Bangui, MISCA and MINUSCA established a joint task force that
meets regularly to ensure the implementation of key tasks in relation to the
transition, including the establishment of a command and control structure and force
and police headquarters; the training of MISCA contingents; support arrangements;
the redeployment of military and police units and critical infrastructure
requirements.
62. From 1 to 19 May, the United Nations and the African Union conducted a joint
visit to the Central African Republic to assess the capacities of the MI SCA
contingents and identify capability gaps. The assessment confirmed that MISCA
contingents were operationally reactive and delivering effectively, despite
significant shortfalls in equipment and limited logistical support systems. The

14/18

14-58076

S/2014/562

assessment identified critical shortfalls in mobility (due to lack of vehicles and air
assets), medical capacity and command and control (due to lack of structure and
communication equipment within units). All contingents were found to require
self-sustainment capabilities and equipment, particularly with regard to water
treatment, ablution, crowd control and observation.
63. In follow-up to the joint capability assessment, the Departments of
Peacekeeping Operations and Field Support have worked closely with the MISCA
troop- and police-contributing countries that were identified for rehatting to
MINUSCA, to explore all available options to overcome the identified shortfalls. On
2 July, the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations held a meeting of
MISCA troop- and police-contributing countries and donors in New York, to seek
donor support for the deployment of the additional capabilities that are required.
Early in July, an advance police team was deployed to Bangui to support the
establishment of the MINUSCA police component and support the transfer of
authority from MISCA to MINUSCA in the area of policing.
64. MINUSCA continued to work closely with MISCA to enhance its overall
command and control, including through the provision of training to staff officers.
In addition to the planned rehatting of a number of MISCA staff officers, qualified
civilian MISCA staff members were actively considered for recruitment into
MINUSCA in accordance with United Nations procedures. Efforts began to combine
the joint operations centres of MISCA and MINUSCA and co-locate the MISCA and
MINUSCA military and police headquarters; this is to be completed prior to the
transfer of authority on 15 September. A United Nations mobile training team is
carrying out in-mission training of trainers for the MISCA military and police
personnel that will be rehatted. The curriculum encompasses material on United
Nations standards as well as key mandated tasks, including the protection of
civilians, child protection and conflict-related sexual violence, with the use of
scenario-based exercises.
65. In parallel, the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and Field Support
were active in the generation of additional capabilities for MINUSCA. Force
generation processes were accelerated, and similar effo rts are under way to speed up
contracting and movement timelines. As a result of these efforts, three non -MISCA
infantry battalions as well as two formed police units and 120 individual police
officers will be in the process of deploying at the transfer of authority on
15 September. Regarding enablers, an engineer company, which began to deploy in
June, will be fully operational before the transfer of authority, while a second
engineer company will follow shortly thereafter. The requirement for two military
utility helicopter units will be met, the first three helicopters becoming operational
around the time of the transfer of authority. A civilian medical capacity has been
contracted for a Bangui Level I (plus) hospital and at least one military Level II
hospital will be deployed by early October. The Force Commander, the Police
Commissioner and some 60 staff officers for the force and sector headquarters will
also be deployed by the transfer of authority. Capabilities for which pledges have
yet to be received are for a security unit (sous groupement de sécurité) for the
protection of key political stakeholders in Bangui, a special forces company, an
attack helicopter unit and one C-130 fixed-wing aircraft.

14-58076

15/18

S/2014/562

VI. Financial aspects
66. The General Assembly, by its resolution 68/299 of 30 June 2014, authorized
the Secretary-General to enter into commitments for the Mission for the period from
10 April to 31 December 2014 in a total amount not exceeding $312,976 ,400,
inclusive of the amount of $59,552,000 previously authorized by the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for the period from 10 April
to 30 June 2014.
67. As at 30 June 2014, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Accou nt for
MINUSCA amounted to $59,552,000. The total outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations at the same date amounted to $1,133.7 million.
68. As at 28 July 2014, amounts owed to the Member States that contribute the
troops who make up MINUSCA totalled $0.7 million. The reimbursement of troop
costs in the amount of $0.8 million has been made for the period up to 31 May 2014,
respectively, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

VII. Observations
69. Although there has been some improvement in Bangui, I remain deeply
concerned about the security situation and the deadly cycle of sectarian violence in
the Central African Republic with its tragic humanitarian consequences. Civilians
across the country suffer appalling violence and brutality, widespread insecurity and
a complete absence of basic services, with women and children paying the highest
price. I strongly condemn all acts of violence and violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law perpetrated by armed groups and civilians. As an
essential first step, all parties must commit themselves to laying down their arms and
ceasing all forms of violence and destabilizing activities immediately, in accordance
with the cessation of hostilities agreement signed at Brazzaville on 23 July.
70. Too many minority populations, mainly Muslim, have left the country. Only a
few thousand have stayed behind in the southern and western parts of the country,
and most of them are trapped in enclaves at risk in Bangui and other locations. I call
on the transitional authorities and national actors, with the support of the
international community, to fully implement the cessation of hostilities agreement,
and to take immediate measures to ensure the protection of those popula tions and
improve their living conditions. Steps also need to be taken to address the root
causes of the conflict and allow displaced populations to safely and voluntarily
return, without fear of being attacked.
71. I commend the efforts of the international forces, MISCA, the French forces of
Operation Sangaris and EUFOR, which remain critical to saving lives and
preventing a further deterioration of the security situation. I pay tribute to the
dedication and courage with which they implement their mandates in a dangerous
and unpredictable environment, and extend my sympathy to the families of those
who lost their lives in the service of peace. I am particularly encouraged by the
excellent cooperation between the African Union and the United Nations in
preparing for the transfer of authority from MISCA to MINUSCA in a spirit of
partnership and mutual respect. However, the MISCA contingents continue to lack
critical capabilities. MISCA troops and police will be the backbone of MINUSCA

16/18

14-58076

S/2014/562

on 15 September and it is vital that international partners help to enable those
contingents to deliver in accordance with United Nations standards.
72. I am encouraged by the consensus emerging among national and international
key stakeholders, further to the ECCAS Summit in Malabo on 27 June and the
meeting of the International Contact Group for the Central African Republic in
Addis Ababa on 7 July, that lasting solutions to the crisis in the Central African
Republic can be achieved only through inclusive political dialogue wi thin a wider
framework of national reconciliation. Preceding initiatives by the Head of State of
the Transition, Catherine Samba-Panza, and other national and international actors
in preparation for a dialogue and reconciliation process were important cata lysts and
demonstrated the readiness among Central Africans to engage in dialogue. The
participation of Central Africans from across the political spectrum in the
Brazzaville forum has marked the beginning of a political process that must be
inclusive and owned by the Central Africans themselves. The forum was an
important first step in a process that will be a long journey, addressing the suffering
of the victims, understanding the motivation of the offenders, bringing together
estranged communities, and trying to find a path to justice, truth, reconciliation and
ultimately peace.
73. Such dialogue should lead to a political agreement on elections; the
composition and format of the national armed forces; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of armed groups; transitional justice and other key political issues,
including the future of governance, decentralization, and the economic future of the
country. I encourage the transitional authorities, armed entities and groups and all
political and civil society actors to take full ownership of the process and redouble
their efforts to work together in earnest to resolve their differences, in close
cooperation with my Special Representative and the international mediation. With
ownership comes responsibility. I urge all parties, and those who have an influence
on them, to refrain from acts that undermine this process.
74. As I underlined in my last report, there will be no solution to the crisis in the
Central African Republic without the continued active engagement of the country’s
neighbours and the region. I pay a tribute to the resolve and determination of the
ECCAS leaders, particularly the current Chairman, the President of Chad, Idriss
Déby Itno, and the Mediator, the President of the Congo, Denis Sasso u Nguesso, as
well as the continued support of the African Union.
75. Tackling impunity will be vital to bringing about an immediate improvement
in people’s lives and creating an environment in which sustainable peace can take
hold. I am encouraged by the discussions between the transitional authorities and
MINUSCA on the implementation of urgent temporary measures, which I am
confident can have an important multiplier effect. Measures to hold accountable
perpetrators of human rights violations and of international humanitarian law and to
restore State authority are essential pillars of the Mission’s protection of civilians
mandate. They are vital to restoring confidence in State institutions and respect for
the rule of law. Alongside the efforts of MINUSCA in this area, a significant
investment in restoring the penal chain in the Central African Republic will be
needed.
76. Since its establishment on 10 April, MINUSCA has significantly increased its
civilian component, while working closely with MISCA and the African Union to
ensure a seamless transition on 15 September. However, the progress made in a

14-58076

17/18

S/2014/562

number of areas in standing up MINUSCA cannot detract from the challenges that
exist a few weeks before the transfer of authority. The expectations of MINUSC A
remain high and there is significant work ahead to bring the Mission up to its
authorized strength of 10,000 military personnel and 1,800 police. Although lessons
have been learned from other United Nations peacekeeping deployments, mounting
and sustaining a large, highly decentralized multidimensional mission in a
landlocked country with extremely poor infrastructure remains daunting. I am
nonetheless confident that on 15 September MINUSCA will reach an initial
operating capability that will ensure its ability to implement priority mandated tasks.
77. The deployment of the peacekeeping operation alone will not be sufficient to
resolve the crisis in the Central African Republic. The international community must
remain engaged in a sustained and coordinated manner to provide the Central
African Republic with the assistance necessary to ensure the effectiveness and
sustainability of its actions, based on the respective comparative advantages of the
actors involved. Given the dire conditions and extreme vulne rability of the
population, immediate and sustained support for humanitarian operations is vitally
important.
78. I am grateful to my Special Representative for the Central African Republic
and Head of MINUSCA, Babacar Gaye, for his tireless efforts. I am deeply
appreciative of the work being done by the personnel of MINUSCA and the United
Nations country team in a dangerous and unpredictable environment. I am grateful
to my Special Representative for Central Africa, Abdoulaye Bathily, for his support
to the international mediation effort. I also thank the African Union, MISCA troop contributing countries, ECCAS, the European Union, donor countries and
multilateral and non-governmental organizations for their continued efforts in
support of peace in the Central African Republic.

18/18

14-58076
