A

UNITED

NATIONS

General Assembly

•

Distr.
GENERAL

......,.'{'---

A/R.ES/47/42
31 March 1993

Forty-seventh session
Agenda item 87
R.ESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
(on the report of the Second Committee (A/47/727)]
47/42.

Assistance to Mozambique

The General Assembly,
Recalling Security Council resolution 386 (1976) of 17 March 1976 and
taking note of Council resolution 782 (1992) of 13 October 1992,
Recalling also its relevant resolutions, in particular resolution 45/227
of 21 December 1990, in which it urged the international community to respond
effectively and generously to the call for assistance to Mozambique,
Reaffirming the principles for humanitarian assistance contained in the
annex to its resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991,
Noting the signing at Rome, on 16 July 1992, of the Declaration on
Guiding Principles for Humanitarian Assistance, 1/ which permits the expansion
of relief programmes to cover all affected people in Mozambique, and urging
all parties concerned to implement the Declaration,
Welcoming the signing at Rome, on 4 October 1992, of the General Peace
Agreement for Mozambique, 1/ whose main goals are the establishment of lasting
peace, tbe enhancement of democracy and the promotion of national
reconciliation in that country,
Stressing the need for a sustained effort by the international community
to respond to the increasing and urgent emergency humanitarian needs of the
people of Mozambique, in the light of the current severe drought and the
evolving process of repatriation of refugees and normalization of the lives of
displaced persons,

1/

93-18598

See S/24635, annex.

I ••.

A/RES/47/42
Page 2

Stressing also that a proper response to the current situation in
Mozambique requires substantial international assistance in a comprehensive
and integrated manner, linking emergency relief aid with additional
rehabilitation and development assistance,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, l/
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;

2.
Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General and the
relevant organizations of the United Nations system for the measures taken to
organize international assistance programmes for Mozambique;
3.
Expresses its gratitude to all States and rPgional,
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations that have rendered
assistance to Mozambique;
4.
Expresses its satisfaction at the entry into force, on 15 October
1992, of the General Peace Agreement for Mozambique, in particular the
cease-fire; which creates favourable conditions for the implementation of
programmes of economic and social rehabilitation and the overall process of
national reconstruction;
5.
Urges the international community, in particular the United
Nations system, to extend its full support and contribute to the
peace-building process in Mozambique in accordance with the General Peace
Agreement, providing, inter alia, assistance for the electoral process,
emergency and rehabilitation assistance for refugees and displaced persons and
support for programmes of demobilization of armed forces;
6.
Also urges the international community, in the context of
paragraph 5 above, to support and participate actively in the forthcoming
conference of donor countries and organizations, to be held at Rome on 15 and
16 December 1992;
7.
Notes with appreciation the establishment, in Mozambique, of a
Committee on Humanitarian Assistance, with the participation of the United
Nations, and the formulation of a unified plan for the delivery of relief
assistance throughout the country;
8.
Draws the attention of the international community to the unmet
funding needs referred to in the 1992/93 Emergency Programme for Mozambique
and the United Nations/Southern Africa Development Community Consolidated
Appeal for the Drought Emergency in Southern Africa;
9.
_ Calls upon all States, regional and interregional organizations,
other intergovernmental organizations and international non-governmental
organizations to intensify their development cooperation and assistance in
support of the process of national reconstruction of Mozambique;

ll

A/47/539.

I • ••

A/RES/47/42
Page 3

10.
Requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with the
Government·of Mozambique:
(~)
To continue his efforts to mobilize the international assistance
required by Mozambique;

(Q)
To ensure the coordination of the work of the United Nations
system for an adequate response to the emergency, rehabilitation and
development needs of Mozambique;
(£)
To prepare a report on assistance to Mozambique for submission to
the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session.
81 •t plenary meeting
9 December 1992
