United Nations

A/RES/48/222

General Assembly
Distr. GENERAL
23 December 1993
ORIGINAL:
ENGLISH

A/RES/48/222
87th plenary meeting
23 December 1993
Pattern of Conferences
A
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Conferences,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 43/222 B of 21
December 1988, 46/190 of 20 December 1991 and 47/202 A to C of 22 December
1992,
1.
Approves the draft calendar of conferences and meetings of the
United Nations for the biennium 1994-1995 as submitted and amended by the
Committee on Conferences;
2.
Authorizes the Committee on Conferences to make adjustments in the
calendar of conferences and meetings for 1994 that may become necessary as a
result of action and decisions taken by the General Assembly at its fortyeighth session;
3.
Invites the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund
and the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme to
increase their efforts to rationalize their meeting and documentation
requirements with a view to reducing them to the maximum extent possible;
4.
Also invites the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's
Fund and the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme to
consider dispensing with summary records;
5.
Welcomes the decision of the Committee on Conferences to continue
to monitor the conference services provided to organs and programmes not
funded from the regular budget of the United Nations with a view to
identifying cost savings;
6.
Endorses the efforts of the Committee on Conferences to improve
the utilization of conference-servicing resources, and takes note of the
Committee's decision in paragraph 23 of its report to raise the benchmark
figure to 80 per cent, pending further analysis of the expanded methodology;
7.
Welcomes the decision of the Committee on Conferences to continue
the experimental methodology in respect of the utilization of
conference-servicing resources, and requests the Secretariat to expand the
information presented to include analyses of trends and figures on the

utilization of conference-servicing capacity;
8.
Endorses the decision of the Committee on Conferences to request
its Chairman to consult on its behalf with the chairmen of organs concerned,
where the utilization factor is lower than the established benchmark figure
applicable for the last three sessions, and requests the Committee to report
the results of the consultations to the General Assembly at its forty-ninth
session;
9.
Urges those bodies whose utilization factor is below the
applicable benchmark figure for the last three sessions to review and consider
reducing the amount of conference-servicing resources requested;
10.
Recommends that the measures to ensure optimum utilization of
conference services contained in annex II to the report of the Committee on
Conferences be implemented, as applicable, by all subsidiary organs in order
to achieve the most efficient and effective use of conference-servicing
resources;
11.
Requests the chairmen of the relevant organs and subsidiary bodies
of the General Assembly to propose to Member States, at the beginning of each
session, the adoption of time-limits for speakers;
12.
Welcomes the decision of the Committee on Conferences to play an
informational role vis-a-vis subsidiary organs, to provide clear directives to
the Secretariat, to set standards and to heighten awareness;
13.
Renews its requests to the Secretariat, contained in paragraph 5
of its resolution 47/202 A and paragraph 10 of its resolution 47/202 B, to
bring to the attention of all organs information on the notional costs per
hour of meeting time and on the notional cost per page of documentation;
14.
Reiterates its view, expressed in section VIII of its resolution
44/201 A of 21 December 1989, on the desirability of the establishment of
unified conference services at Vienna and, in this context, stresses that the
combined financial burden for providing conference services to the United
Nations Office at Vienna and the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization should, in the long run, benefit from the unification agreement,
and urges the Secretary-General to conclude the negotiations with the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization in that regard as quickly as
possible and to report thereon to the General Assembly no later than at its
forty-ninth session;
15.
Notes with appreciation the system-wide coordination of conference
activities and the agreement reached with regard to establishing a systematic
exchange of information and language staff to promote effective utilization of
conference staff;
16.
Requests the Secretary-General, as Chairman of the Administrative
Committee on Coordination, through the established mechanism of the
Inter-Agency Meeting on Language Arrangements, Documentation and Publications,
to enhance that coordination, including coordination of meeting schedules,
with a view to optimizing the use of available conference services, resources
and facilities, with due regard to quality, and making possible the effective
participation of Member States, and to report on the results achieved to the
General Assembly at its fiftieth session through the Committee on Conferences;
17.
Emphasizes that any decisions to convene world conferences should
take into account the impact of such conferences on the capacity of the United
Nations system to provide conference services and the capacity of Member
States to participate in them;
18.
Welcomes the benefits from the application of technological
innovations to conference servicing, including gains in productivity and
reductions in costs, and emphasizes that the primary goal of the introduction
of new technology should be to enhance the quality of conference services and

ensure their timely provision;
19.
Reaffirms the general principle that, in drawing up the schedule
of conferences and meetings, United Nations bodies shall plan to meet at their
respective established headquarters;
20.
Requests the Secretary-General to review the legal basis and
experience of all subsidiary bodies that meet away from their established
headquarters, thus constituting a departure from General Assembly resolution
40/243 of 18 December 1985, and to report thereon to the Assembly at its
forty-ninth session through the Committee on Conferences;
21.
Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, when deciding upon its meeting schedule, including meetings away
from Headquarters, to take into account the programme of work of the Fifth
Committee;
22.
Endorses the decision of the Committee on Conferences that in
future its review of the proposed programme budget for conference services
should be expanded to include conference services at the United Nations Office
at Nairobi and at the regional commissions.
B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the control and limitation of
documentation, including resolutions 33/56 of 14 December 1978, 36/117 B of 10
December 1981, 37/14 C of 16 November 1982, 45/238 B of 21 December 1990 and
47/202 B of 22 December 1992,
Reaffirming the need for and desirability of written meeting records for
some bodies of a political or legal nature,
Considering, on the one hand, the effects of the introduction of
technological innovations and, on the other, the increase in the workload and
the reduced staffing in the Office of Conference Services,
1.
Expresses concern about the late issuance and distribution of
documentation, including summary and verbatim records of United Nations
bodies;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its forty-ninth session, through the Committee on Conferences, an
analytical report on the factors that contribute to this situation, including
the increase in the workload of the Office of Conference Services, the level
of staffing, workload standards, the late submission of documents by author
departments and the effects of the introduction of technological innovations
in the Office;
3.
Encourages all bodies currently entitled to written meeting
records to review the need for such records, particularly verbatim records,
and to communicate their recommendations to the General Assembly at its fortyninth session;
4.
Calls upon the Secretariat to strengthen planning and forecasting
of parliamentary documentation in both author departments and the Office of
Conference Services, and the training of those responsible for the preparation
of parliamentary documentation in author departments;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures to
ensure that documents are submitted by author departments in compliance with
the ten-week rule in order to permit processing on time in all official
languages, and to include information on the impact of those measures in the
report on compliance with the six-week rule requested in paragraph 9 of
resolution 47/202 B;

6.
Invites intergovernmental bodies and their members to review, as
appropriate, their agendas with a view, inter alia, to combining agenda items
and limiting requests for pre-session documentation;
7.
Calls upon the Secretariat to provide the Office of Conference
Services with adequate resources, especially technological resources, to
enable it to respond to its increased workload and maintain a high standard of
services, with due respect to the principle of equal treatment of the official
languages of the United Nations as laid down in General Assembly resolution
42/207 C of 11 December 1987;
8.
Expresses its deep concern regarding the economy measures
announced by the Secretary-General on 26 August 1993 in the context of the
financial crisis without prior consultation with Member States, those measures
being in contradiction with the principle of equal treatment of the official
languages of the United Nations as laid down in resolution 42/207 C;
9.
Concurs with the recommendation of the Committee on Conferences,
contained in paragraph 12 of the addendum to its report, that cuts in
conference servicing introduced by the Secretary-General on 26 August 1993,
and subsequently lifted in New York, be lifted also at Geneva and Vienna;
10.
Endorses the letter from the Chairman of the Committee on
Conferences to the President of the General Assembly, contained in paragraph
136 of the report of the Committee, which reflects the opinions of the
Committee on the economy measures announced by the Secretary-General.
