A/58/PV.79

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-eighth session

79

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 23 December 2003, 6.30 p.m.
New York

President:

The Hon. Julian R. Hunte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 7.05 p.m.
The President: Let me first apologize for the
delay, which was due to circumstances entirely beyond
our control. I am sure that members understand that we
are endeavouring to make every effort to conclude this
evening, rather than continue tomorrow. I thank
members for their patience.
Agenda item 26 (continued)
The situation in Central America: progress in
fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy
and development
Draft resolutions (A/58/L.30/Rev.1 and
A/58/L.38)
Reports of the Fifth Committee (A/58/653 and
A/58/654)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held a debate on this agenda item at its 55th
plenary meeting, on 4 November 2003.
The reports of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolutions
A/58/L.30/Rev.1 and A/58/L.38 have been issued as
documents A/58/653 and A/58/654, respectively.
I give the floor to the representative of Mexico to
introduce draft resolution A/58/L.30/Rev.1.

(Saint Lucia)

Ms. Anguiano Rodríguez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): It is an honour for the delegation of Mexico
to introduce, on behalf of the sponsors, the draft
resolution on the United Nations Verification Mission
in Guatemala (MINUGUA), which is contained in
document A/58/L.30/Rev.1. In addition to the countries
listed in the version of the draft resolution that we are
introducing today, Japan has joined the list of sponsors.
With the signing of the Agreement on a Firm and
Lasting Peace, on 29 December 1996, the Government
of Guatemala and the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional
Guatemalteca put an end to more than three decades of
armed conflict in Guatemala. The Agreement was the
result of a six-year negotiation process sponsored by
the United Nations. Since that time, at the request of
the parties, the United Nations, through MINUGUA,
has played a fundamental role in the peace process:
verifying compliance with the commitments arising
from the Agreement. That role has been widely
recognized by the parties to the agreements and by
Guatemalan society as a whole.
The draft resolution that we are introducing today
takes note of the reports submitted under this item. In
particular, it responds to the request of the Government
of Guatemala and of that country’s civil society that the
Mission’s mandate be extended for one more year, until
the end of 2004, so that it can accompany the peace
process during the first year of the mandate of the
Government that will assume its duties in January.
Among the draft resolution’s new elements, I
should like to highlight the appeal to those who will be

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

04-20853 (E)

*0420853*

A/58/PV.79

elected on 28 December to support the peace
agreements as State accords and to incorporate them
into their governmental plans, in conformity with the
commitment undertaken by the main political parties in
July 2003. Also included is a reference to the meeting
of the Consultative Group for Guatemala held in May
2003, in which all participants agreed that the peace
agreements should remain the essential road map for
Guatemala’s development. In addition, there is a
reference to the recent agreement to establish an office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
Guatemala. That will lend continuity to the verification
work carried out by MINUGUA, once the Mission’s
mandate has been completed.
As already indicated, with the adoption of this
draft resolution, the Assembly will authorize a final
renewal of the Mission’s mandate from 1 January to 31
December
2004,
in
conformity
with
the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report. In addition, we request the Secretary-General to
submit to the fifty-ninth session of the Assembly a
report on the implementation of the resolution and a
final report on the Mission’s work.
I wish to indicate an editorial correction to the
English version of the draft resolution under
consideration. So that it is consistent with the English
version recorded on behalf of the sponsors, in operative
paragraphs 2 and 12 of the text, the words “with
satisfaction” after the word “welcomes” must be
deleted.
Guatemala is now in a time of political transition
in which the international community’s support,
through the Mission, remains very important. We trust
that the political forces and Guatemalan society as a
whole will maintain their commitment to the peace
agreements and will commit themselves to completing
the tasks remaining in the implementation of those
agreements.
In this, which will be the final extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Guatemala,
we
hope
that
draft
resolution
A/58/L.30/Rev.1 will have the Assembly’s unanimous
support.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/58/L.30/Rev.1, entitled
“United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala”,
as orally corrected.

2

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/58/L.30/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/58/L.30/Rev.1, as orally
corrected, was adopted (resolution 58/238).
The President: I shall now call on the
representative of Japan, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
May I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Omura (Japan): The Japanese delegation
would like to provide an explanation regarding my
Government’s support of the draft resolution contained
in document A/58/L.30/Rev.1, entitled “United Nations
Verification Mission in Guatemala”. Japan believes that
continued support for and strengthening of cooperation
with the United Nations Verification Mission in
Guatemala (MINUGUA) are critical for the
enhancement of cooperation relations with Guatemala
and with the Central American region as a whole, and
has decided to sponsor this draft resolution to extend
its mandate.
At the same time, my delegation would like to
stress that, while the extension of this Mission will not
immediately result in an increase in the United Nations
budget, we are generally quite concerned about the
budget’s continuing expansion. It is essential that, from
this point forward, MINUGUA strive to accelerate its
activities and to bring its final mandate to a conclusion
expeditiously through closer coordination with the
United Nations Development Programme and with
other relevant organs of the United Nations system that
are conducting activities on the ground.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of position.
Draft resolution A/58/L.38 is entitled “The
situation in Central America: progress in fashioning a
region
of
peace,
freedom,
democracy
and
development”.
Before proceeding to take action on draft
resolution A/58/L.38, I should like to announce that,
since its publication, the following countries have
become sponsors: Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica,
Estonia, Germany, Grenada, Jamaica, Lithuania, the
Netherlands, Poland, the Republic of Korea, the
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,

A/58/PV.79

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Slovakia, Suriname
and Switzerland.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/58/L.38?
Draft resolution A/58/L.38
(resolution 58/239).

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 26?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 52 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft resolution (A/58/L.19)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/648)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held the debate on this item at its 63rd and
64th plenary meetings, on 24 November 2003.
The report of the Fifth Committee on its
programme budget implications is contained in
document A/58/648.
We will proceed to consider draft resolution
A/58/L.19.

balance between conflicting interests. Furthermore, the
Convention makes no provision for registering
reservations on specific clauses.
Although we agree with the Convention in its
general intent and most of its provisions, we are unable
to become a party to it because of those serious
shortcomings. That being the case, we cannot support
the draft resolution, which calls upon States to become
parties to the Convention on the Law of the Sea and to
harmonize their national legislation with its provisions.
Mr. Pulido León (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to explain its position in the
forthcoming voting on the draft resolution entitled
“Oceans and the law of the sea”, contained in
document A/58/L.19.
The delegation of Venezuela wishes once again to
place on record its commitment to supporting, as it has
always done in the past, efforts to promote
coordination and cooperation with respect to oceans
and the law of the sea. However, the difficulties that
have prevented my country from becoming a party to
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
remain unchanged and in effect, despite the fact that
the Convention entered into force more than two
decades ago. Its standards therefore do not apply to
Venezuela, since my country is not a party to that
international instrument.

I shall now call on those representatives who
wish to speak in explanation of vote before the voting.
May I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.

That is why my delegation wishes once again to
place on record the fact that, for the reasons I have just
noted, certain aspects of the draft resolution on the
Convention on the Law of the Sea, contained in
document A/58/L.19 under agenda item 52 (a), will
compel us to abstain in the imminent voting.

Mr. Tekin (Turkey): Turkey will vote against the
draft resolution entitled “Oceans and the law of the
sea”, contained in document A/58/L.19.

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/58/L.19, entitled
“Oceans and the law of the sea”.

The reason for my delegation’s negative vote is
that some of the elements contained in the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea that had
prevented Turkey from approving the Convention are
once again retained in this year’s draft resolution.
Turkey supports the international efforts to establish a
regime of the sea that is based on the principle of
equity and that can be acceptable to all States.
However, the Convention does not make adequate
provision for special geographical situations and, as a
consequence, is not able to establish an acceptable

I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become co-sponsors: Cyprus, Denmark,
Malta, Mauritius, Sierra Leone and the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

3

A/58/PV.79

In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina,
Botswana,
Brazil,
Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri
Lanka,
Sudan,
Suriname,
Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Turkey
Abstaining:
Colombia, Venezuela
Draft resolution A/58/L.19 was adopted by 156
votes to 1, with 2 abstentions (resolution 58/240).

4

[Subsequently, the delegation of Guyana
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote in favour and the delegation of Azerbaijan
informed the Secretariat that it had not intended
to participate in the voting.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 52?
It was so decided.
Reports of the First, Second, Third and Sixth
Committees
The President: The General Assembly will now
take up the following reports in order to take action on
remaining draft resolutions, those dealing with the
report of the First Committee on agenda item 73; the
reports of the Second Committee on sub-items (b) and
(f) of agenda item 94; the reports of the Third
Committee on agenda items 110 and 113 and on subitems (b) and (c) of agenda item 117, as well as the
report of the Sixth Committee on agenda item 155.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the First, Second,
Third and Sixth Committees that are before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the First, Second, Third and Sixth
Committees have been made clear in the Committees
and are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee”.
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations

A/58/PV.79

of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the First,
Second, Third and Sixth Committees, I should like to
advise representatives that we are going to proceed to
take decisions in the same manner as was done in the
Committees, unless notified otherwise in advance. This
means that where recorded or separate votes were
taken, we will do the same. I should also hope that we
may proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Committees.
Agenda item 73 (continued)
General and complete disarmament
Report of the First Committee (A/58/462)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/646)
The President: The Assembly will resume
consideration of the report of the First Committee on
agenda item 73 to take action on draft resolution I
recommended by the First Committee in paragraph 82
of its report (A/58/462).
The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution I is
contained in document A/58/646.
Draft resolution I is entitled “The illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons in all its aspects”. In the
Committee, draft resolution I was adopted with a
recorded vote. However, it is my understanding that
there is no vote requested in the plenary.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution I without a vote?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
58/241).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 73?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of all the reports of the
First Committee before it.

Agenda item 94 (continued)
Environment and sustainable development
(b) Implementation of the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in Those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa
Report of the Second Committee
(A/58/484/Add.2)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/655)
The President: The Assembly will resume
consideration of the report of the Second Committee on
sub-item (b) of agenda item 94 to take action on draft
resolution I recommended by the Second Committee in
paragraph 14 of its report (A/58/484/Add.2).
The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution I is
contained in document A/58/655.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Implementation of
the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in
Africa”.
A separate vote has been requested on operative
paragraph 14 of draft resolution I. Is there any
objection to this request? There is none.
I shall now put to the vote operative paragraph 14
of draft resolution I, on which a separate vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican

5

A/58/PV.79

Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia and Montenegro, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Operative paragraph 14 of draft resolution I was
retained by 161 votes to 1.
The President: The Second Committee adopted
draft resolution I as a whole. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
58/242).
The President: I have one request for
explanation of vote after the vote. I give the floor to the
representative of the United States.
Mrs. Tamlyn (United States of America): The
United States remains opposed to the financing of
conference services for this treaty body from the
United Nations on a non-reimbursable basis. In
accordance with Article 17 of the Charter of the United

6

Nations, the Member States of the United Nations are
not responsible for expenses relating to treaty body
activities. However, in the context of our overall
deliberations on the 2004-2005 budget and in keeping
with our position that in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 41/213 the budget be adopted by
consensus, the United States has not blocked
provisions for this resource requirement from the
contingency fund.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 94?
It was so decided.
(f) Protection of global climate for present and
future generations of mankind
Report of the Second Committee
(A/58/484/Add.6)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/656)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 11 of its report
(A/58/484/Add.6). The draft resolution is entitled
“Protection of global climate for present and future
generations of mankind”.
A separate vote has been requested on operative
paragraph 5 of the draft resolution. Is there any
objection to this request? There is none.
I shall now put to the vote operative paragraph 5
of the draft resolution, on which a separate vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,

A/58/PV.79

Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia and Montenegro, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Operative paragraph 5 of the draft resolution was
retained by 161 votes to 1.
The President: The Second Committee adopted
the draft resolution as a whole. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/243).
The President: One delegation has requested the
floor in explanation of vote after the vote. I give the
floor to the delegation of the United States.
Mrs. Tamlyn (United States of America): As
stated previously, the United States is opposed to the
financing of conference services for this treaty body
from the United Nations on a non-reimbursable basis.

In accordance with Article 17 of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Member States of the United
Nations are not responsible for expenses relating to
treaty body activities. However, in the context of our
overall deliberations on the 2004-2005 budget and in
keeping with our position that in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 41/213 the budget be
adopted by consensus, the United States has not
blocked provisions for this resource requirement from
the contingency fund.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (f) of agenda item 94?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 12 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Second Committee (A/58/495)
The President: I now give the floor to the
Rapporteur of the Second Committee, Mr. José Alberto
Briz Gutiérrez of Guatemala.
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour once again of addressing
the General Assembly in relation to agenda item 12,
entitled “Report of the Economic and Social Council”,
assigned to the Second Committee. I wish to call to the
attention of the plenary an omission in paragraph 18 of
document A/58/495, where, as a recommendation of
the Second Committee, a new decision should be
included, after decision I. Thus the existing draft
decision II, which concerns the Second Committee’s
proposed programme of work for 2004, becomes draft
decision III.
The new draft decision II, entitled “Trust Fund
for the United Nations Forum on Forests”, was adopted
by consensus by the Second Committee and is
contained in chapter I of the report of the Economic
and Social Council (A/58/3 (Part I)) and in A/C.2/58/6.
The text of the draft decision has been circulated
informally to the delegations in the Hall.
The President: If there is no objection, the
Assembly will resume its consideration of the report of
the Second Committee on agenda item 12, entitled
“Report of the Economic and Social Council”,
document A/58/495, to take action on draft decision II

7

A/58/PV.79

recommended by the Committee in paragraph 18 of its
report, the text of which is contained in document
A/C.2/58/6 in all languages and was reproduced and
circulated in English in the Hall.
Draft decision II is entitled “Trust Fund for the
United Nations Forum on Forests”.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt draft decision II, recommended by the Second
Committee?
Draft decision II was adopted (decision 58/554).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
12.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Second
Committee before it.
Agenda item 110 (continued)
Advancement of women
Report of the Third Committee (A/58/501)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/649)
The President: The Assembly will resume
consideration of the report of the Third Committee on
agenda item 110 to take action on draft resolution VII
recommended by the Third Committee in paragraph 43
of its report in document A/58/501.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution VII
is contained in document A/58/649.
Draft resolution VII is entitled “Future operation
of the International Research and Training Institute for
the Advancement of Women”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,

8

Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Italy, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Poland,
Republic of Korea, San Marino, Sweden,
Switzerland, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uzbekistan
Draft resolution VII was adopted by 126 votes to
5, with 30 abstentions (resolution 58/244).
[Subsequently the delegations of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and South Africa
informed the Secretariat that they had intended to
vote in favour.]

A/58/PV.79

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 110?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Promotion and protection of the rights of children
Report of the Third Committee (A/58/504)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/652)
The President: The Assembly will resume
consideration of the report of the Third Committee on
agenda item 113 to take action on draft resolution III
recommended by the Third Committee in paragraph 65
of its report in document A/58/504.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution III
is contained in document A/58/652.
Draft resolution III is entitled “Office of the
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint

Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland,
Georgia, Germany, Iceland, Israel, Japan,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Poland, Sweden, Switzerland, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Estonia, Fiji, Hungary, Latvia,
Mongolia, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, San
Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Solomon Islands, Spain, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Venezuela
Draft resolution III was adopted by 115 votes to
20, with 28 abstentions (resolution 58/245).
[Subsequently the delegation of India informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: May I take it that it is wish of the
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
113?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Human rights questions
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms
Report of the Third Committee
(A/58/508/Add.2)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/650)
The President: The Assembly will resume
consideration of the report of the Third Committee on

9

A/58/PV.79

agenda item 117 to take action on draft resolution
XXVIII recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 131 of its report in document
A/58/508/Add.2.

Mr. Tun (Myanmar): In the Third Committee,
Myanmar disassociated itself from draft resolution
A/C.3/58/L.63/Rev.1, as orally revised, contained in
report A/58/508/Add.3 as draft resolution II.

The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution
XXVIII is contained in document A/58/650.

I would like to request that, for reasons already
given in the Third Committee, Myanmar’s
disassociation from the resolution be duly reflected in
the official records.

Draft resolution XXVIII is entitled “Ad Hoc
Committee on a Comprehensive and Integral
International Convention on the Protection and
Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with
Disabilities”. The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution XXVIII without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XXVIII was adopted (resolution
58/246).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 117.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 117?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded consideration of all the reports of the Third
Committee.
Agenda item 155 (continued)
Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/58/517)

Report of the Third Committee
(A/58/508/Add.3)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/651)
The President: The Assembly will resume
consideration of the report of the Third Committee on
sub-item (c) of agenda item 117 to take action on draft
resolution II, recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph
57
of
its
report
in
document
A/58/508/Add.3.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution II is
contained in document A/58/651.
Draft resolution II is entitled “Situation of human
rights in Myanmar”. The Third Committee adopted
draft resolution II without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
58/247).
I call on the representative of Myanmar, who
wishes to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted.

10

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/647)
The President: The Assembly will resume
consideration of the report of the Sixth Committee on
agenda item 155 to take action on draft resolution I
recommended by the Sixth Committee in paragraph 12
of its report (A/58/517).
The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution I is
contained in document A/58/647.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Report of the
Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization”.
The Sixth Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
58/248).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 155?

A/58/PV.79

It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of all the reports of the
Sixth Committee before it.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 12, 118, 124 to 126, 131 to 134, 138, 140, 143
(a), 165, 166, 120, 122, 59, 121, 120 together with 121
and 161, and 119.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Fouad Rajeh of Saudi Arabia, to introduce in one
intervention the reports of the Fifth Committee.
Mr. Rajeh (Saudi Arabia), Rapporteur of the
Fifth Committee (spoke in Arabic): I have the honour
today to present to the General Assembly the reports of
the Fifth Committee containing recommendations on
issues that required action during the main part of the
fifty-eighth regular session of the General Assembly.
The Fifth Committee met on 30 September and
from 6 October to 22 December 2003. It held 30
plenary meetings and more than 100 rounds of informal
consultations, excluding the many rounds of closed,
informal consultations held outside the venue of
Conference Room 5, particularly on the items “Scale of
assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
the United Nations”, “Scale of assessments for the
apportionment of the expenses of United Nations
peacekeeping operations” and “Pattern of conferences”
and the reports submitted under agenda item 59,
“Strengthening of the United Nations system”.
I would be remiss if I failed to mention the
intense negotiations on the draft resolution on the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 20042005, which was held nightly over the past week and
this weekend, lasting throughout the night in
Conference Room 5. I therefore have the honour to
present the following brief report on the work of the
Fifth Committee, whose recommendations to the
Assembly were all adopted without a vote.
Under agenda item 12, entitled “Report of the
Economic and Social Council”, in paragraph 8 of its
report in document A/58/588 the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of
two draft decisions. Draft decision I is entitled
“Delegation of formal authority in matters of personnel

of the United Nations Population Fund”; draft decision
II takes note of chapters I, VII (sections B and C) and
IX of the report of the Economic and Social Council.
The two draft decisions were adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
Under agenda item 118, entitled “Financial
reports and audited financial statements, and reports of
the Board of Auditors”, in paragraph 7 of its report in
document A/58/570 the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution
that was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Under agenda item 124, entitled “Scale of
assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
the United Nations”, in paragraph 7 of its report in
document A/58/432/Add.1 the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly the adoption of a draft
resolution that was adopted by the Committee without
a vote.
Under agenda item 125, entitled “Pattern of
conferences”, in paragraph 6 of its report in document
A/58/575, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution on pattern
of conferences, which was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
Under agenda item 126, entitled “United Nations
common system”, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly in paragraph 8 of its report in
document A/58/576 the adoption of a draft resolution
that was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
The reports of the Committee on agenda items
131 and 132 — “Financing of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994” and
“Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991” — are contained in documents A/58/579
and A/58/580, respectively. In paragraph 7 of
document A/58/579 and in paragraph 7 of document
A/58/580, respectively, the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of two draft

11

A/58/PV.79

resolutions that were adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
Under agenda item 133, entitled “Scale of
assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
United Nations peacekeeping operations”, in paragraph
6 of its report in document A/58/581, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft resolution that was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
Under agenda item 134, entitled “Administrative
and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations”, in paragraphs 12
and 13 of its report in document A/58/582, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of two draft resolutions and two draft
decisions. Draft resolution I is entitled “Report of the
Joint Inspection Unit on reforming the Field Service
category of personnel in United Nations peace
operations” and draft resolution II is entitled “Report
of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the
audit of the establishment and management of mission
subsistence allowance rates”. Draft decision I is
entitled “Transfer of buildings to the United Nations
Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy” and draft decision II
is entitled “Special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse”. All those draft
proposals were adopted by the Committee without a
vote.
The reports of the Committee on the financing of
the following four peacekeeping operations — under
agenda item 138, “Financing of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo”; under agenda item 140, “Financing of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor”;
under agenda item 143 (a), “Financing of the activities
arising from Security Council resolution 687 (1991):
United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission”;
and, under agenda item 165, “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia” — are contained in
documents A/58/583, A/58/584, A/58/585 and
A/58/589, respectively. In paragraph 6 of each report,
the Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of a draft resolution or draft decision, all
of which were adopted by the Committee without a
vote.
The report of the Committee on agenda item 166,
“Admission of the International Criminal Court to
membership in the United Nations Joint Staff Pension

12

Fund”, is contained in document A/58/590. In
paragraph 6 of its report, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly the adoption of a draft
resolution that was adopted by the Committee without
a vote.
Agenda item 120 is entitled “Programme budget
for the biennium 2002-2003”. In paragraphs 19 and 20
of its report on that item (A/58/572), the Fifth
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of four draft resolutions and three draft
decisions, respectively: draft resolution I, “Report of
the Joint Inspection Unit on the revenue-producing
activities of the United Nations system”; draft
resolution II, “Conditions of service and compensation
for officials other than Secretariat officials: members
of the International Court of Justice, judges of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
judges of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda”; draft resolution III, “Salary and retirement
allowance of the Secretary-General and salary and
pensionable remuneration of the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme”; draft
resolution IV, “Conditions of service and compensation
for officials, other than Secretariat officials, serving the
General Assembly: full-time members of the
International Civil Service Commission and the
Chairman
of
the
Advisory
Committee
on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions”; draft
decision I, “Report of the Joint Inspection Unit on
support costs related to extrabudgetary activities in
organizations of the United Nations system”; draft
decision II, “Construction of additional office facilities
at the Economic Commission for Africa”; and draft
decision III, “Strengthening the Department of Public
Information, within the existing capacity, in order to
support and enhance the United Nations web site in all
official languages of the Organization: follow-up”. All
those draft proposals were adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
The report of the Committee regarding the second
performance report for the biennium 2002-2003 under
agenda item 120, “Programme budget for the biennium
2002-2003”, is contained in document A/58/572/Add.1.
In paragraph 5 of its report, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft resolution, “Final budget appropriations for the
biennium 2002-2003”, which was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.

A/58/PV.79

Agenda item 122 is entitled “Programme
planning”. In paragraph 6 of its report on that item
(A/58/574), the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution that was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Agenda item 59 is entitled “Strengthening of the
United Nations system”. The report of the Committee
on that item is contained in document A/58/587. In
paragraph 6 of its report, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly the adoption of a draft
resolution, which was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
Agenda item 121 is entitled “Proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005”. In its
report on that item (A/58/573), the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of
draft report A/C.5/58/L.56, Parts I and II; Part I relates
to the measures adopted by the Committee with regard
to the programme budget, and Part II contains the
Committee’s recommendations. With respect to agenda
item 121, the Committee considered 11 draft reports on
the implications of the proposed programme budget.
Document A/C.5/58/L.53 contains the 11 draft reports
on the implications of the proposed programme budget,
which were adopted by the Committee without a vote.
The Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of those reports and decisions, contained
in documents A/58/646 and A/58/656.
Here, I should like to draw the Assembly’s
attention to the following corrections to the draft
resolution I in document A/18/573.
(spoke in English)
In paragraph 45, the text “rule 105.6 (a)” should
be replaced by the text “rule 105.6”.
Turning to the end of section 24, the Assembly
would endorse the narrative of the Secretary-General
contained in paragraphs 24.64 to 24.69 of section 24,
Human rights.
Agenda item 161, “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in Côte d’Ivoire”, was considered by
the Fifth Committee, together with agenda item 120,
“Programme budget for the biennium 2002-2003”, and
agenda item 121, “Proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2004-2005”. In paragraph 7 of its report
(A/58/586), the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution on the
financing of the United Nations Mission in Côte

d’Ivoire, which was adopted by the Committee without
a vote.
(spoke in Arabic)
Agenda item 119 is entitled “Review of the
efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”. In paragraph 14 of
its report (A/58/571), the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of five draft
resolutions. Draft resolution I is entitled “Outsourcing
practices”. Draft resolution II is entitled “Report of the
Joint Inspection Unit on the management audit review
of outsourcing in the United Nations and the United
Nations funds and programmes”. Draft resolution III is
entitled “Report of the Joint Inspection Unit on
common and joint services of the United Nations
system organizations at Vienna”. Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services on the audit of the Investment Management
Service of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund”. Draft resolution V is entitled “Review of
duplication, complexity and bureaucracy in United
Nations administrative processes and procedures”.
Those five draft resolutions were adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
In paragraph 5 of the addendum to that report
(A/58/571/Add.1), the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of two draft decisions:
draft decision I, on the biennial programme of work of
the Fifth Committee for 2004-2005; and draft decision
II, on questions deferred for future consideration. Both
draft decisions were adopted by the Committee without
a vote.
Before concluding, I would like to take this
opportunity to express my profound gratitude to the
Group of Asian States for demonstrating their
confidence in me by asking me to serve as Rapporteur
of the Fifth Committee at the fifty-eighth session of the
General Assembly. I also thank the chairperson of the
Committee and the Deputy Secretary, Ms. Nora Benary,
for the considerable efforts they have made. I also
thank delegations for their cooperation. I assure them
that the changes made to documents in the course of
the Fifth Committee’s 30th meeting, held this morning,
have been duly taken into account and will be reflected
in corrected documents as needed. Finally I wish all
my colleagues the best for New Year and Christmas.
The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the

13

A/58/PV.79

General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Fifth Committee which are before the Assembly
today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanation of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Fifth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records. May I
remind Members that by paragraph 7 of decision
34/401, the General Assembly agreed that when the
same draft resolution is considered in a Main
Committee and in plenary meeting, a delegation
should, as far as possible, explain its vote only once,
that is, either in the Committee or in plenary meeting,
unless that delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is
different from its vote in the Committee.
May I remind delegations also that in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee unless
notified otherwise in advance. I therefore hope that we
may proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Fifth Committee.
Agenda item 12 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/588)
The President: The General Assembly will now
take action on the two draft decisions recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
Draft decision I is entitled “Delegation of formal
authority in matters of personnel of the United Nations
Population Fund”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt draft decision I without a vote.
Draft decision I was adopted (decision 58/555).

14

The President: Draft decision II is entitled
“Report of the Economic and Social Council”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft decision II, recommended by the Fifth
Committee?
Draft decision II was adopted (decision 58/556).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
12.
Agenda item 118
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/570)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/249).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its recommendations of agenda
item 118.
Agenda item 124 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee
(A/58/432/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/1 B).

A/58/PV.79

The President: I shall now give the floor to those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Alarcón (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
With respect to the resolution on the scale of
assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
the United Nations that has just been adopted, I would
like to thank all delegations that participated, with
generosity and in good faith, in the negotiations
leading to the more appropriate distribution of the
assessments.
As all delegations know, the methodology
adopted in 2000 for application over the following
three years, created significant distortions that were
detrimental to certain countries, particularly developing
countries. Unfortunately, the methodology that is in
place does not produce fair or equitable results. Costa
Rica, together with 14 other nations, experienced an
increase in its assessment of more than 50 per cent.
The negotiations on the scale of assessments made it
possible to reduce the negative impact of the
methodology, thanks to the voluntary increase agreed
to by the Russian Federation, as well as to bilateral
agreements between some of the worst-affected States
and others that were interested in resolving this unjust
situation.
Costa Rica would like to thank the Government
and the people of Spain for their solidarity and
generosity. Thanks to them, the increase in my
country’s assessment during the forthcoming period
will be more reasonable — although it will still be
significant. My delegation will never forget the noble
and visionary initiative of the Spanish people.
The difficulties we faced this year in negotiating
the scale of assessments made it clear that we need to
undertake an in-depth review of the methodology
leading to a sound, fair and equitable calculation that is
independent of political considerations. My delegation
is prepared to start working to ensure that in 2006 we
can adopt a new and better methodology. Likewise, we
must provide the Committee on Contributions with
clear technical, non-political criteria so as to enable it
to evaluate the situation of each of the Member States
with greater objectivity and with justice.
Mr. Ramlal (Trinidad and Tobago): During my
delegation’s statement during the meeting of the Fifth
Committee on 15 October on agenda item 124, “Scale
of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses

of the United Nations”, we emphasized four issues,
which we viewed as critical to our deliberations.
First, we made clear our unswerving commitment
to abide by the agreements contained in resolution 55/5
B, of 23 December 2000, which, among other things,
fixed the elements of the scale methodology for two
trienniums, namely, 2001-2003 and 2004-2006.
Secondly, we emphasized the need for greater political
commitment on the part of all Member States to pay
their assessed contributions in full, on time and without
conditions. Thirdly, we also emphasized the need for
the General Assembly to extend sympathetic
understanding to those who may be temporarily unable
to meet their financial obligations because of genuine
economic difficulties. Fourthly, we stressed that,
consistent
with
the
technical
and
political
considerations inherent in the scale of assessments, due
consideration would be given by the Assembly to
ensuring adherence to the fundamental principles and
processes which have guided the Assembly over the
past 50 years in its deliberations on the scale of
assessments.
One of these long-standing principles has been
the evolutionary nature of the scale methodology and
the related need to ensure that there are no substantial
increases in the individual rates of assessments of
Member States over successive scale periods.
Accordingly, in the context of negotiations on the draft
resolution on the scale of assessments, Trinidad and
Tobago sought to ensure full adherence to all the
agreements contained in resolution 55/5 B, as well as
to those principles which have guided the Assembly on
this agenda item. We are pleased to have been a part of
a consensus resolution on this important agenda item.
We would also like to take this opportunity to place on
record our appreciation to those delegations whose
goodwill facilitated a decision on this agenda item,
particularly the Government of Spain.
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
124.
Agenda item 125
Pattern of conferences
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/575)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the

15

A/58/PV.79

Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The text
of the draft resolution is, for the time being, contained
in document A/C.5/58/L.42.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/250).

Draft resolution I is entitled “Second performance
report for the biennium 2002-2003 on the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994”.

The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
125.

The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

Agenda item 126
United Nations common system
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/576)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/251).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 126?
It was so decided.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/252).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/253).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
131.

Agenda item 131
Agenda item 132
Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in
the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1
January and 31 December 1994
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/579)
The President: The Assembly will now take
action on the two draft resolutions recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.

16

Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/580)
The President: The Assembly will take action on
the two draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Second performance
report for the biennium 2002-2003 on the International

A/58/PV.79

Tribunal for Yugoslavia for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
58/254).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
58/255).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
132.
Agenda item 133
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of United Nations peacekeeping operations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/581)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Fifth
Committee without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/256).
The President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 133.

Agenda item 134
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/582)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 12 of its report and
on the two draft decisions recommended by the
Committee in paragraph 13 of the same report.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Report
of the Joint Inspection Unit on reforming the Field
Service category of personnel in United Nations peace
operations”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
58/257).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
the audit of the establishment and management of
mission subsistence allowance rates”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
58/258).
The President: We turn next to draft decision I
entitled “Transfer of buildings to the United Nations
Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft decision I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft decision I was adopted (decision 58/557).
The President: Draft decision II is entitled
“Special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft decision II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft decision II was adopted (decision 58/558).

17

A/58/PV.79

The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
134.

(a) United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation
Mission
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/585)

Agenda item 138
Financing of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/583)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/259).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
138.

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The draft
decision is entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 58/559).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 143.
Agenda item 165
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/589)

Agenda item 140
Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/584)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/260).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
140.
Agenda item 143
Financing of the activities arising from Security
Council resolution 687 (1991)

18

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/261).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
165.
Agenda item 166
Admission of the International Criminal Court to
membership in the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/590)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.

A/58/PV.79

The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/262).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 166?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 120
Programme budget for the biennium 2002-2003
Reports of the Fifth Committee (A/58/572 and
A/58/572/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly will turn first to
the report of the Fifth Committee contained in
document A/58/572.
The Assembly will take a decision on the four
draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 19 of the report and on the three draft
decisions recommended by the Committee in paragraph
20 of the same report.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Report of the Joint
Inspection Unit on the revenue-producing activities of
the United Nations system”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
58/263).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Conditions of service and compensation for officials
other than Secretariat officials: members of the
International Court of Justice, judges of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
judges of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
58/264).

The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Salary and retirement allowance of the SecretaryGeneral and salary and pensionable remuneration of
the Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution III
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
58/265).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Conditions of service and compensation for officials,
other than Secretariat officials, serving the General
Assembly: full-time members of the International Civil
Service Commission and the Chairman of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution IV
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
58/266).
The President: We now turn to draft decision I,
entitled “Report of the Joint Inspection Unit on support
costs related to extrabudgetary activities in
organizations of the United Nations system”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft decision I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft decision I was adopted (decision 58/560).
The President: Draft decision II is entitled
“Construction of additional office facilities at the
Economic Commission for Africa”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft decision II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft decision II was adopted (decision 58/561).
The President: Draft decision III is entitled
“Strengthening the Department of Public Information,
within the existing capacity, in order to support and
enhance the United Nations web site in all official
languages of the Organization: follow-up”.

19

A/58/PV.79

The Fifth Committee adopted draft decision III
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The text
of the draft resolution, for the time being, is contained
in document A/C.5/58/L.47.

Draft decision III was adopted (decision 58/562).

The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

The President: The Assembly will now turn to
the report of the Fifth Committee contained in
document A/58/572/Add.1.
The Assembly will take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 5 of its report. The draft resolution is
entitled “Final budget appropriations for the biennium
2002-2003”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/267).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
120.
Agenda item 122
Programme planning
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/574)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The text
of the draft resolution, for the time being, is contained
in document A/C.5/58/L.46.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/268).
The President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 122.
Agenda item 59 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/587)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the

20

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/269).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
59.
Agenda item 121
Proposed programme budget for the biennium
2004-2005
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/573)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the five draft resolutions recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 59 of its report,
which, for the time being, are contained in Part II,
section IV, of document A/C.5/58/L.56.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Questions relating to the proposed programme budget
for the biennium 2004-2005”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
58/270).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution II.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
58/271).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Special subjects relating to the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2004-2005”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution III
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
58/272).

A/58/PV.79

The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the
biennium 2004-2005”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution IV
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
58/273).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Working Capital Fund for the biennium 2004-2005”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution V
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution
58/274).
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolutions just adopted.
Ms. Goycochea (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation went along with the adoption without a vote
of the draft resolution on the programme budget for the
biennium 2004-2005, despite our reservations about a
number of its provisions. Although my delegation
understands that a budget resolution should not become
an extensive policy document, we believe that it should
include a number of provisions that put financial
decisions in context. Therefore, we think a resolution
text such as this, negotiated under exceptional
circumstances, is inherently exceptional and should not
be a precedent for future resolutions. That is without
prejudice to the merits of the resolution just adopted,
which are recognized by all delegations. In that
context, my delegation would like to thank the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Pakistan for his
extraordinary efforts to arrive at this outcome.
My delegation notes that the resolution once
again imposes budgetary cuts on the amount of
resources requested by the Secretary-General. We
believe that everyone’s commitment to the
Organization should include unrestricted support for
reform measures and should be reflected in consistent
and unconditional support for the budgetary requests
that enable the Organization to function smoothly. That
would be more coherent.
The Cuban delegation is also concerned that the
draft resolution has been used to promote certain

reform decisions in the absence of specific decisions on
the part of the relevant legislative bodies. It is in that
context that we express serious reservations about the
approval of the four posts requested by the SecretaryGeneral in document A/58/569 for section 24, “Human
rights”, related to the implementation of measures 3
and 4 of his reform plan. Although Cuba accepted the
establishment of those posts, showing great flexibility,
we have serious questions about them, in that their
establishment constitutes a violation of paragraphs 8
and 9 of resolution 57/300. We shall carry out the
necessary follow-up on this issue once the relevant
legislative bodies have indicated their position.
Mr. Kennedy (United States of America): The
United States remains opposed to the financing by the
United Nations of conference services for treaty bodies
when the treaty itself calls for the States parties to bear
such costs. In accordance with Article 17 of the Charter
of the United Nations, Member States are not
responsible for expenses related to such treaty body
activities. However, in the context of our overall
deliberations on the 2004-2005 budget and in keeping
with our position that — in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 41/213 — the budget should be
adopted by consensus, the United States has not
blocked provision for several allocations from the
contingency fund, but we shall continue to oppose such
expenditures.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 121.
Agenda items 120 and 121 (continued) and 161
Programme budget for the biennium 2002-2003
Proposed programme budget for the biennium
2004-2005
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Côte
d’Ivoire
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/586)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The draft

21

A/58/PV.79

resolution is entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Mission in Côte d’Ivoire”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/275).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 120, 121 and 161.
Agenda item 119
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Reports of the Fifth Committee (A/58/571 and Add.1)
The President: The Assembly will turn first to
the report of the Fifth Committee contained in
document A/58/571.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
five draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 14 of its report.
Draft
practices”.

resolution

I

is

entitled

“Outsourcing

The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
58/276).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the
management audit review of outsourcing in the United
Nations and the United Nations funds and
programmes”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
58/277).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Report of the Joint Inspection Unit on common and
joint services of United Nations system organizations
at Vienna”.

22

The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution III
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
58/278).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
the audit of the Investment Management Service of the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution IV
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
58/279).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Review of duplication, complexity and bureaucracy in
United
Nations
administrative
processes
and
procedures”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution V
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution
58/280).
The President: The Assembly will now turn to
the report of the Fifth Committee contained in
document A/58/571/Add.1.
The Assembly will take a decision on the two
draft decisions recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 5 of its report. The texts of the draft
decisions, for the time being, are contained in
documents
A/C.5/58/L.55
and
A/C.5/58/L.54,
respectively.
Draft decision I is entitled “Biennial programme
of work of the Fifth Committee for 2004-2005”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft decision I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft decision I was adopted (decision 58/563).
The President: Draft decision II is entitled
“Questions deferred for future consideration”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft decision II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?

A/58/PV.79

Draft decision II was adopted (decision 58/564).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
119.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it.
Programme of work
The President: Apart from organizational
matters and items that may have to be considered by
operation of the rules of procedure of the Assembly,
and bearing in mind the action already taken by the
Assembly thus far, I should like to propose that the
following agenda items remain for consideration during
the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly:
agenda items 3 (b), 10 to 12, 17, 18, 23 (a), 25, 28, 37,
38, 40 (b), 41, 44, 47, 49, 50, 55 to 60, 83, 85, 94 (e),
117 (b) and (d), 118 to 122, 124, 125, 131 to 134, 138,
140, 143, 160, 161 and 165.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly that those agenda items remain for
consideration during the fifty-eighth session of the
Assembly?
It was so decided (decision 58/565).
Statement by the President
The President: It is now my pleasure to speak
the words that, I am confident, we all want to hear: we
have concluded our work for the first part of the fiftyeighth session of the General Assembly. Given the
challenges we faced at the beginning and throughout
the session, what we have been able to achieve together
and the ambitious agenda we have set for ourselves for
the remainder of the session, I believe it is safe to say
that this session thus far has been nothing short of
extraordinary.
We started this session with a most dynamic and
substantive general debate. The overall policy direction
provided by the record number of heads of State or
Government and other high-level participants in the
general debate underpinned and stimulated the work of
the Main Committees and of subsidiary bodies.
Therefore, we were better prepared to address the
myriad critical issues on our agenda, including
HIV/AIDS, financing for development, humanitarian

assistance, an enhanced role for the General Committee
and the revitalization of the General Assembly itself.
I was personally very optimistic at the beginning
of this session that we were ready to move decisively
to advance the process of revitalizing the General
Assembly. I was ever conscious of the impact that a
revitalized Assembly could have on the status of the
United Nations in the global community. I am pleased
that my reading of the readiness of Member States to
move in that direction was right and that we have
begun, with the adoption of a consensus resolution, a
process for strengthening and revitalizing the General
Assembly.
On all the issues it has addressed thus far in this
session, the General Assembly has put its shoulders to
the wheel to accomplish the tasks at hand. We all know
that it was not easy, and in fact at times it was
exceptionally difficult. But each of our steps forward
spoke volumes about our determination to reach
accommodation, even when the challenges seemed
intractable. I believe we have thus earned the right to
be highly satisfied with our accomplishments.
In particular, I am deeply appreciative of the
support you have all provided in completing our work
and the support you have given to me personally. In so
doing, you have lightened my significant task. What we
have accomplished redounds to the benefit of the
General Assembly, of the United Nations and,
consequently, of the various national constituencies
that make up our global community.
I want especially to express my heartfelt thanks to
Permanent Representatives, delegates, chairpersons and
members of regional and interest groups, and
facilitators for the tremendous cooperation and support
they have given me during this first part of the session.
I look forward to their continued cooperation and
support in the remainder of the session.
The support of the Secretariat is integral to our
collective effort to accomplish the goals and objectives
of the General Assembly. I am especially indebted to
the Under-Secretary-General and officers of the
Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management, who have spared no effort in assisting me
and my Cabinet in every aspect of our work.
The forthcoming period will be a demanding one,
filled with challenge and great opportunity. We have
laid out a very demanding agenda for what remains to

23

A/58/PV.79

be done during the rest of the session. On revitalization
alone, our consensus resolution commits us to take up
four key issues: the scheduling of future General
Assembly sessions, including the work of the Main
Committees and subsidiary and related bodies; the
rationalization of the Assembly’s agenda; the
biennialization,
triennialization,
clustering
and
elimination of items; and the rationalization of the
working methods of the Main Committees. As
members are well aware, revitalization is but one of the
myriad issues to which we must turn our attention.
Others, including planning and preparation for the
major events of 2005, will also have to be taken up
with the greatest of resolve.
I have some good news: we will resume in
January 2004. Technically speaking, that is next year,

24

and we have all earned the right to rest, relaxation and
recreation in the interim. I also have some not-so-good
news: January 2004 is but a mere nine days away.
Notwithstanding that fact, I hope that we will all be
back in January, energized and, indeed, revitalized and
ready to contribute to the fullest to the implementation
of the courses of action on which we have agreed.
On that note, I wish all delegations and their
families a wonderful holiday season and a successful
and very happy New Year.
I am now pleased to declare this part of the fiftyeighth session of the General Assembly closed. I will
ask members of the Assembly to join me in standing
and giving ourselves a round of applause.
The meeting rose at 9.05 p.m.
