UNITED NATIONS

22w

MEETING:

17 OCTOBER

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/225 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Expression of welcome to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh

1

.. .

Adoption of the agenda ................................................

1 *’ ii

The’situation

-11, :. ;

between Iran and Iraq .....................................

WPV.2251

,

,‘.

‘:

.
.:

3

‘

.,:

NOTE”

.

‘.,
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters-corn- 1
bined with figures. .Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document. ,
,
..

i

Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sl . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OJ%kd Records of the Security Council. The date
.of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
,’

,.

,
.

I

(.

.

‘.

.

e. ./
,.*.
r

.

.

..

( ..?A,.,,

..,.

.

:..

1

’r:
‘t’,,,.

.. ,. *j.:-

:
-.
.,

” :‘.‘

-The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in :1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions und
Decisions qf the Se~urity..Colm~it..The
new system,, which has been applied
., ”
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative c.
‘on that date.
‘.,
.. . .
”
..’
.’
.“’
,
_’
I.
_:
:.,:
‘;
:L.
,
b
,‘,
‘,.’
I,
,..
.,
J
. .I
i’
.
..
,, . __. ”
. .,
,’
:

.

.t, ,...
’*
Ii
.,:I ‘1’.
.-I*
_

;

.’
~
.

-,

,’
‘_

i.- ,.
,.

’
.
,,

.. /
.,
.~I
’
~ ;...“,

.*

,.I
,_,, ,.

I,
. :
.‘, /,

1
‘,

,’

..

,,

.,

;-’

.’

.
*:.

2251st MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 17 October 1980, at 5 p.m.
Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

4. I welcome the Prime Minister of Iran, Mr. Mohammed Ali Rajai, and I invite him to make his statement.

‘Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain -and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

5. Mr. RAJAI (Iran) (interpretation from French)*
No one can cry out his indignation unless he has been
a victim of aggression. We have come here at a time
when our country is engaged in a war which was ini-tiated by the cruel, despotic Government of Iraq.
We are here at a time when our Imam and our people
have been greatly saddened by the many deaths that
have been caused by the earthquake in Algeria. We
regret the fact that the war has made it impossible for
us to give. the aid and the assistance that we would
have liked to give to Algeria and to its fraternal Muslim
people.

President:

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2251)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation between Iran and Iraq

6. I have come here straight from the front. The
spectacle of the dead and the wounded would have
moved the most heartless of men. I saw that spectacle
with my. own eyes. The surface-to-surface missiles
which struck the city of Dezful demolished a large part
of the city and many of the courageous population
perished. More than 30 babies are in hospital, babies
who are less than six months old. I have seen those
babies and they are fighting for their lives.

The meeting

was called to order at 6.10 p.m.
.
lkpression of welcome to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
I should like first to welcome the Minister for Foreign
AfTairs of Bangladesh, Mr. Muhammad Shamsul Huq,
who is present at this meeting of the Council.
Adoption

7. The Hussein army, using ridiculous pretexts-and
perhaps it really should be added that they are no
pretexts at all-has committed an act of aggression
against our country. It has destroyed centres of production, the economy and towns including hospitals
and schools, and it has killed innocent people.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation

between Iran and Iraq

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
In accordance with previous decisions [2247th, 2248th
and 2250th meetings], I invite the representatives of
Iran and Iraq to take places at the Council table and
I invite the representatives of Cuba and Japan to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

8. The whole world must know that Saddam Hussein’s army has acted without mercy, without pity,
like Hitler’s armies. To prolong his cruel regime,
Saddam has engaged 12 divisions and more than
2,500 tanks, as well as large quantities of weapons
and hundreds of war planes. He has used them to
attack the people of our country-this at a time when
the Islamic Republic was entering into a period of
reconstruction.

iIt the invitation of the President, Mr. Rajai (Iran)
and Mr. Hammadi
(Iraq) took places at the Council
table and Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba) and Mr. Nisibori
(Japan) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

9. Yesterday, during my flight, I learned that at
Kermanshah, following a bombing against schools and
universities, those buildings and the hospital were hit
and more than 1,000 schoolchildren and civilians were
victims of that raid.

3. -The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/14221. which contains the text of a letter dated
%i October 1980 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Council.

* Mr. Rqjai spoke in Persian. The French version of his statement
was supplied by the delegation.

1

10. Iraq’s Baath army, which has no understanding
whatsoever of humanity, spared no effort in those
inhuman acts. They have plundered, they have even
been guilty of rape. In the occupied areas, they have
imprisoned all adult men and have in that way taken
many prisoners of war, some of whom have been tortured and others killed in the prisons.

are trying to do is mutilate the revolutionary movement of the Muslim Iranian people. They wish to
destroy the Islamic Republic. They want to prevent
the completion of the bond that mankind has begun
to forge in Iran. They are trying to prevent us from
building a free Iran on the foundation of Islamic and
humanitarian values, for any victory for Iran spells
the defeat of all the forces of evil throughout the world.
The dispossessed peoples of the world, as well as
those. who have lost confidence in both the left and
the right, must realize that our Islamic revolution has
opened up a new path for all the disinherited peoples
of the world. The Iranian revolution acquired independence thanks to the power of the people, and our
people will guarantee its future by sacrifice and
through self-sufficiency. We believe that the true
winner of the war will be the revolutionary faith of
the peoples, not arms and munitions. That is why we
firmly declare that in this war, which has been imposed
on us, the Islamic revolutionary faith .of our people
will prevail. It is not the American AWACS or the
Russian Tupolevs that will bring about this victory.
In this war we are defending not only our territorial
integrity and our economy, but also human dignity
and the honour of our Muslim people. We are leading
mankind towards true humanitarian values. We know
that this war which has been imposed, on us will end
with the victory of the forces of good over the forces
of evil. We shall show the world that we can rely on
our own strength, without allying ourselves with the
colonialism of the East to fight the colonialism of the
West, and that we will make every sacrifice to guarantee our independence. The Tabas raid, the planned
coup d’e’tut and the armed invasion of Saddam Hussein
have shown the super-Powers that in their relations
with the Islamic Republic any resort to force is doomed
to failure.

11. We would appeal to the conscience of the peoples of the world, in particular to the Muslim people,
with whom we share a common ideology and common
values. It is for them to pass judgement. It is surprising that those who profess belief in dignity remain
aloof and say nothing, and, in the face of this open
aggression, declare their neutrality in international
forums. How can the representatives of those peoples
speak of neutrality? We know that many revolutionaries have already come here to the Council and have
asked that the rights of their peoples be defended.
But, in the final analysis, it is always the peoples them,selves who have defended their rights, by fighting the,
aggressor with their own hands. Our oppressed but
heroic people, inspired by the potent ideology of Islam
and under the leadership of the Jmam Khomeini, will
continue to fight and will determine their own future.
12. The resistance of the Iranian armed forces and
the Iranian people in the face of Saddam’s army has
amazed the entire world. Our people are resolute and
determined to fight, even if the people’s war must be
prolonged. We will not only expel the aggressor, but
we will allow the friendly fraternal people of Iraq to
become aware of the tyrannical and dependent nature
of Saddam Hussein’s regime. They will then be able
to deal a lethal blow at American imperialism, which
directly or indirectly has been helping the Baath Government of Iraq. The United States with its AWACS
aircraft in Saudi Arabia controls the movements of
Iranian troops and passes all information on to Iraq.
It also misleads Iranian pilots. We warn all those who,
through the port of Aqaba in Jordan, send arms and
munitions and spare parts to Iraq so that all those
weapons can be used to attack and bomb the antiimperialist and revolutionary people of Iran.

15. That war has already cost us thousands of martyrs and wounded. Material reparations cannot compensate for that. We are looking forward to the day
when the criminal Saddam Hussein will be judged by
a revolutionary tribunal in Iraq, to the day when he
will be punished for his deeds. We are looking forward
to the day when the people of Iraq will rid themselves
of him. Let all the oppressed peoples of the world
learn this lesson: that dignity and independence cannot
be obtained without sacrifice, for God is with the
disinherited.

13. Our people are determined to survive. They will
protect the. Islamic and humanitarian revolution.
They will remain free. They will live, and with the
help of God, they will win. The super-Powers wish to
impose a new Israel on the Middle East. The crimes
of the‘united States that have been committed against
the peoples of Palestine.and southern Lebanon should
have been enough, but today they are trying to create
a new Israel under the banner of an Arab nationalism.
Were not the Zionists in Israel sufficiently criminal?
Another Government led by Saddam Hussein has now
been given a mandate to destroy humanitarian values
and pursue its own ambitions. Saddam has brought
destruction to the whole area. All those who help him
will die in that destruction, as will he.

16. Let us now review the pretexts advanced by the
Saddam regime for launching an aggression against the
Islamic Republic of Iran. Saddam Hussein, mercenary
of the oppressors of the world, recognizing that he
himself was responsible for the military attack against
Iran and its territorial integrity, invoked the nonapplicability of the articles of the agreement concluded on 6 March 197Y as a pretext, to whitewash
this open aggression. It should be pointed out that,
following the Algiers negotiations, at the conference
of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries,
which was held from 4 to 6 March 1975, a Treaty con-

14. The true aim of the Iraqi regime and its masters
is not to gain a few kilometres of territory. What they
2

ceming the State Frontier and Neighbourly Relations,
with three annexed protocols, was concluded on
13 June 1975, and four additional agreements were
entered into on 26 December 1975.2 A document
serving as a final comprehensive settlement of the
outstanding questions was signed on the same date,’
and there was an exchange of the instruments of ratification between Iran and Iraq. All these agreements
and documents were duly registered with the Secretariat of the United Nations. All these instruments
make it perfectly clear that Iraq’s totalitarian regime
admitted at the time that it had no more claims regarding its rights and that the disputes had been terminated.

20. First, the very nature of the regime should be
clarified, and we should briefly review the positions
taken by Saddam Hussein in respect of the Islamic
revolution. The Baath Party in power in Iraq is made
up of the supporters of the notorious Michel Aflak.
He was a Freemason and a cunning Zionist. He diverted the anti-Zionist, anti-imperialist struggles of
the Muslim peoples, of the disinherited Arab peoples,
and he founded institutions that were in appearance
nationalist and socialist but in fact inspired by racist
ideals. After the victory of Abdel Nasser in Egypt
and his attacks on the interests of the puppet regimes
in the Arab Middle East-in view of the fact that the
reactionary regimes such as those of King Hussein
and King Hassan, for example, were not in a position
to counter those attacks individually-the
West, in
order to fight against Nasser and Nasserism, undertook to set up so-called leftist regimes whose slogans
sounded much more revolutionary than did Nasser’s
but which were in practice much more conservative
than those of King Hussein-type regimes. One of those
regimes, as the Council is aware, was the Baath regime
in Iraq. The history of the struggle of the Arab Muslim
peoples shows that that regime, which today is using
its full military might to destroy the Islamic revolution,
never sent its troops to combat the invaders of Jerusalem, except, perhaps, at the last moment, when the
war was already over. That Party, notwithstanding its
anti-Zionist slogans, never took any practical action
to combat the interests of Zionism, Is there really any
need to add that it will never do so?

17. The peoples of the world must also know that
the regime of the Islamic Republic of Iran, although
it might have called for a review of all the agreements
that had been concluded, since the time immediately
following the victory of the revolution, has never
strayed from the terms of the Treaty that I have just
mentioned, and that it is those who governed the
people of Iraq when the Treaty was being prepared
and whose signatures appear on the Treaty who violated the provisions of the Treaty. Moreover, the
Treaty itself provided for the means of settling whatever disputes might arise between the two parties.
18. Let me now turn to a possible explanation for
the abrogation of the Treaty by Iraq. Perhaps the best
explanation is that the Iraqi regime is acting irrationally, in an inhuman manner, or perhaps that it is
blindly following its masters, namely, the SuperPowers, not so as to make changes in the borders but
to deal a lethal blow to the Islamic revolution in Iran.
Even before the unilateral announcement that the
‘Treaty had been abrogated by Saddam Hussein, there
were instances of flagrant violations, and here are a
few: first, continual interference in the internal affairs
of Iran since the victory of the Islamic revolution;
secondly, the violation of articles pertaining to the
security of borders by the continual dispatch of mercenaries and Baath agents and armed groups into the
provinces of Kurdistan, Kermanshah, Barn and
Khuzistan and the provision of assistance to antirevolutionaly elements in the provinces I have just
mentioned’and also in SCistanand Baluchistan;‘ihirdlj,
the provision of assistance to persons sought in Iran
for having committed crimes against the population
during the Shah’s regime and guarantees that those
individuals would have all material means and the use
of propaganda to weaken the regime of the Islamic
revolution. They now have two radio stations on Iraqi
territory, it should be added, and are engaging in
propaganda against the Iranian regime.

e:

21. Inside the country, the Iraqi regime has taken
dictatorship and oppression to such limits that it has
even dared to imprison and kill Ayatollah Mohammad
Bagher Sadr and his sister. The prisons are full of
honest Muslim prisoners. The position of the regime
of Saddam Hussein vis-his
the Iranian ‘revolution
has been hostile right from the start and is aimed at
preventing the achievements of the Islamic revolution. The entire world will recall that right at the very
beginning of the revolution in Iran the Baghdad regime
forced Imam Khomeini to leave Iraq. The friendly
and fraternal relations of Saddam Hussein with the
Shah’s Iran changed right after the victory -of the
revolution, and its relations with Iran became imbued
with a hostility that cannot ever be compared with the
‘kind of hostility that that regime feels towards Israel.
The publicity machine used by Saddam and his mercenaries was set in motion against the Islamic revolution. Iraq became the land of asylum and the centre
of activities of the lackeys of the United States and
the Pahlevi regime. Notorious torturers such as antirevolutionaries from the right and the left in Iran
enjoyed the material and moral support of the Baathists
in Iraq. As I have said, radio broadcasting stations
called “Iranian stations against the revolution” were
set up in Iraq.

19. Now let me turn to the true aims of Iraq in its
aggression against Iran and consider the nature and
position of the Iraqi regime vis-ci-vis the Islamic revolution and the role of the super-Powers. Why did the
Baghdad regime reject. the Treaty and commit aggression against Iran? What were its aims and purposes?

22. We call on the peoples of the world to ask why
the Iraqi regime, which says that it is fighting against
the United States, had friendly relations with the
3

Shah’s regime, the valet of the United States, whereas
its position is hostile to a‘regime that is truly fighting
to destory the vital and strategic interests of imperialism, and in particular those of the United States and
international Zionism, a regime that was even the victim of direct intervention by the .United States when
diplomatic relations were broken off and an economic
embargo was put into effect. If Iraq is really hostile
to the United States and if that hostility goes beyond
mere declarations of intent, why did it never dare
attack the Shah’s army, which was entirely controlled
by United States military advisers while today it is
attacking an army that has only recently freed itself
from the American yoke? Is this not, in fact, an American mission with an anti-American appearance? These
tactics are not at all mysterious to the peoples of the
world. Recently we saw another puppet regime-that
of Ian Smith in Zimbabwe-using the same tactics and
rising up against its masters.

As I have already said, the Jordanian port of -Aqaba
is today the primary. port of entry for Iraq, -and the
airports of Jordan today are accommodating Iraqi
planes. The Egyptian pilots and crews are playing a
particularly active role in Iraq, and units of the. Jordanian army are at present stationed there.
’
28. In view of all those points, can we still consider
the war of the Iraqi regime with Iran a war of claims
that are exclusively territorial in nature? Are we ‘not
entitled to consider that this war is part of the fight
of the super-Powers against the Islamic revolution?
During these days of warfare, while blood is being
shed, we are witnessing a buildup of the super-Powers*
forces and fleets in the region, and we note with
surprise that military agreements between European
Governments and countries of the Middle East have
been concluded. We are also greatly surprised these
days to see that the United States, which had refused
to take part in the Olympic Games in Moscow because
of the Soviet Union’s military aggression in Afghanistan, is today readily agreeing to engage in new SALT
negotiations. Does that not explain why Soviet
weapons are being shipped through American Jordan
to Iraq and the regime of Saddam Hussein?

23. The position of Iraq, which is hostile .to Iran, is
only a reflection of the hostility of the super-Powers,
first and foremost the United States, towards the
Islamic Republic of Iran. From this rostrum we declare to all the peoples of the world that Iraqi military
aggression is construed by us as an integral part of the
continual attempts at international aggression against
our revolution. We wish to repeat that Iraq’s aggression is in reality the aggression .of the forces of evil
and is the work of great Satan and the lesser Satans.
.’
24. We ask the peoples of the world, and in particular
the Arab Muslim peoples, to pause and ponder and we
trust -<thatthey will find, an answer to the questions
which I.am about to ask.

29. Let me now set forth our position on the war,
and let me speak now about the outcome of the conflict.
30. The peoples of the world are well aware of the
fact that the war between Iran and Iraq is a war that
has been imposed upon us. The regime of the Islamic
Republic never would have dared use its forces and its
weapons against an Islamic country with an unpopular
regime, at a time when the fight should have been
against the invading regime in Jerusalem, which, has
subjected to’ international Zionism our Palestinian
Arab brothers .who’have ‘been deprived of ‘all their
property and all their rights in the occupied territories
and in southern Lebanon.
‘. ;

25. First, how is it that the Iraqi regime, even assuming that there was a territorial dispute with Iran,
before having recourse to the good offrces of Algeria,
which presided over the reconciliation of the two countries, engaged in a ,wide-scale military attack on the
land of the Islamic Republic of Iran?

31. Unfortunately, Iraq’s’ recent aggression has
taken a very heavy:economic and military toll on the
Muslim peoples of both countries. Bullets which were
intended to be used against the invaders of Islamic
territories are today being used to kill our Muslim
brothers, with-the aim of satisfying the ambitions of a
single individual Ito serve the, interests of the forces of
evil.
.
32. The Baath Government of Iraq, after occupying
part of our territory, after killing innocent civilians,
after destroying our facilities, our factories, our towns,
asks for a cease-fire today in order to deceive intemational public opinion. Regrettably, some countries
have wittingly or unwittingly supported that request.
We wish to declare that a fair end to this war can be
found only if the aggressor is vanquished and punished. That is our final position. For if a country
that has been devastated, a country that has been the
victim of aggression, accepts a cease-fire, that will
only serve to consolidate the position of the aggressor;
it will only serve to condone the act of aggression.

26. Secondly, together with that attack, how is it
that today Iraq’s aggression goes beyond changes in
borders and has as its object the invasion of our provinces, in particular the oil province of Khuzistan? And,
together with that attack, how is it that all the counterrevolutionaries outside Iran went to Iraq where it was
made possible for them to conduct their activities on
Iraqi territory? How is it that the United States sees
in that’attack an opportunity for their hostages to be
freed? How is it that Iraqi aggression coincides with
the end’,of the separatist claims in Kurdistan and with
the installation of the Government of the Islamic.
Republic?
27. Thirdly, how is it that in this war the puppet
regimes par excellence,
which are entirely dependent
on the United States, such as those of Jordan, Egypt,
Morocco and so on, are the primary suppliers of
assistance to the so-called progressive regime in Iraq?
4

33. Our people are today in mourni.ng for the thousands of schoolchildren killed during an Iraqi raid
against the schools of Kermanshah. That is the best
reason for condemning the Baath regime. We have
seen that regime go so far as to bomb a hospital in
Abadan. Eight wounded persons died, and more than
40,persons who had been working in the hospital were
seriously wounded; today, they are in the very ,beds
that had been occupied by most of the victims. That is
but, one reason, but we could cite so many more, for
condemning the Baath regime of Iraq.

39. The PRESIDENT (interpretdon
from Russian):
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq,
Mr. Saadoon Hammadi.
40. Mr. HAMMADI (Iraq): I shoud like to begin by
saying that I shall have a few comments to make on
some of the statements which have been made by
Mr. Rajai, the head of the Iranian delegation. However, I shall not use the improper language I have
heard concerning Iraq, the Arab people and the leaders
of my country. I do not think that improper language
is in keeping with the dignity of this meeting or that
it would serve the purpose of the meeting.

34.’ In conclusion, I should like to explain in a few.
words why we are here.

41. I should like to recall, however, that the ‘President of Iraq rose :from amongst the people, from the
ranks of the very.poor. He spent most of his life in
revolutionary work against monarchy and dictatorship. He spent a good part of his life in gaol and in
underground work. His ideas, and what he is doing for
our country, for the Arab people, for the countries of
the third world and the world at large, are well known
and it is not my duty to ,comment.

35: Islam and historical experience have taught us
that we cannot overcome the difficulties unless we rely
on God’s will and the will of the peoples.‘In view of
what I have just said, the members of: the Council
will readily understand that we are not here to ask the
Council for anything at all;’ we are here to convey
the facts, to expose what is actually happening in our
.I,
country-,

42. I should, however, ‘like to make the following
points. Mr. ,Rajai spoke about the termination of the
1975 Algiers agreement.’ As I made clear in my statements before the General Assembly3 and the Security
Council [225&h meeting], my Government decided
to consider ,the aforesaid agreement and those following and based upon it as terminated on the part of
Iraq after Iran had terminated them by word and deed.
That ,was done in accordance with paragraph 4 of the
Algiers agreement and article 4 of the Treaty concerning the State Frontier and Neighbourly Relations
of 1975,’ which was based on the aforesaid agreement.

36. , We are perfectly aware that the Council, in view
of. the veto of the major Powers, and in view of the
existence of other difficulties, is not in a position truly
to help the oppressed and disinherited peoples of the
world. Moreover, history shows us that the Council,.
even if upon occasion it has adopted resolutions on
matters of principle, under the pressure of world public.
opinion, has been unable to ensure their implementation owing to the opposition of one major Power or
another.: The failure to implement the resolutions of.
the Council concerning Israel or the racist regime of
South Africa is particularly,enlightening.
:_,
,.‘.
.‘.
+’ ‘:’
37. We are here for the sole purpose of making the
voice of the Muslim and revolutionary peo le of,Iran
heard. We are here to warn the peoples oP the entire
world about the dangers that overthrowing the Iranian
revolution would entail, about the impact that it would
have on the struggles of other oppressed peoples.
We are here to urge, once again,, the &eat. Powers
and the forces of evil to put an end to, their plots
against the Islamic revolution, to realize that the nohIe,
divine Iranian revolution, born of and nourished by
the blood of thousands of ,martyrs, will never be
vanquished.
.:

43, . The’ Algiers agreement represented a .package
deal, the spirit of which was to arrive at .a Xinal and
permanent solution of the existing problems between
the two countries, in the application of the principles
of territorial integrity, the inviolability of frontiers and
non-interference in internal affairs. The elements of
the package deal were: first, definitive. demarcation
of ‘land frontiers on the ‘basis of the Constantinople
Protocol of I913 and’the proceedings of the Frontier
Delimitation Commission of 1914 established in c
accordance therewith; secondly, delimitation of the
frontier in Shatt-Al-Arab according to the thalweg
line; thirdly, the establishment of reciprocal security
and confidence along the common frontiers and the
exercise of strict and effective control with aview ‘to
putting a final end to all acts of infiltration of ,a subversive character, no matter where they originated.
The parties assumed all the aforesaid obligations,.
under one condition, namely that of paragraph 4 of the
agreement which provided that the parties had also
agreed to consider those obligations as indivisible
elements of a comprehensive solution and that any
violation of any of them should naturally be considered
contrary to the agreement. In that way the parties
assumed their mutual obligations as a balance between

38.) The decision of the Council, whatever it may be,
will not change anything for us. For our people, with
the help of God, will fight Saddam and his oppressive
regime with their own hands. Our. people will win.
With the help of God, the people of Iraq will in- the
near future be liberated once and for all from this cruel
oppressor. Very soon the people will see the oppressors of the world disappear; they will see that, in the
last analysis, it is those who have right on their side
who will win.
5

political and juridical considerations; and that is the
cardinal provision of the agreement.

47. The Prime Minister of Iran mentioned something
about the national minorities in Iran. I should like t;
say that those national minorities expected, after the
change of regime in Iran, that their national and cultural rights would be respected. Nothing of that sort
happened. The regime in Iran took many steps to
reformulate the State on a religious basis and specifically on the ideology of one sect of the population.
That also, and very unfortunately, aroused the
feelings of the other sects inside Iran. A considerable
number of those minorities belong to our sects. We
should be objective. We shoud look at things as they
are. If the national minorities in Iran rise up and ask
for national recognition, that their national and cultural rights be respected, that is not the fault of Iraq.
We in Iraq have granted local autonomy and national
and cultural rights to the Kurdish minority and to
other minorities. We cannot be expected to accept
this principle in our own country and be against it
somewhere else. Apparently the Iranian Government
would like us to oppose the ‘principle of granting
national rights to minorities in Iran. We do not do that,
therefore we are accused of interfering in their internal
affairs.

44. Turning now to the allegation regarding the settlement of disputes as contained in article 6 of the
Treaty, it should be remembered that the Treaty
represented the technical details of the Algiers agree;
ment. I should like to point out at once that article 4
of the Treaty contained in a more categorical form the
provisions of paragraph 4 of the Algiers agreement.
Article 6 of the Treaty dealt with the resolution of
differences of opinion regarding the interpretation
and application of the Treaty provisions. Those two
articles are mutually exclusive in the sense that the
application of article 6 presupposes the existence of
the Treaty through the non-violation of any of its indivisible elements. Article 6, in other words, only becomes operative when the Treaty is still in force and
the parties disagree on the interpretation or application of the technical details thereof. When article 4 is
violated, that means that the whole Treaty becomes
nonexistent. Any argument to the contrary makes
the provisions of those two articles contradictory and
impossible to apply. The continuous violations of the
elements of the Treaty mentioned in article 4 left Iraq
with no Treaty to implement. As a matter of fact, Iraq
continued to remind Iran of the obligations under the
Treaty until 17 September 1980. As I have shown in
the General Assembly, the continuous reminders
were not only met with continuous violations but also
insistence upon them, which was made clear by the
announcements of official Iranian circles that the
agreement was suspect, that it did not meet Iran’s
interests and that Iran did not consider itself bound
by it.
45. On 22 June 1976, upon the exchange in Tehran
of the instruments of ratification of the Treaty of 1975,
the Foreign Minister of Iran and I exchanged letters
providing for the exchange, within six months of that
date, of the immovable property-the buildings, the
private and public establishments whose national
identities had changed as a result of the redemarcation
of the land frontiers. That was to be done by a mixed
Iraqi-Iranian expert commission. The letters were
designed to remove, once and for all, all the Iranian
encroachments upon Iraq’s sovereign territory, as
delimited by the international agreement, binding upon
the two parties. The deadline was set around the end
of 1976. Now we are in 1980.

48. Something was mentioned about Khomeini
leaving Iraq and the Iraqi Government having from
the very beginning shown a hostile attitude to Khomeini. This is contrary to the facts. Khomeini, as
I have mentioned, was a guest for 15 years in our
country, and he was given material support in his
struggle against the Shah for over seven years. But at
the climax of the crisis, Khomeini was trying openly
to carry out activities against the Shah. He wanted
to‘have press conferences, he wanted to invite the
world press and television to Iraq so as to speak to
them. If we had allowed him to do that, that would
have been considered by Iran as interference in their
internal affairs, and the 1975 agreement strictly prohibits each side from interfering in the internal affairs
of the other. We told Mr. Khomeini, “We cannot allow
you to do that in such an open and large-scale manner.
You are a political refugee, you have carried out
covert activities against the Shah for a long period
of time and we have tolerated that and helped you;
but when it comes to open and large-scale interviews
with the press and the other mass media, that cannot
be allowed.*’ Mr. Khomeini preferred to leave, and
he left. Apparently he has kept that in his mind. Those
are the real facts and the reason Mr. Khomeini left
Iraq.

46. How lonr! should a State wait for the return of its
sovereign ter&ory, at a time when that territory is
being daily utilized in the shelling of towns and villages? If the Iranian Government had good faith, why
did it not withdraw its military posts from those territories on 7 September? Why, when we delivered
our first note requesting respect for the 1975 Treaty,
did it ,not stop bombing us, even on that date? Why
did it not even declare its intention to withdraw or
say, “We shall discuss the matter”, for instance? The
Iranian response was shelling and claiming those very
areas as Iranian territory.

49. The Prime Minister of Iran spoke about the
aggression on the side of Iraq. He did not mention
anything about what the new regime in Iran did in
order to stir up religious feelings inside Iraq, to form
a Dawa Party, seated and led from Qum. He did not
say anything about the subversive activities carried
out by that group inside Iraq and by Iranians residing
in Iraq. He didnot mention anything about the attempt
of the new regime to play again the card of the Kurdish
rebellion in the north of our country. The regime
6

invited the Barzani leadership and gave them full
moral and material support, including a broadcasting
station in the north of Iran; and again, as with the
Shah, this was directed towards our internal safety
and the territorial integrity of our country.

54. That decision on our part-was adopted on 17 September 1980 and it was based, as I have mentioned,
on paragraph 4 of the agreement. On that occasion,
we called upon the Iranian authorities to act wisely
and rationally, having exhausted all the peaceful
means at our disposal to have Iran heed its obligations. Yet we failed and were thus left with only our
right to self-defence to restore our sovereignty over
the totality of our territory.

50. The Dawa Party was organized by Iran and had
its seat in Qum. I gave a detailed account of it in my
previous statement [ibid.]. One of the prominent
leaders of that Party volunteered; he came out of the
place where he was hiding and made a long and detailed
statement on our television on 24 April 1980. He gave
full details of what the Dawa Party was doing in Iran,
when it was formed, by whom it is led, where it is
directed from and all the activities of that Party. The
details of what he said were documented. We sent the
document to the United Nations in a letter dated
21 May 1980 from our representative informing the
Organization of this flagrant interference in our internal affairs.

55. And despite our declaration that we did not wish
to engage in any war with Iran, that we did not aim
at widening the conflict, outside the limits of restoring
Iraq’s legitimate rights of territorial sovereignty, and
that we did not have any territorial ambitions in Iran,
the Iranian Government nevertheless escalated the
conflict. It began as of 19 September to bombard by
heavy artillery and bomber planes heavily populated
areas in Iraq and vital economic establishments.
56. I should now like to mention as an example that
the number of Iranian violations for the period of June
to September 1980 has reached 187 violations and
military actions across the Iraqi frontier against populated cities and villages, roads and border posts. Those
armed violations have become a daily routine for the
conduct of the Iranian military forces.

51. Mr. Rajai tried to paint a picture showing us as
the aggressors in Iran. Iraq did not start the war with
Iran. The Iranian authorities started it with their subversive terrorist and military actions against us long
before the present hostilities. I went through the facts
which prompted our defensive action in my statement
before the General Assembly on 3 October-’ and also
before the Council [ibid.]. To put it briefly: when
Khomeini’s subversive sabotage and terrorism through
the Dawa Party had failed to achieve their aim, military actions began.

57. It is worth mentioning that concentrated bombardment was made from the area of Zain Al-Qaws,
which is situated between frontier pillars 46 and 51
deep inside Iraq’s territory. At noon on 7 September,
the bombardment was carried out again in the same
manner. In our turn, we summoned to the Foreign
Ministry on that date the Charge d’affaires of the
Iranian Embassy in Baghdad, and we delivered a note
to him. We stated that the Iranian military units had
encroached upon numerous areas of Iraqi territory, as
was the case in Zain Al-Qaws, and said that those
violations had continued, contrary to the Treaty of
1975 between the two countries. We requested that
he convey to his Government that it should immediately end those violations, but the Iranian forces continued with their bombardment that evening.

52. The continuous shelling of our border towns,
villages and roads became a daily routine in the conduct of the Iranian military forces. A dangerous
turning-point was reached on 4 September 1980, when
American-made heavy artillery of 17%mm. calibre was
used to shell the towns of Khanaqin and Mandali,
causing severe damage to both life and property. That
shelling was carried out from the area of Zain Al-Qaws,
which is one of the areas of Iraq’s sovereign territory,
illegally held by Iran.
53. We responded on 7 September by reminding Iranof its international obligations through a note delivered
to the Iranian Charge d’affaires in Baghdad. But the
shelling continued, and we had to follow the same
procedure the next day, 8 September, reminding Iran
of, its international obligations-only this time we
stated our intention of exercising our legitimate right
to self-defence in liberating our territory in Zain
Al-Qaws, Saif Sa’ad, and other places. Our action;
were again met by intensified Iranian military actions
in the aforementioned areas against our liberating
forces. In the face of that, we delivered to the Iranian
Charge d’a&ires another note, setting out in detail
Iraq’s rights to those areas according to the Algiers
agreement and the Treaty of 1975. All that fell on deaf
ears. We were thus left with only one alternative,
namely, to consider the Algiers agreement and what
issued from it as terminated on the part of Iraq after
it had been terminated by Iran in word and deed.

58. On the following day, 8 September, the Iranian
Charge d’affaires was again called in to the Foreign
Ministry and we handed him another note. In that
note, we stated that the Iraqi military forces, in the
exercise of our legitimate right to self-defence, .were
forced to end the Iranian occupation of Zain Al-Qaws
and to restore the. occupied Iraqi territories. We also
stated that the Government of the Republic of Iraq
expressed its hope that the Iranians would benefit from
that event and give back the Iraqi land which Iran had
encroached upon in previous times, had been agreed
upon in the 1975Treaty, hence avoiding the possibility
of a wider confrontation between the two countries.
But the following days witnessed concentrated military activities by Iranian military forces inside the
encroached-upon Iraqi territories. My Government
again found it necessary to call in the Iranian Charge
7

d’affaires to the Foreign Ministry on 11 September
1980. A detailed note was again delivered to him, this
time stating the following points:

grave violations of their international obligations.
Having exhausted all peaceful means to have Iran
heed its obligations, my Government was left with
only one choice, namely, the exercise of self-defence
for the purpose of restoring Iraq’s sovereignty over
the totality of its territory.

,- First, from our observation of Iranian conduct
and reactions; we had reached various conclusions, the
main one being that owing to the confusion in Iran and
the disorderly structure and information sources of
the Iranian State, the Iranian leadership might not be
aware of the. fact that Iran had encroached upon Iraqi
territories, contrary , to. international law and past
agreements .b$ween the .two countries, including the
Algiers agreement of 1975. If that was so, the note
said, we advised the Iranian leadership to ask -the
competent Iranian authorities responsible for matters
of frontiers and ~agreements to make itself familiar
with our ‘point of view and henceforth base its action
on knowledge,:rather than mistaken i,deas. ‘.
.:

61. Iraq, as I have shown, did not act first, and when
it acted it was absolutely in self-defence. Here is a list
of the dates of Iranian armed attacks on Iraq from
19 to 22 September 1980: .18September, machine-gun
tire against Siba village in Shatt-Al-Arab; 19 September, artillery bombardment of Urn Al-Risas in
Shatt-Al-Arab; 20 September, artillery bombardment
against navigation lanes at Urn Al-R&as; the Iranian
commercial vessel Zran Bandar, which was armed,
tired at Iraqi military-naval .patrols; 21 September,
the British vessel Oriental Star was tired upon by an
Iranian patrol boat at Ziyadiyah while en route to
Basra;
the Iraqi navigation control tower at Wasiliyah
- Secondly, the’ Iranian leadership.’ should r&&e
was
fired
upon by an Iranian patrol boat; the- Kuwaiti
that striking at cities populated by civilians, as it did
was hit by fire from Abadan;
in bombarding :Khanaqin and Mandali; is neither a vessel Al-Ghardaniyah
Urn Al-Risas tower number 2 was bombarded by
simple matter. nor a game-of violence of the sort’which
the Iranian off&ls eritkrtained themselves with at medium and heavy artillery; Siba village was fired
times inside, Iran. Striking at’ Iraqi cities ‘.was con- upon by a boat; medium and heavy artillery was
sidered a”grav.e matter,‘which should be avoided by opened on%the Iraqi dredger Sina’a at Urn Al-Risas;
artillery shelling at the station at North Fakka, which
Iran if it wished not to have relations betw.een the two
was
damaged; fire attack on Muhammad
barge in
cou,ntries deteriorate dangerously. The rulers of. Iran, _
Wasiliyah;
the
Singaporean
vessel
L.auciffe
was hit
alone would bear ‘the responsibility for those aggressive actions before God, the Iranian people and world I by light fire while navigating towards Basra; an Iraqi
crane vessel was fired on near Wasiliyah; heavy and
public opinion. V-e
.
medium artillery tiring on the headquarters of an Iraqi
- Thirdly, Iraq had”& ambition .in Iranian terri; : naval lifeguard; heavy artillery shelling on the city of
t+s.
(, ,
) 1 ,;y: ;. ; 1, ;_ 1.
I .’ ’ Mandali; concentrated aerial bombardment of the
town of Mandali; heavy artillery shelling on the city
of
Khanaqin for 90 minutes; heavy artillery shelling
59.’ “All those. diplomatic’ notes fell on dk&.ears; we
did not.get any res@nse to them. In view of the Len- Y on the town of Quratu; 22 September, concentrated
artillery shelling on the suburbs of Mandali; harassil
tinual “Iranian violations of ‘the’ Algiers agreement bf
ment
of ‘navigation in Shatt-Al-Arab bi intermittent
1975, the insistence upon those violations which was
.
firing..
’
made clear by,,the ,announcements of official Iranian
.
ci&les, ,namely,. that the“aforesaid agreement, was 62. Mr. Raj’ai spoke about the humanitarian aspects.
suspect&,‘thatit did not meet Iran’sinterests, and that : He said something about his country’s prisoners in
Iran’did not consider itself bound by it, it was &tab- ~ Iraq. I should like to, say this. It is clear from the
lished :,by,‘my, Government that the Iranian Govemstatement of the International Committee of the Red
merit had violated the elements of the comprehensive
Cross issued. in press communiqut No. 1402, dated
settlement contained in the Algiers agreement and that 13 October, that my Govemment’has fulfilledits obliit: had terminated it. Cdns.equently, the Government
gations under the Geneva Convention relative to the
of the Republic ‘of ITa{ decided,’ in &cordance with
Treatment of Prisoners of War, of 12 August 1949”.
paragraph, 4 of the’ Algiers agreement and article 4 of My Government has been co-operating fully with the
the Trert of ,1975, to consider the aforesaid agree- Committee. It would be.interesting to ask whether the’
rnerit~~@i’
dI those following and based upon it as ter- Government of Iran is acting in the same manner. This
mmated@n,the part of Iraq after Iran had terminated
may not seem to be the case, as we saw on television
it by “wo.rd.and deed. Iraq then called upon the Iranian
the other day some Iraqi prisoners of war being exhib-’
authorities’ to accept the. new’ situation and to act ited inhumanely before a mass rally on the grounds
rationally and wisely in the face of the exercise by of Tehran University. We hold the Iranian GovemIraq of its.legitimate rights and full sovereignty over
ment fully responsible for the fate and well-being of
all its. land and water territories in Shatt-Al-Arab, as those. prisoners. According to what we know, up to
was
before
agreement.
c the
_. case d.
,. the Algiers
now, the Iranian Government has not allowed the Red
:
Cross authorities to operate in Tehran.
60: The Government of the Republic of Iraq was
forced to take the measures I have just indicated after
63. Mr. R&d also spoke about the bombardment of
the ruling authorities in Iran continued to commit civilian targets in Iran. I should like to say, that from
s

:

,,;

:

“$.

8

the very beginning, our Government made it clear that
we were not going to bomb civilian targets, and we
called upon Iran to do the same. It is very clear that
the overwhelming majority of attacks by the Iranian
air force is carried out against civilian cities in Iraq,
whereas the Iraqi air force has, on the contrary,
always sought non-civilian targets in Iran. Mr. Rajai
spoke about people being killed and wounded. This is
most unfortunate. War is a very bad thing. It should
not have been started. We should just like to say that
somebody must have been responsible for this war.
It is the side which did not listen to reason, which
wanted to continue territorial expansionism, interference in the internal affairs of its neighbours and
disregarded the call for reason. It is those who did
these things who are responsible for the unfortunate
events that are now taking place.

66. Khomeini has a diierent concept of the world’s
political structure. To him it is not a world made up
of independent States, where one should not interfere in the internal affairs of another and every country
should be free to choose ‘its own political and social
system. His ideology is religion. To him what happened
in Iran has not been the outcome of the social, economic and political developments in Iran but rather a
manifestation of the rise of Islam’s fundamental principles. The rise of the Islamic Republic of Iran is only
considered the starting point. That is exactly the road
to territorial expansion, regardless of the ideological
dressing. ‘It is the justification for open interference
in ihe internal affairs of the neighbouring countries.
That is why the new regime has developed tense rela- ’
tions with practically all its neighbour countries.
Unfortunately, Iraq was the first open case of cotitlict,
That has happened because Iraq, in Khomeini’s view,
in vulnerable and because Iraq insists on resisting.

64. In conclusion, I should like to say this. Iraq is
a small country and ‘it is determined to preserve its
independence. Its only way of achieving that is to,be ’ 67. As Iraq is a small and developing country, there
a non&igned country. The principles of non-alignment
is nothing we want ‘more than’ peace. ,We want peace
are known to everybody. When a statement by the with independence and non-interference in our internal
lranian Foreign Minister, Mr. Yazdi, was made in affairs. We tried hard to achieve that. We.did our best,
which be- expressed Iran’s wish to be ,non-aligned, and nothing was spared to avoid conflict; but Khomeini
I sent a telegram to Minister Yazdi congratulating him had fixed ideas ‘in’ his mind. His success in dverand stating that Iraq would be,gIad to propose that to throwing the, Shah made ‘him over-confident, and
the non-aligned movement at its fast meeting; and we holding diplomats of a super-Power as hostages made
did so. We did so having in mind the old Iranian policy
him more so. He became more rigid. He thought that
of domination of the region and of territorial expan-. overrunning Iraq and then the region was possible.
,
sion. We had hopes that such long-standing poli-,
68. We hope that reason will eventually dominate
ties would now be terminated and that we could live
in peace. While this might have been the thinking
and that an understanding can be reached with Iran.
of some Iranian leaders, like Mr. Bazargan, it was Despite the military situation that we are now in, we
not the thinking of Khomeini. His idea was that of
reaffirm again that we have no territorial ambitions in
exporting the Islamic revolution, which is the expres- Iran, but we insist on the territorial integrity .of Iraq
sion coined for that purpose. What is the first step in land and water and non-interference in our
. .internal
and, how to do that? The- first stage is Iraq and the afElh I
,’
I
,
._;
Arabian Gulf countries, but Iraq is on the priority list
for obvious reasons. Among those ressons is the ethnic 69. Mr. McHENRY (United.States of America): The
and religious composition of its population. If Iraq
purpose of this meeting is to carry, out the primary ’
falls, then the Arabian Gulf countries will fall. The
responsibility of the Security Council for the presermethod used was destabilization through terrorist
vation and maintenance of peace. United States Govand subversive activities coupled with an intensive
ernment officials have already spoken in regard to’
media campaign to incite religious feelings, and then the conflict between Iran and Iraq, and .at an appr&“:
a mass uprising would follow, as they calculated it.
priate time I will have an opportunity to state with
As to the tool, it was militants sent from Iran and those candour and frankness the Principles that all natrons)‘:
recruited from among the Iranian residents and firstmust respect in resolving this and ‘any ,other ‘dispute.
generation Iraqis of Iranian origin. Thus, the AlWe shall do so on the basis of principle; Despite the
Da’tiwa Party was established in Qum and its leader:
unfounded and untrue .charges just made against the
ship was created there.
:
United States by the representative of Iran, at no’time
has the United States passed information- to, either
65. I described to the Council on Wednesday last party regarding the military actions *of the other.
: . .I’..1
[ibid. ] the activities they had carried out and I gave
some examples. This is the crucial point between us 70. The subject of this meeting is’ the situation beand Iran. Khomeini has waged an undeclared war
tween Iran and Iraq, but no one could,come’to this
against us, with intentions he.does not hide. This easily meeting without sharing the burden of the ‘concern for
explains the Iranian refusal to return the Iraqi lands. the 52 Americans who for almost a year have’been
To them this would be giving lands to a Government
held in Iran against their will. We all recall the unanithey are working to overthrow. This explains their
mous decisions of the Security Council, the’eloquent
insistence on holding three Arab islands and keeping pleas by the former President of the General Assembly
and even the order of the International Court of juscontrol of the Shatt-Al-Arab.

.

. 9

tice,s which spoke without dissent in reaffirming the
status of the hostages and their right to be free under
international law.

absolutely nothing new to this Council in his second
statement. Once more he repeated the same arguments
that he used when addressing the General Assembly.3

71. The mothers, fathers, wives, sons and daughters
whose loved ones remain separated from them are
part of the audience of this meeting and our special
thoughts for them today should remind all of us that
we are a family of nations and that our faith and aspirations are interdependent and perhaps even indivisible. The voices of all nations have spoken. The .
universal tenets of all religions, including the precepts
of Islam, echo what must be done. The hostages must
be freed, and in their freedom the community of
nations, I believe, will find new strength.

77. When Iraq launched its aggression against my
country, it launched at the same time a campaign of
lies and distortions designed to deceive international
public opinion about the true nature of its action,
which is a blatant aggression according to all the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, according
to the Charter of the Islamic Conference, and according
to the principles of the non-aligned movement.

72. I believe it unfortunate that in the speech of the
Prime Minister of Iran the only reference to the hostages was a rhetorical question on how the Iran-Iraq
conflict would .lead the United States to expect that
the hostages would be freed. Of course, we do not
believe that the conflict in and of itself should lead to
anything except a search for peace, but the basic
answer to the question posed by the representative
of Iran is simple. We expect the hostages to be freed
on the basis of the same principles of law, justice and
human dignity on which the Prime Minister based his
own appeal to the Council. Indeed, on the basis of
those principles, the hostages should not have been
taken captive in the first place.

78. How does the Foreign Minister of Iraq dare to
come to the Security Council and tell the international
community how his country respects international
law and the principles of the non-aligned movement,
when at this precise moment the forces of aggression
are present in my country? They have occupied parts
of my country. From the very beginning of their
aggression they have been destroying oil installations,
economic resources, centres of civilian population,
towns and cities, and the lives of innocent people.
79. Their instruments of propaganda have constantly
been boasting of how they have invaded my country,
how in Abadan, in Khorramshahr, in Dezful and in
other cities of Khuzistan they have attacked and
killed innocent people and destroyed huge economic
installations and raw resources of my country. I think
that the members of the Council will agree that
nothing that has been said by the Foreign Minister of
Iraq can justify an unjustifiable action: the aggression
Iraq has launched against my country.

73. I should like to make one final point. The Prime
Minister of Iran referred to the inability of the Council to implement its resolutions and suggested that the
Council’s actions tie blocked by the super-Powers.
Indeed, the Council is sometimes prevented from
implementing its resolutions. But is it not ironic that
this complaint about the Council’s inability to implement its resolutions should come from Iran, which
stands .in defiance of numerous resolutions of the
Council?

80. I think that what the representative of the United
States has said regarding the crisis between our two
countries does not reflect the realities of the situation.
I wish that we had time enough here in the Council
to study and examine all the aspects and dimensions
of the problem. What has happened between our two
countries is an eloquent expression of more than three
decades of intervention and interference in the affairs
of my country.

74. The PRESIDENT (irh-pretation
from Russian):
The representative of Iran has requested to be allowed
td speak in exercise of the right of reply, and I call
on him.

81. The representative of the United States has
spoken of respect for humanitarian principes of international law, but he is fully cognizant of the reality
that perhaps no country in the world has violated
principles of international law and disregarded respect for humanitarian principles more than the United
States. I do not think that I need mention examples
here. Everybody knows what the United States did in
Viet Nam. Shall I give more examples? I do not think
that it is necessary.

75. Mr. SHEMIRANI (Iran): My purpose in asking
for the floor is to dissipate a false impression that may
have been created, not in the minds of the members
of the Council but in the mind of the Foreign Minister
of Iraq as a result of his second intervention in the
debate-the false impression that he has perhaps been
able to deceive international public opinion in his futile
attempt‘*to justify the aggression that Iraq has unleashed against my country.

82. Millions of people were massacred there as a
result of the deliberate policy pursued by the United
States Government. And not only in Viet Nam, but in
Cambodia, in Laos, and in some other parts of the
world. But what happened with regard to my own
country is something on which I am sure the United

76. It is not my intention to make a long statement
because a few minutes ago my Prime Minister in his
statement unmasked the true nature of Iraq’s pretensions regarding the war it has imposed on my country.
But I can say that the Foreign Minister of Iraq said
10

rule of procedure. He knows the ethics of statesmanship. Can he profess now before the Council that the
language of the Iranian revolutionary so-called statements in the General Assembly and the Council conform to the basic norms of ethical conduct in this
Organization? Or has he perhaps become convinced
of the new logic of Khomeini’s revolution? I do not
know. He talks about the principles of the Charter and
says that the Foreign Minister of my country did not
say anything new in the Council, because he repeated
the same arguments all over again. It seems that we
have to repeat arguments and continue repeating them
because we appear to be running up against a concrete,
wall. The world is on one side-that is, the world of
evil-and Khomeini’s world-the
world of right,
goodness, justice, equity and so on-is on the other.

States representative himself will agree. If he examines his conscience, he will agree with me ‘that his
country committed many, many crimes during the
35 years of the dark history of relations between our
two countries. Who toppled a constitutionally established Govcmment in Iran in 1953? Nobody in the
Council raised a finger then. Was that not against the
principles of international law? Was that not a violation of all the elementary principles of the Charter of
the United Nations? Everybody kept silent.
83. I do not think that even for a moment an official
representative of the United States would deny that
reality, which has been admitted by Presidents and
high dignitaries of the United States. Exactly like the
aggression of Iraq, it is undeniable.
84. Therefore it is not my intention to go into details
about the history of the relationship between Iran and
the United States, but I thought that, in order to set
the record straight, it was necessary for me to mention
just a few examples of what the United States has
done in other parts of the world and what the United
States has done in the case of my own country.

90. The Prime Minister of Iran and the representative of Iran who followed him came here to the Council talking about the humanitarian conduct of the hostiities. They started off in their statements by touching
upon the chord of humanity or human feeling. How
many persons were condemned to death in Iran and
executed during the month of Ramadan, for instance?
Did the Iranians or did they not bomb civilian targets
in Iraq long before 4 September? Have they or have
they not murdered unarmed sailors in cold blood in
the waters of the Shatt-Al-Arab? Those are facts, that
cannot be denied by rhetoric. They ,talk about legalities and they appeal to law, yet they violate the law,
only to come when they find themselves in a comer
and say “Give us some time to study the situation in
depth”. Certainly my delegation is not prepared to see
more than two years of the disruption of its internal
security.

85. I reserve my right to speak again if that is necessary.
86. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
The representative of Iraq has asked to be allowed to
exercise the right of reply, and I now call on him.
87. Mr. AL-QAYSI (Iraq): The representative of
Iran said that his Prime Minister “unmasked the true
nature of Iraq’s pretensions” regarding what he called
“the war it has imposed on my country”. I think it is
evident to the minds of all that if there is anything that
the Prime Minister of Iran has unmasked this afternoon it is the mentality of Khomeini and his strange
outlook on international relations. I need only refer to
the concluding remarks which were made by the Prime
Minister of Iran as to how supposedly the forces of
good will prevail over those of evil. He was talking
in terms of right and wrong, basing himself on Islam.
Islam does not yield him any support in the ideas he
pretends to carry with him in his ideology on more
than one score and least of all regarding the sanctity
of diplomatic representatives.

91. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
I call on the representative of Iran who has asked to
speak in exercise of the right of reply.
92. Mr. SHEMIRANI (Iran): I am reluctant to reply
to rhetoric. I shall never accept lectures on human’
rights from the representative of a country that is the
last one to speak of respect for human rights. ’
The meeting

rose at 8.30 p.m.

,* ,

88. The Prime Minister of Iran said with all the determination that a human being can muster that Iran
is determined to interfere and, it seems, to interfere
in the affairs of the whole world. Why? Because, he
says, their revolution is leading mankind to true human
values.

NOTES

I See United Nations, Treary Series, vol. 1017. No. 14903.
* Ibid., Nos. 14904 to 14907.
’ Oficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth ‘Session,
Plenury Meetings, 22nd meeting.
’ United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 972. p. 135:
s United Stutes Diplomatic and Consular St@ in Tehran.
Provisional Measures, Order of 15 December 1979. I.C.J. Reports
1979. p. 7.

89. The representative of Iran who has just spoken
is a seasoned diplomat. He knows the Charter. He
knows this organ of the United Nations. He knows the

11

.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PURLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans la libmiries et les ageneesdCpositaires du
monde entier. Informervous aupr&s de votre tibraire ou adressez-vous A : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gen&ve.
KAK IIOJIYPHTh
HSAAHHSI
OPl-AHH3AI&HH
OlS%E~HHEHHMX
HAUHH
W3nanna Opranu3artnn 06aenxnentibrx
HaunR stoxoto xynxrb n wwxxbIx
wara3xxax x aremcmax
80 acex panoxax senpa. HanoAHTe cnpasnn 06 n3xatinax a

..I

natueu

xiifwcnohs

HasuR,Cetcsnn

Mara3nne
HIH mfnm~e
no
nonpo~ame~3~asw4R.Hbm-HopxnnnXexeaa.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUHJCACIONES
. ,

anpecy:

OpraHn3aunfi

Olmexmienxbrx

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaeiones de. Ias Naciones Unidas es& en venta en lib&as y cams diitribuidotas en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o ditijase a: Naciones Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

moo

834462-October

1987-2.050
