UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/41
10 October 1996
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3701st meeting of the Security Council, held on 10 October 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered, in the light of its resolution
1034 (1995) of 21 December 1995, the current situation with regard to the
investigation of violations of international humanitarian law in the areas
of Srebrenica, Zepa, Banja Luka and Sanski Most as well as in the areas of
Glamoc, Ozren and elsewhere throughout the territory of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
"The Security Council recalls the report of the Secretary-General of
27 November 1995 (S/1995/988).
"The Security Council expresses deep concern about the very little
progress achieved so far in these investigations and strongly appeals to
all the parties of Bosnia and Herzegovina to make every effort to identify
the fate of the missing persons, both for humanitarian and legal purposes.
"The Security Council is concerned that endeavours by the relevant
international authorities to identify the fate of the missing by inter alia
carrying out exhumations has met with limited success largely due to
obstruction by Republika Srpska. It notes with concern that the fate of
only a few hundred missing persons has been so far established.
"The Security Council welcomes the recent visit by the delegation from
Republika Srpska to the International Tribunal on former Yugoslavia in The
Hague and expresses hope that this visit marks a turning point in relations
between Republika Srpska and the International Tribunal and will facilitate
cooperation with regard to investigations conducted by personnel of the
International Tribunal.
"The Security Council condemns all attempts to obstruct the
investigations or to destroy, alter, conceal or damage any related
evidence. The Council stresses again the obligations of all the parties to

96-26956 (E)

101096

/...

S/PRST/1996/41
English
Page 2

cooperate fully and unconditionally with the relevant international
authorities and among themselves with respect to such investigations and
reminds the parties of their commitment under the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Annexes thereto
(collectively the Peace Agreement S/1995/999, annex).
"The Security Council reaffirms that the violations of international
humanitarian law throughout the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
described in resolution 1034 (1995) must be fully and properly
investigated. The Council reiterates that all States and concerned parties
have an obligation, in accordance with resolution 827 (1993) of
25 May 1993, other relevant resolutions and the Peace Agreement, to
cooperate fully with the International Tribunal and to comply without
exception with requests for assistance or orders issued by a trial chamber.
The Council expresses again its support for the endeavours of the
international agencies and authorities involved in these investigations and
invites them to pursue and intensify their efforts. It encourages Member
States to continue to provide the necessary financial and other support.
"The Security Council will continue to follow this issue closely. It
requests the Secretary-General to keep it regularly informed on progress
reached in the investigation of the violations of international
humanitarian law referred to in the report mentioned above."

-----
