S/PV.7687

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7687th meeting

Wednesday, 4 May 2016, 2 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-12629 (E)
*1612629*

S/PV.7687

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 2.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs; and Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: The Council has requested the
Department of Political Affairs to brief it on the political
and security implications of the recent developments in
Aleppo. At the outset, I wish to emphasize what the
Secretary-General said to the Council yesterday (see
S/PV.7685). The pattern of systematic destruction
is evident in Aleppo. No corner of the city has been
spared. Aleppo is increasingly becoming a shell of
what it once was. Government aerial bombardment of
the city over the past two weeks represents some of the
worst of the war. Opposition shelling of Governmentcontrolled neighbourhoods has also led to death and
destruction. There is a clear danger that those attacks
and counter-attacks will continue to escalate and even
spread beyond Aleppo. We take note of the statement
just issued by the United States Department of State that
the United States and Russia concluded arrangements
late yesterday to extend the nationwide cessation of
hostilities to Aleppo, and we urge the parties to abide
by that immediately and comprehensively.
The Council will hear shortly from UnderSecretary-General Stephen O’Brien on the humanitarian
dimensions of the recent developments in Aleppo. But
let me be clear — denying people access to essential
humanitarian relief is a serious violation of international
humanitarian law. Using starvation as a weapon during
conflict is a war crime. No cause can justify the toll
2/20

04/05/2016

in civilian lives that we continue to see around the
country every day. All State and non-State parties to
conflict are bound by a strict obligation to comply with
the rules of international humanitarian law. I remind
Council members of the Secretary-General’s call for
the situation in Syria to be referred to the International
Criminal Court. Those responsible for war crimes must
be held to account.
Unfortunately, ever more shocking reports have
been received from the city of Aleppo over the past
two weeks. We have all seen the horrifying images
of attacks on hospitals in both Government- and
opposition-held neighbourhoods of the city. Let me
once again be absolutely clear: intentional and direct
attacks on hospitals are war crimes. Indiscriminate
attacks on civilian neighbourhoods in Aleppo have also
continued. Both Government and opposition forces
have reportedly made attempts to achieve territorial
advances in recent weeks. Finally, reports of joint
military operations being conducted both by groups
that are parties to the cessation of hostilities and by
those outside it, such as the Al-Nusra Front, present a
major challenge to stabilizing the situation.
The overall situation in Aleppo increasingly
resembles some of the worst days of the period
before the cessation of hostilities. As I mentioned, we
understand that the United States and Russia concluded
arrangements for a day of silence in Aleppo and its
surroundings, starting last night at one minute after
midnight Damascus time, but its implementation has
proved challenging, even as it has led to an overall
decrease in violence. Consolidating and extending
that agreement would be an important step in the right
direction. We also hope that the arrangements of days
of silence announced earlier for parts of Damascus
and rural Latakia will also be consolidated, and we
welcome the news that the silence has been extended
to the eastern Ghouta suburb of Damascus for the next
48 hours.
We must put the cessation of hostilities back on
track throughout the country, and all should do their
fair share in that regard. Moving forward, additional
measures will also be needed to reinvigorate and ensure
enhanced monitoring of the cessation of hostilities.
In that regard, Special Envoy de Mistura held
consultations over the past two days with the co-Chairs
of the International Syria Support Group ceasefire
task force and is in Berlin today to meet with German
and French officials. He also met separately with the
16-12629

04/05/2016

S/PV.7687

The situation in the Middle East

head of the opposition’s high negotiations committee.
I welcome the co-Chairs’ decision to deploy additional
staff to Geneva to increase oversight of the cessation
of hostilities.
Turning now to the political process, Special Envoy
De Mistura was clear in his briefing to the Security
Council on 27 April: in order to be credible, the next
round of negotiations should be supported by tangible
progress on the ground in terms of a consolidated
cessation of hostilities and increased humanitarian
access. The Special Envoy intends to reconvene
intra-Syrian negotiations later in May, but doing so
without progress in those two areas runs a real risk
of becoming a failed political process. In particular,
the current levels of violence in Aleppo are having a
negative effect on the Syrian parties’ ability to engage
in negotiations.
The Secretary-General has repeatedly said that
there is no military solution to this conflict. The basic
fact remains that the only way for peace to come to
Syria is through a political solution based on a credible
political transition that emerges from intra-Syrian
negotiations. With that in mind, during the round of
negotiations held from 13 to 27 April, Special Envoy
De Mistura developed a mediator’s summary that
identified 18 points that are necessary if political
transition arrangements are to move forward.
During that last round of negotiations, progress
was made in the sense that all participants, including
the Syrian Government, accepted that a Syrian-led
transition is necessary in order to end the conflict.
In future rounds, we will have to determine how the
respective visions of a political transition that have been
put forward conform to the requirements of resolution
2254 (2015) for credible, inclusive and non-sectarian
governance; of the resolution’s endorsement of the
Vienna statements in pursuit of full implementation of
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex); and of
its reiteration that a sustainable solution to the current
crisis in Syria must include, among other things, the
establishment of an inclusive transitional governing
body with full executive powers, which shall be formed
on the basis of mutual consent while ensuring the
continuity of governmental institutions.
In resolution 2254 (2015), the Vienna statements and
the Geneva communiqué, the international community
has already defined a number of core principles for any
transition. Chief among them for ensuring a credible

transition is the requirement set out in the Geneva
communiqué for all Government institutions, including
the security and intelligence services, to perform
in accordance with human rights and professional
standards and to operate under a leadership that
inspires public confidence, under the control of the
transitional governing body. We are at a point where
the renewed backing of the International Syria Support
Group is required to take forward the intra-Syrian
negotiations on a political transition process, based on
full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communiqué.
As per resolution 2253 (2015) and numerous other
Council resolutions, combating terrorism is a top
priority. The need to tackle that issue, however, should
not prevent us from advancing serious negotiations on a
political transition. Now that terrorism is being addressed
on a separate, credible and parallel international track,
it should not hinder progress on the political transition
process. Let us also be clear that there can be no place
for terrorism, in Syria or anywhere else. Through the
political process, one of the greatest contributions we
can make to fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and the Al-Nusra Front and their ideology is by
achieving a comprehensive political transition to an
inclusive, democratic and participatory State.
In accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy are trying to
arrive at an agreed way forward by August. We cannot
waste the opportunity provided by the negotiations in
Geneva. It would be a mistake to allow the parties to
the conflict to play for time or territory on the ground
so as to strengthen their positions at the negotiating
table. The United Nations will strive to resume the
negotiations as soon as feasible, in the hope that, in the
meantime, the efforts to put the cessation of hostilities
back on track, including in Aleppo, will bear fruit.
The President (spoke
Mr. Feltman for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Feltman for his briefing. I echo
his call and that of so many others for an end to the
carnage in Aleppo, and in Syria generally. For the sake
of the people of Aleppo, Syria and beyond, we cannot
squander the opportunity provided by the negotiations
in Geneva. I am glad to note the news that have just been

16-126293/20

S/PV.7687

The situation in the Middle East

received, as announced by Mr. Feltman, of a further
agreement and hope that it can be implemented in full.
But I am horrified by the continued death
and destruction in Aleppo. Over the past 10 days,
indiscriminate attacks and the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas by Government forces,
non-State armed groups and listed terrorist groups
has intensified, mostly affecting innocent civilians.
While the dead are still being counted and while
medical personnel are trying to save lives and tend to
the injured, we can already estimate that hundreds of
civilians have been killed or injured, including dozens
of women and children.
Life for people in Aleppo is horrendous and has lost
all sense. Access to basic and essential services such
as water and electricity is sporadic at best. People are
living under daily threat and terror. Those who remain
in eastern Aleppo, roughly 300,000 people, live in
constant fear of the next attack from the air, including
from barrel bombs. School activities for thousands of
children have been suspended, and Friday prayers have
been cancelled. The estimated 1.3 million people living
in western Aleppo city are crowding into basements,
seeking refuge from volleys of shells and mortar
rounds, which continue to slam into what is left of their
homes, as people and humanitarian workers are pinned
down in their respective factional quarters in the city.
There can be no explanation or excuse, no reason or
rationale for waging war on civilians.
I am going to focus again on the inexcusable,
deeply disturbing attacks on medical facilities. We
have all seen the harrowing images of bombs and
mortars raining down on medical facilities and
medical personnel across Aleppo in recent days. On
22 April, an air strike hit an ambulance en route to
assist people wounded in an earlier air strike in the
Al-Huluk neighbourhood of eastern Aleppo, killing
the driver and the paramedic. On 27 April, Al-Quds
hospital, the most advanced paediatric care centre in
Aleppo — let me repeat, a hospital dedicated to treating
children — was destroyed after being hit by a wave of
air strikes, which by all accounts had been launched
by the Government of Syria. Fifty people were killed,
including several doctors, and eighty more people were
injured. On 29 April, air strikes destroyed a United
Nations-funded primary health centre in the Marjeh
Square neighbourhood and the Boustan Al-Qasir
health-care centre in eastern Aleppo, which are both
currently controlled by non-State armed groups,
4/20

04/05/2016

injuring several people and putting the facilities out
of service. In western Aleppo, currently controlled
by the Government, Ibn Rushd hospital was hit by
mortars, allegedly fired by non-State armed groups last
week, and just yesterday an attack on the Al-Dabeet
maternity hospital, in western Aleppo, again allegedly
by non-State armed groups, resulted in three fatalities,
injuring fifteen more. Those terrible attacks have
not only claimed innocent lives, but have also had a
multiplier effect, leaving tens of thousands of civilians
unable to obtain even the most basic levels of care, even
as fighting intensifies around them.
More broadly, according to Physicians for Human
Rights, there have been over 360 documented attacks
on some 250 medical facilities during the course of
the conflict. More than 730 medical personnel have
been killed. Hospitals dedicated to treating children
and those serving pregnant women are no longer
places where civilians can safely go for treatment. And
it is now considered a risk, as I said in my previous
statement to the Council (see S/PV.7682), to live near a
medical facility.
Clearly enshrined in international humanitarian
law and as the Council reconfirmed yesterday (see
S/PV.7685), the protection and provision of medical
assistance and health care to the wounded and sick is at
the heart of humanitarian action. Whoever they are and
whatever side of the fight they are on, those responsible
for such repeated, unconscionable acts of inhumanity
must understand that their acts cannot and will not be
forgotten. Such attacks against civilians are violations
of international humanitarian law. Some of them
amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Those who are responsible must know that they will
one day be held accountable,
I want to pay tribute to the tireless efforts of
humanitarian actors and first-responders, most of whom
are Syrian, who continue to risk their lives to stay and
deliver assistance in Aleppo and across the country.
So far this year, the United Nations and partners have
delivered life-saving aid to hundreds of thousands of
people per month in Aleppo city, originating both from
within Syria and from across the border in Turkey.
However, we remain extremely concerned about
how the security situation in Aleppo city is impeding
humanitarian access and operations. Already, in the
past few days, many humanitarian actors have had
to suspend their operations, unable to reach tens of
16-12629

The situation in the Middle East

04/05/2016

thousands of children, who could not be vaccinated last
week. We are dismayed that the Government of Syria
did not approve our request for a cross-line inter-agency
convoy to eastern Aleppo city in May. The suspension
of the activities of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent in the
east of the city over the past weeks is also a worrying
development, as that organization is a key partner of the
United Nations in Syria, and we call on all concerned to
allow it to resume its activities in eastern Aleppo city
as soon as possible. In fact, now, there is not a moment
to lose.
We are reporting today on Aleppo, but make no
mistake, indiscriminate attacks and the destruction of
civilian infrastructure continue to inflict tremendous
suffering on Syrians across the country. We are very
concerned about the escalation of violence and the
impact on civilians in other parts of the country; for
example, in Dar’a, where there have been reports
of heavy fighting between Government forces and
non-State armed groups, including shelling and aerial
bombardment over the past week.
The bottom line is that attacks on civilians and
civilian infrastructure need to stop immediately. There
also needs to be full, unhindered, unconditional, safe
and sustained access to all people in need, including in
besieged and hard-to-reach areas, access for all types of
assistance, including medical and surgical supplies. In
short, all parties must finally and unequivocally live up
to their obligations under international humanitarian
law and the demands of the Council’s resolutions.
My question to Council members today is again:
how many more deaths, how much more suffering can we
tolerate before there is a collective push towards an end
to this senseless and shameful crisis affecting Syrians,
their neighbours and many more people beyond?
The President (spoke
Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to the members of the Council.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for responding rapidly to my request for
an urgent meeting. I welcome the briefings by UnderSecretary-General Feltman and Under-SecretaryGeneral O’Brien, and I welcome the fact that this is a
public meeting of the Security Council.
Aleppo has been Syria’s cultural capital for
centuries, but in this conflict it has become a very
different symbol, one of oppression and brutality, a

S/PV.7687

symbol of Al-Assad’s willingness to fight to the last
breath, even if it means the very destruction of Syria
itself. One need only glance at media reports from
yesterday. At 11 a.m. local time, two barrel bombs fell
on the Al-Huluk neighbourhood of Aleppo city. Four
people were killed. Just after midday, regime shelling hit
at least seven neighbourhoods. A couple of hours later,
at 2.30 p.m., rockets hit the Al-Shaher neighbourhood. I
could go on, but I think the point is clear: the cessation
of hostilities has effectively ceased to exist in Aleppo.
The city is burning; people are dying. In little over a
week last month, 253 people were killed in Aleppo, 80
of them were women and children. As Dr. Abo El Ezz
put it so painfully, “we are running out of coffins to
bury our friends, family and colleagues”.
The cessation of hostilities was supposed to be
one of the three pillars of Special Envoy De Mistura’s
political settlement in Syria, but like the hospitals and
houses of Aleppo, that pillar has been systematically
attacked and degraded by the actions of the Al-Assad
regime. Any trace of optimism from resolution 2268
(2016) has all but evaporated.
Through his actions, Al-Assad has shown that
he has no commitment to a political settlement, no
commitment to bringing peace to Syria. It has never
been clearer: there can be no peace while he remains
in power. How can he play a role in the future when he
orders his forces to impede access to humanitarian aid
in complete disregard of so many of our resolutions;
when he wilfully denies those most in need of the very
supplies that could save their lives; when he deliberately
attacks hospitals, as we heard so painfully yesterday?
Al-Assad and his allies will point to the threat of
the terrorist group Jabhat al-Nusra in Aleppo. They
will claim that their actions are in defence of the Syrian
people. But how, under any circumstances, can the
assault and encirclement of an entire city be justified?
How can the shelling of hospitals and schools be
justified? Those attacks amount to nothing more than
barbaric collective punishment. They are war crimes.
I agree with the Secretary-General: those responsible
should be held fully accountable, including by the
International Criminal Court.
The Council has an obligation to the people
of Aleppo. We have an obligation to show that we
are working for their protection, that we are trying to
find that elusive political settlement that will end this
war. What confidence can a man, woman or child in

16-126295/20

S/PV.7687

The situation in the Middle East

Aleppo have in our words today? What faith can they
place in any future cessation of hostilities when they
have seen this one abused so violently? The only way
to build back confidence, to restore that faith, is to
stop the violence. We owe it to the people of Aleppo
to be clear and candid about the efforts to stop those
attacks. Without such clarity, how can they believe that
a cessation of hostilities will not be used as cover for
further military advances?
I therefore welcome the recent announcement about
the agreement between the United States and Russia
reaffirming the cessation of hostilities in Aleppo,
Latakia and eastern Ghouta. But we must now see an
immediate, positive response to that latest development.
Only its full implementation will give the people of
Syria that much needed clarity for actions speak louder
than words.
To support that effort, the United Kingdom is today
proposing a Security Council statement that condemns
the violence in Aleppo and calls for an urgent end to the
brutality. We owe it to the people of Aleppo, the living
and the dead, to show that the Council can speak with
one voice on that issue and that we can work together
to bring this violence to an end. We cannot choose
to do nothing in the face of such barbarity. To do so
would be tantamount to collusion with the very forces
destroying Aleppo.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Egyptian presidency of the Security Council for
bringing us together today for this public debate on
the situation in Syria, and more specifically in Aleppo.
France took the initiative with the United Kingdom
to call for this meeting. I also thank Mr. Feltman and
Mr. O’Brien for their briefings.
The diplomatic process that was initiated in Vienna
raised hopes when it ended on 27 February with the
entry into force of a cessation of hostilities across
the entire Syrian territory. France voted in favour of
resolution 2268 (2016) and welcomed the agreement as
a contribution to de-escalation and as an opportunity
for Syrians to finally see the diplomatic process lead
to a reduction in violence and an improvement in
the situation for civilians. For almost a month, the
cessation of hostilities helped the population enjoy an
improvement that had not been seen since the conflict
began five years ago, even if humanitarian progress has
never yet met their expectations.
6/20

04/05/2016

Since last month we are seeing that the fragile
vessel of the cessation of hostilities is full of holes and
today threatens to sink. Let us not mince words. The
Damascus regime is the main party responsible and the
new offensive launched by the regime on Aleppo city
on 22 April is a flagrant and tragic example of that.
In many respects, Aleppo is to Syria what Sarajevo
was to Bosnia — a symbol, a crossroads, a martyr.
Aleppo — a symbolic city that is thousands of years
old and considered to be part of the world cultural
heritage — is a crossroads where so many civilizations
have clashed and merged, leaving a deep and diverse
imprint. The city is now suffering martyrdom. That
bastion of the moderate opposition has for four years
resisted the continual assaults of Bashar Al-Assad’s
regime and of Da’esh.
We cannot turn a blind eye on those who seek
to seize Aleppo by using the cessation of hostilities
agreement as a smokescreen. That is all the more true
because in its offensive against Aleppo the regime is
using all means possible, including deliberate attacks
on civilians. We are now seeing the consequences of
that. The resumption of fighting has left over 280 dead
in just a few days and caused a new flow of displaced
persons to the Turkish border. The use of barrel bombs
on populated residential areas, the very purpose of
which is to spread terror among the population, has
resumed. France has repeatedly denounced such acts.
Although the Security Council yesterday
unanimously adopted resolution 2286 (2016) to
protect medical personnel and facilities, the regime is
deliberately, systematically and methodically targeting
them. On 25 April, five White Helmets were killed
after their centre at Al-Atareb, near Aleppo, was
deliberately attacked. On 27 April, the Al-Quds hospital
was deliberately bombed by the regime, with a raft of
casualties. On 29 April, the Al-Marjeh health-care
centre in Aleppo was completely destroyed. The regime
of Bashar Al-Assad bears the full responsibility for the
breakdown in the ceasefire in Aleppo. Faced with this
spiral of violence, France and the United Kingdom felt
duty-bound to call on the Security Council to convene
this meeting.
At this very hour, the fragile agreement between
the Russians and Americans that just entered into force
is an encouraging sign, but it needs to be confirmed
and then translated into facts on the ground. To restore
the ceasefire across the entire Syrian territory and
maintain the political momentum, we must do a great
16-12629

04/05/2016

The situation in the Middle East

deal more to ensure the cessation of hostilities is
effectively respected. Otherwise, we will see a return
to the horror and the resumption of clashes that, let us
not forget, have led to over 400,000 deaths and millions
of refugees and destroyed an entire country.
France believes that the Security Council has an
important role to play in monitoring the observance of
the ceasefire and to punish the most serious violations
by mining the information to be relayed on a monthly
basis by the Geneva task force, as requested under
resolution 2268 (2016). In the meantime, the supporters
of the regime must shoulder their responsibilities and
use their influence on Damascus to ensure that the
weapons are effectively silenced, because too often the
regime pays lip service to an agreement only so as to
violate it more thoroughly.
Last week, Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura alerted
us collectively, stressing that the cessation of hostilities
was in danger. We are convinced that a collective
mobilization is necessary to respond urgently to that
warning. For its part, France will spare no effort in that
regard, on the basis of three major axes in particular.
After this meeting, we hope that the Council will
be able to send a clear message on the need to end the
fighting in Aleppo and to strengthen the cessation of
hostilities. That will require nothing less than ensuring
compliance with resolution 2268 (2016), which was
adopted unanimously as a joint proposal of Russia and
the United States. We must also continue to mobilize the
international community to bring pressure to bear on
the regime and to seek to rebuild positive momentum.
It is in that spirit that the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of France, Mr. Jean-Marc Ayrault, and his German
counterpart met today with Special Envoy De Mistura
and the head of the moderate opposition, Riad Hijab.
Finally, as Staffan de Mistura did before this
Council last week, France has been requesting for
several days now that we organize, in short order, a
ministerial meeting of the International Syria Support
Group with three objectives in mind: first, to secure
a more robust guarantee of respect for the ceasefire;
secondly, to reaffirm the need to protect and provide
assistance to civilian populations; and thirdly, to resume
negotiations with a view to finding a political solution.
Ultimately, a single lodestar should guide
us — to do everything to end the violence, in Aleppo
and throughout Syria, and enable the resumption of
negotiations aimed at implementing resolution 2254

S/PV.7687

(2015) and the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012
(S/2012/523, annex). There is no other alternative if we
are to put an end to the Syrian tragedy.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the United Kingdom for having
requested this urgent meeting of the Security Council.
Just yesterday, here in the Chamber, the President
of Médecins Sans Frontières, who was seated exactly
where the Syrian delegation is seated, stated that more
than 300 attacks had occurred in Aleppo over the past
few days, with hundreds of civilian deaths and the
destruction of six medical facilities (see S/PV.7685). Last
week in a closed meeting, we said what today we would
like to repeat openly, with more urgency if necessary:
we need to rectify the situation in Syria immediately,
along the three tracks in this conflict, namely, the
cessation of hostilities, the political negotiations and the
desperate humanitarian situation. The Security Council
must support the work of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
through bilateral efforts with the parties and through
a statement on the three issues that I just mentioned.
As the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General said,
the priority now is the cessation of hostilities. All the
parties to the conflict must urgently comply with the
parameters established by resolution 2268 (2016). The
next step must be a return to the negotiating table in
order to take up the political transition in Syria once
and for all.
The most recent attack on a hospital took place
yesterday, launched by the opposition forces. That is
in addition to other attacks committed by Government
forces. All of them were of enormous seriousness.
We demand once again that all the parties to the
conflict, in particular the Government of Al-Assad, to
respect international humanitarian law in the conduct
of hostilities.
Mr. O’Brien said in closed consultations — and
yesterday the President of Médecins Sans Frontières
repeated it — that in Aleppo it is dangerous to live
next to a hospital. Mr. O’Brien once again reminded
us of that today. It is unbelievable that it is often more
dangerous to be a doctor, a patient or a family member
visiting a patient than it is to be a combatant.
Aleppo is the first opportunity to demonstrate
that we take resolution 2268 (2016) seriously. As I said
yesterday, our threshold of tolerance in the face of
attacks against medical facilities and medical workers

16-126297/20

S/PV.7687

The situation in the Middle East

04/05/2016

should be zero. We want the medical workers and
patients that still survive in Aleppo to be the first to see
some kind of outcome from this resolution.

All three tracks are interlinked and interdependent and
we cannot, as some have argued, neglect any one of
them and expect the other two to succeed.

Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, and Mr. Stephen O’Brien, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator. I would also like to
thank the United Kingdom for calling today’s important
meeting.

In recent days, as evidenced most clearly by what
has occurred in Aleppo, all three of those tracks are in
grave peril. First, as others have noted, across much of
Aleppo, the cessation of hostilities has given way to
horrific violence. The Syrian Observatory for Human
Rights reported that more than 270 civilians were killed
in Aleppo just since 22 April. While all sides have
contributed to the violence, the military escalation was
attributable largely to the actions of a single party — the
Al-Assad regime. The regime launched more than 300
air strikes, 110 artillery strikes and 18 missiles, and
dropped more than 68 bombs on the city over just
these past two weeks, according to credible actors on
the ground. All of that while still paying lip service
to a cessation of hostilities. Against that backdrop, the
United States has been working urgently with Special
Envoy De Mistura and with the Russian Federation
to reaffirm the cessation across the country. Through
those efforts, the parties to the cessation agreed to
recommit to the truce in Aleppo and its suburbs earlier
today. The city has been calmer, and we urge all parties
to comply fully so that hostilities actually cease — not
just in Aleppo but across the country.

The city known today as Aleppo has been
continuously inhabited for more than 7,000 years. Over
the centuries, it has been won and lost by a succession
of empires — the Greeks, the Romans, crusaders,
the Ottomans and more. It has been home to diverse
populations of traders and merchants, which included
Muslims, Jews and Christians. That is not ancient
history. Those influences have long been visible in
the city’s architecture, tasted in its food and felt in its
culture. By the sixteenth century, it was famous enough
for Shakespeare to cite it in Othello and Macbeth.
A city does not become one of the world’s oldest
without surviving great challenges. Aleppo has endured
wars, occupations and earthquakes. In 1260 it survived
a siege by the Mongols. After so many centuries, a city
like this might seem able to survive anything. But in
recent days, young Syrians have spread a slogan across
social media: “Aleppo is burning”. After five years of
war, the recent explosion of violence has threatened what
remains of the city. Just today, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
warned that continued violence could be catastrophic
and that it could force 400,000 more residents to flee.
Imagine the ripple effect and the consequences of that
additional displacement.
To save Aleppo — what is left of Aleppo — we need
progress on the same three fronts needed for peace in
Syria overall. It is not that complicated. As Special Envoy
De Mistura previously underscored, the three elements
are stopping the fighting, improving humanitarian
access and engaging in political negotiations to bring
about transition. This year has actually shown that all
three are possible — however belatedly, unevenly and
imperfectly implemented — when there is political will.
The cessation of hostilities has, up to this point, saved
lives. Humanitarian access, while still grotesquely
restricted, has improved modestly. And Special Envoy
de Mistura has convened the parties for talks in Geneva.
8/20

The regime and some of its supporters sometimes
claim to be attacking the Al-Nusra Front or Da’esh, but
the sites hit in Aleppo show otherwise. Consider this
list of targets struck by the regime or its allies between
20 and 29 April — not ancient history, but rather a
matter of the past couple of weeks. This list of targets
was provided by the Syrian Network for Human Rights,
which has proved highly reliable during the conflict:
an ambulance in the Bab Al-Nairab neighbourhood,
a public market in the district of Al-Sakhour, a civil
defence centre in Al-Atarib, a bakery in Al-Ameriyeh,
a school in the Bab Al-Hadid district and a mosque
in the Al-Sukkari district. The distinction between
civilians and military personnel and targets has to be
respected in accordance with international law. Yet
every day the photos and videos out of Aleppo show
that that distinction has been obliterated.
It is important to note that violence by the Al-Nusra
Front or Da’esh is violence by groups that are not
a party to the cessation and are not protected by the
cessation of hostilities. The rest of the opposition that
signed up for the cessation and abided by it cannot be
held responsible for the actions of terrorists who have
16-12629

04/05/2016

The situation in the Middle East

made no secret of their desire to keep fighting. Nobody
benefits more from this war, and from the failure to
reach a political solution and a political transition, than
the terrorists. However, one cannot lump the like with
the unlike, the innocent with the guilty.
These attacks have imposed an incalculable toll on
Aleppo’s civilians, and they contribute to a devastating
humanitarian situation in the city. But the regime has
also taken additional measures that show its overt intent
to ratchet up civilian suffering in Aleppo. The Syrian
Government has restricted humanitarian access and
blocked aid, thereby undercutting that second element
necessary for a peaceful resolution to be advanced. The
International Syria Support Group (ISSG) has just been
informed, as Under-Secretary-General O’Brien has just
confirmed here today, that the regime has approved
only eight deliveries for 25 per cent of people in the
United Nations May delivery plan for besieged and
hard-to-reach areas, and the Syrian Government did
not approve any of the Aleppo locations in the United
Nations May plan. Is that a coincidence or is it simply in
keeping with the regime’s massive offensive designed
to terrorize the people of Aleppo?
Though the Council should need no reminder,
resolution 2254 (2015) calls for rapid, safe and
unhindered access throughout the country. Aleppo is
a place of huge need right now. We often focus in our
remarks on those who have been killed, but think of
all of those who have been injured and are in desperate
need of help. Resolution 2254 (2015) proscribes the
removal of medicines and medical supplies from aid
conveys, but, again, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has documented that
that is a routine practice throughout Syria. It is the
exception when medical supplies are actually allowed
through on convoys. It is a rule, and a rule that is
enforced across the board by the Syrian Government’s
bureaucracy, to remove medical supplies from convoys.
Just to give one example, on a recent convoy to
Rastan, the authorities even went so far as to remove
the scissors and anaesthetics from midwifery kits.
Who does that? Let us be honest. The people who
do that are people who do not give a damn what the
Council prescribes. They do not care. They have
stopped listening.
At the same time, the regime has deliberately
targeted first-responders, health-care workers and
medical facilities. Of the 33 hospitals open in Aleppo

S/PV.7687

in 2010, fewer than 10 are reportedly functioning today.
The most recent example, as we all know, was the loss
of the Al-Quds hospital, which suffered a horrific
attack that killed at least 50 civilians, including the
city’s last pediatrician, Dr. Muhammad Waseem Moaz,
a man described by a colleague as the loveliest doctor
in their hospital. He was a man who had sent his family
to safety in Turkey, while he stayed behind to treat his
patients. He was a man so committed to his people that
he often slept in the hospital in case a child needed
emergency help during the night.
According to Physicians for Human Rights, the
attack that killed that great doctor along with so many
others was actually the third strike on the hospital since
the war began. That is not an accident. If you hit a hospital
once by mistake, you can adjust your targeting and
make allowances, but that was wilful targeting. At least
six medical facilities throughout Aleppo were attacked
during the past week, and the most recent attack, as we
have heard, was yesterday against the Dabbit maternity
clinic in regime-held territory where more civilians
were killed. All of those attacks are reprehensible.
Just yesterday, the Council adopted resolution 2286
(2016) on, inter alia, the importance of the protection
of medical personnel and the importance of access to
medical care in armed conflict. Every member of the
Council voted in favour, and it is now time to call for its
implementation in a real context — the context of Syria.
And that means urgently pressing the regime and any
group that would shell a hospital to comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
cease targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including hospitals and medical personnel.
That brings me to the third and final element
necessary for progress towards the conflict’s resolution:
political negotiations aimed at political transition.
After five years of war, it should be abundantly clear
that the conflict will be settled only through political
dialogue. Aleppo is a living monument to the belief
that military force can achieve something for the people
of Syria. The need for a political solution is precisely
what the Council agreed in December 2015 when we
adopted resolution 2254 (2015). Yet we have seen one
party in particular renege on its commitments to a full
cessation of hostilities nation-wide and to the full, rapid
and unhindered delivery of humanitarian aid, blatantly
disregarding resolution 2254 (2015). That undermines
the conditions needed for negotiations and makes

16-126299/20

S/PV.7687

The situation in the Middle East

04/05/2016

finding common ground and forging compromises
exceedingly difficult.

had begun to recover during the truce, to get their
lives back.”

Let me conclude. There is plenty of blame to go
around for the worsening situation in Aleppo, but there
can be no doubt about where the primary responsibility
lies. It lies with the same regime that is responsible for
committing similar offenses throughout the country: the
one that has laid siege to 15 cities throughout Syria and
restricted access to aid for millions of Syrians, leading
to the preventable deaths of countless civilians; the one
responsible for 12 of the 13 attacks on medical facilities,
recorded from January through March by Physicians
for Human Rights, and 24 of the 25 deaths that resulted
from those strikes; the regime responsible for last
week’s air strikes against a Syrian civil-defence station
in the town of Al-Atareb in Aleppo Province, which
killed five brave men who volunteered to serve their
communities as first-responders: Ahmad Abdullah,
Khaled Bashar, Ahmad Mahmoud, Hamdo Haj Ibrahim
and Hussain Ismail — the most recent casualties among
the more than 115 white helmets, who have died in the
line of duty since the war began; and the same party
and the same regime responsible for the vast majority of
the 400,000 deaths — and counting — in the conflict.

He continued to recount that now, people in Aleppo
are waiting for death and even praying for it in some
instances to take them away from “this burning city”,
as he put it. All of us here must work relentlessly to
restore and maintain the respite from violence, for which
Syrians yearn and which they deserve, to ensure that
they receive vital humanitarian aid to survive — many
are on death’s door right now as we sit here — and to
build the political solution, which is the only escape
from the daily inferno.

The party primarily responsible for the burning in
Aleppo is a United Nations Member State. That should
revolt us. The party is a United Nations Member State
indifferent and cold to the ghastly suffering of its
people. That should galvanize and unite us. All those
with influence, particularly Russia and Iran, must press
the regime to meet its commitments and obligations.
For our part, the United States will continue pressing
the opposition to do the same. We will work with our
Russian counterparts to try to restore a real and lasting
cessation of hostilities in Aleppo and elsewhere in
Syria and facilitate a political transition away from
Al-Assad — the only way in which this war will finally
end. The entire ISSG is going to have to be a part of
making that happen.
Today, a Syrian surgeon in Aleppo, Dr. Osama Abo
El Ezz, wrote in the New York Times of losing so many
of his close friends who were medical professionals over
the last five years. Over the past week, he wrote, “The
bombardment has reached such ferocity that even the
stones are catching fire”. Of the cessation of hostilities,
he wrote,
“Imperfect though it was, it offered Syrian civilians
a brief respite from five years of violence. People
10/20

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Jeffrey Feltman and Stephen
O’Brien for their briefings.
As a result of the cessation of hostilities, which was
put in place thanks to the leading role of the Russian
Federation and the United States and confirmed in
resolution 2268 (2016), the level of violence in Syria
has significantly decreased. That move was a real
breakthrough in the protracted conflict. New prospects
for a peaceful resolution have opened up, and the
Syrians have to decide for themselves the parameters
of that peaceful resolution with the support of the
United Nations.
Overall, the two rounds of negotiations went very
well. However, not all of the opposition forces showed
a willingness to reach an agreement. Once again, a
separate position was adopted by the Riyadh group,
which still has not formulated a clear position. In many
parts of Syria the truce has been observed. Numerous
armed units and towns are joining the truce, thanks to
the efforts of the Syria Reconciliation Centre opened
by Russia in Hmeymim. Today, there are 90 such towns
covered by the truce. At the same time, hundreds of
meetings with the city elders, field commanders and
representatives of local administrations have been
carried out. And in a number of provinces, peaceful life
is slowly returning.
We should not question the radical improvement
of the situation resulting from the implementation
of the cessation of hostilities, which has, however,
spurred on others who are interested in perpetuating
the Syrian conflict. We also believe that it is counterproductive to express public criticism about unverified
incidents simply to add new charges against the Syrian
Government. That has occurred more than once. The
deterioration in certain areas of Syria, including Aleppo,
16-12629

04/05/2016

The situation in the Middle East

is a serious source of concern. Government forces are
fighting off a large-scale offensive by the jihadists. In
the past few days, we have seen a significant increase
in shelling from the parts of the city controlled by
jihadists. So-called hell’s cannons are being used — gas
canisters packed with tiny metal fragments, which have
a devastating effect. Those weapons are by definition
indiscriminate and are meant to destroy and terrorize
the civilian population.
We were long promised that the armed units of
the so-called moderate opposition would break off all
links with Al-Nusra, withdraw from the territories they
occupy and clearly state their readiness to take part
in the peace settlement. That has not occurred so far,
which raises the question of whether the political will
exists among those who have an influence on the various
players. We are beginning to get the impression that
external sponsors cannot or do not want to influence
the Syrian opposition groups in order to force them to
distance themselves from the terrorists.
Russia and the United States of America, as
co-Chairs of the International Syria Support Group,
are ready to continue working together to ensure
de-escalation. At least that is how we would like to see
the situation to evolve. Russian and American military
experts are working together on a daily basis. As we
speak, a joint centre for rapid response to breaches of
the cessation of hostilities has begun to operate on a
permanent basis in Geneva, maximizing the effective
monitoring of the situation. It must be said say that,
from the very beginning of our increased participation
in the Syrian situation in October, Russia has proposed
such cooperation to the United States. Unfortunately,
it has taken more than six months to achieve it, but we
hope that this will be an important step in our efforts to
stop the bloodshed in Syria.
Thanks to the efforts in the military and political
spheres, calm has been restored in Latakia and eastern
Ghouta, with the aim of making it permanent. Russia
and the United States, with the agreement of the
Government of Syria and the moderate opposition,
hoped to introduce a regime of calm in Aleppo on
3 May. However, that planned timetable was derailed
by attacks by terrorist groups. That day, the insurgents
sought to break the defences through coordinated
offences from the west, preceded by a massive artillery
bombardment. Jabhat Al-Nusra, Ahrar ash-Sham,
Jaish al-Islam, Harakat Nour al-Din al-Zenki and local
criminal groups took part in the offensive. All those

S/PV.7687

groups shelled residential areas the whole day long;
in particular, the Martyrs of Badr Brigade claimed
responsibility for the destruction of Al-Dabit maternity
hospital. Over the past 24 hours, dozens of people were
killed and hundreds were wounded.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Jabhat
Al-Nusra and other terrorist groups are excluded from
the cessation of hostilities regime. It is unacceptable
to pause in the fight with terrorists so as to allow them
to regroup. No one will spare the terrorists and those
who are in breach of the cessation of hostilities required
United Nations resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016).
We would add that the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) has genuine
evidence of the use of mustard gas in Syria, and thee
are serious grounds to believe that war gases are
being used by terrorists. There is an alarming risk that
they have the capacity to produce toxic substances,
as recently confirmed by the Director-General of the
OPCW. It is unfortunate that, just when we need to take
all necessary steps to impede the activities of chemical
terrorists, some Western members of the Council,
under contrived pretexts, are stifling the RussianChinese initiative aimed at neutralizing the threat of
the production of chemical weapons by terrorists in and
around Syria.
We need to pursue our very serious work on the
issue of the Syrian peace settlement and support for
Russian-American efforts. Let us speak clearly — we
need to put an end to all provocations once and for. It is
clear that without external support for terrorist groups
in Syria, they could not operate on such a scale. We
need help in cutting off supplies to terrorists, first and
foremost across the Syrian-Turkish border. Parties
under patronage should be compelled to come to the
negotiating table, which will contribute to ensuring
peace in Syria. I would like to repeat in a slightly different
form a rhetorical question posed by one speaker: How
could you allow the destruction of an ancient country in
a prolonged, bloody conflict to achieve the geopolitical
aims of one party or its partners?
We hope that the Geneva talks will resume in May
and lead the way to further negotiations. We call on
all sides to participate constructively in dialogue and
to refrain from threats or sabotage. As for the press
statement proposed by the United Kingdom, we will
of course consider it, but we would have viewed it as
a truly serious attempt to urge the Security Council

16-1262911/20

S/PV.7687

The situation in the Middle East

04/05/2016

to contribute to the maintenance of the cessation of
hostilities if the delegation of the United Kingdom had
consulted with the co-Chairs of the International Syria
Support Group, Russia and the United States, which
are spearheading the ceasefire efforts. As I see it now,
it is more of a propaganda gesture. However, we will
take a look at the text and consult with our military
colleagues, who, alongside our American colleagues,
are doing relevant work in Geneva.

be delivered in humanitarian convoys. Just yesterday,
the Council unanimously adopted resolution 2286
(2016), reminding combatants of the rules of armed
conflict, demanding protection for those who provide
health care, and demanding accountability for those
who flout those rules. Most of all, good faith in this
context means adhering to the spirit of the cessation
of hostilities, which means stopping the fighting and
attempts to grab land.

Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We too wish
to thank the United Kingdom for convening today’s
meeting. We think it is very timely to have an open
discussion in the Chamber about the situation in Syria,
and in particular the situation in Aleppo.

What has happened in Aleppo in the past few days
was all too predictable, as we heard reports over the
past two weeks from United Nations representatives.
While we have understood that there have been efforts
to battle Al-Nusra, it is hard not to conclude that what
has happened has all been part of an elaborate plan to
seize Syria’s second-largest city before the peace talks
got seriously under way.

New Zealand has been deeply concerned about
the violence in Aleppo and elsewhere in Syria. We
continue to be shocked at the apparent indifference of
the parties to the war and all of their backers to the
appalling suffering of the Syrian people. The escalation
of violence in and around Aleppo shows that the parties
have been continuing to pursue their objectives by
military means. And yet, as we have said so many times
in the Chamber and in the adjacent consultation room,
there can be no military solution to the conflict. We
welcome the news that it has been agreed between the
United States and the Russian Federation to extend the
cessation of hostilities to Aleppo, Latakia and eastern
Ghouta. But if peace is to have any chance, there must
be a full re-establishment of the cessation of hostilities
to all of Syria and a genuine recommitment to the
peace process.
All sides must invest fully in the political process.
That means respecting international humanitarian law.
It means respecting the Council’s resolutions, and it
means prioritizing the welfare of the Syrian people over
narrow political and military aims. The current political
process, established at the end of 2015 under resolution
2268 (2015), represents the best chance we have had
in five years to end this awful war. We cannot afford
to miss that opportunity. We all have a responsibility
to support the talks, to support the Special Envoy
and to pressure the parties at the negotiating table to
participate in good faith.
In our view, good faith means increasing access for
humanitarian aid, negotiating the release of detainees,
stopping the fighting and engaging on the substance of
a political transition. It also means stopping attacks on
schools and hospitals and allowing medical supplies to
12/20

New Zealand is fully committed to international
efforts to combat terrorism. As we have said in the
Council Chamber and in the adjacent room, this should
be an issue that unites us, but it has not been, and
there has been a growing tendency to use the words
“terrorism” and “terrorists” loosely in justification for
any military response. That must stop. Any military
action needs to be carried out with full respect for
international humanitarian law. This of course means
avoiding attacks on civilians and civilian targets.
The requirements of distinction and proportionality
and the prohibition on indiscriminate attacks must
be respected, even when fighting terrorists. If the
cessation of hostilities and the peace process are to have
any chance of succeeding, greater care is required to
distinguish between those groups that are participants
in the peace process and those that are outside it, and
greater weight given to the overall political need to
advance the peace process.
The talks that have been under way between the
United States and Russia, in coordination with the
Special Envoy and others in the region, are the best
chance we have in the short term to make progress and
to see an end to fighting, particularly in and around
Aleppo. We welcome those talks, we welcome the recent
announcement, and we look forward to further progress
in such areas as further geographical delineation and
other measures to help restore and sustain the cessation
of hostilities.
While the United States and Russian efforts
are critical, the United States and Russia are not the
16-12629

04/05/2016

The situation in the Middle East

only actors that can make a difference. New Zealand
supports the International Syria Support Group and
the Security Council putting their weight behind the
political talks. We are open to any course of action
that would be helpful and effective and would welcome
the views of the Special Envoy, the United States and
Russia in particular on how this Council might best
support their efforts.
We all need to remember that the stakes are
high. The breakdown of the peace process would be
catastrophic for the Syrian people and for preserving
what remains of this shattered country. We look forward
to discussing the press statement just circulated by the
United Kingdom and to early agreement upon it.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
the delegation of the United Kingdom and the Egyptian
presidency for initiating and convening this very timely
open briefing. My special gratitude goes to the briefers
for their detailed overview of the current situation in
Aleppo, in particular, and in Syria, in general.
Ukraine strongly condemns the air strikes and
indiscriminate shelling carried out in and around
Aleppo over the recent period, which took the lives
of more than 250 people and left thousands injured
and wounded. Last week’s bombardment of Al-Quds
hospital in the innocent Sukkari neighbourhood of
Aleppo led to the death of two doctors, including the
only paediatrician in the city, three medical support
staff and dozens of patients, among them children.
Yesterday and yet another hospital in Aleppo, Al-Dabit
hospital, came under fire. At least three people were
killed and dozens of civilians were wounded.
The escalation of violence has also been observed
in other parts of Syria, for example, in Dar’a, where
heavy fighting and aerial bombardments have resumed.
We commend the Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, for his efforts in bringing the cessation
of hostilities in Syria back on track. But how can that
be achieved when the Government pushes on with
a military offensive in Aleppo, provoking a further
escalation in fighting that leads to the death of scores
of civilians trapped in the city?
We have heard the claims that Al-Nusra was
being targeted. However, it is not acceptable that,
in the process, hospitals and the city’s other vital
infrastructure had to be destroyed, leaving thousands
of civilians without water, electricity, medical care and
food. It is hard to believe that such an offensive by the

S/PV.7687

Syrian regime would be possible without the approval
of if major ally, which poses itself as a mediator in
the negotiating process. Amazingly enough, that very
delegation moments ago tried to convince us that
“recently the situation in Syria has radically improved”.
The aerial bombardments must stop. The
indiscriminate attacks against civilians must stop.
Only an immediate recommitment to the cessation of
hostilities, which must include Aleppo, can alleviate
the plight of the Syrian people. Against the backdrop
of the rapidly increasing violence in and around
Aleppo, Ukraine considers the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2286 (2016) on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict to be very timely and an extremely
important step. We call on all sides to fully respect that
resolution’s provisions. The failure to do that will lead
to the collapse of the cessation of hostilities and bring
more violence death and destruction, while further
undermining the prospects for finding a negotiated
solution to the Syrian conflict. In this regard, we call
upon all parties to strictly comply with their obligations
under resolution 2268 (2016) on the cessation of
hostilities and resume substantive talks in Geneva on
all aspects stipulated in resolution 2254 (2015).
Finally, I wish to put on record the strong support of
our delegation for the draft press statement circulated
by the United Kingdom just now. It deserves urgent
approval and it does not deserve at all to be labelled
as a propagandistic step, as the Russian delegation
has alleged. We urge other members of the Council to
seriously consider it.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I thank the president for
convening this meeting on Aleppo. I would also like to
extend my appreciation to Under-Secretaries-General
Feltman and O’Brien for their detailed briefings.
It was almost two months ago that we unanimously
adopted resolution 2268 (2016), endorsing in full the
United States-Russian Federation joint statement on the
cessation of hostilities in Syria. After the adoption of
this resolution, we saw some remarkable developments
in the Syrian political process and considerable
improvement in humanitarian access. Since the crisis
is far from coming to an end, however, we cannot be
satisfied with these temporary achievements.
At the same time, we should admit that the cessation
of hostilities gave hope to the Syrian people. Now such
hope is being lost in Syria, especially in Aleppo, an
important Middle East cultural heritage site. We see

16-1262913/20

S/PV.7687

The situation in the Middle East

an escalation of violence and fighting in Aleppo. In
this context, we welcome the latest news of agreement
between the United States and Russia towards extending
the cessation of hostilities to Aleppo. We hope this
welcome effort will be implemented.
Japan strongly urges all parties to fully implement
resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016). Yesterday,
the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
2286 (2016), which addresses the protection of medical
personnel and facilities. That resolution does not
focus on any specific conflict area. However, Syria,
in particular Aleppo, is a typical situation that the
resolution envisages.
For the implementation of resolution 2286 (2016)
in Aleppo, the role of States with influence on the
ground is critical. Japan urges all State, in particular
the Syrian Arab Republic and the States members
of the International Syria Support Group (ISSG) to
thoroughly implement this resolution.
On the draft press statement circulated a few
moments ago by the United Kingdom, I support the
idea of sending a clear message of the Council. The
draft seems to capture all important points.
In conclusion, I would like to state the Japan will
continue to work with members of the Council and
the ISSG for a lasting political settlement through
assistance that gives the people of Syria hope for a
better future.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to thank the delegations of the United
Kingdom and France for requesting this meeting. I
would like to thank the President for having managed
to do whatever it took to make this meeting happen.
I would also like to thank Mr. Feltman and
Mr. O’Brien for their briefings. I am not losing hope
that one of these days Mr. O’Brien might enter the
Chamber and say “I have some good news.” But in
the four months that I have been here, unfortunately,
reality in all its cruelty has been imposed on us. Some
50 years ago, speaking of another war, the American
poet, Robert Allen Zimmerman, better known as Bob
Dylan, asked the question:
(spoke in English)
“How many deaths will it take till he knows
That too many people have died?”
14/20

04/05/2016

The question remains as valid today as it was then.
How many more deaths will we have to see? How many
more hospitals will need to be destroyed? How many
more children will have to be killed? How many more?
It would seem that for some people, certain games are
more important than the lives of human beings.
In an intergovernmental organization such as ours,
the main responsibility for such issues falls on States,
particularly those most directly involved and especially
those that are directly involved and support one party
to the conflict or another. We welcome the joint efforts
of the United States and Russia that have allowed the
cessation of hostilities to include Aleppo. Syria is
suffering and Aleppo is suffering. We therefore hope
they will be able to exert the necessary pressure on the
various actors on the ground.
We must not forget that, in the confusion prevailing
on the ground in areas where various non-State
armed groups are taking part in the combat, any
non-State group that crosses the border — even if
it is merely circumstantially allied with a terrorist
group — is as much a terrorist as the terrorist group
itself. Consequently, the main countries currently
involved in the negotiations should exert all possible
influence on any party over which they have influence
in order to affect the situation on the ground.
Uruguay remains ready to support efforts and
initiatives aimed at strengthening the cessation of
hostilities, humanitarian access and the political
process — the famous three pacts mentioned by
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. We will continue to devote all
our efforts to that end.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I too thank
Mr. Feltman and Mr. O’Brien for their briefings, amd
the delegations of France and the United Kingdom for
requesting this urgent meeting of the Council, following
the unprecedented escalation of violence taking place
in Aleppo. A city that has for millennia been the cradle
of rich cultures and civilizations, with a place on the
World Heritage List, Aleppo has borne the brunt of the
Syrian crisis since the end of the cessation of hostilities.
The hope raised by the cessation of hostilities
agreement soon gave way to unrestrained attacks on
the civilian population due to multiple violations of
the February agreement, as has just been confirmed
by the briefers. With several hundred dead in the past
few days, the city has been the site of indiscriminate
attacks on civilians, including women and children,
16-12629

04/05/2016

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7687

and on medical facilities and markets by parties to the
conflict. Unfortunately, the same situation prevails in
Homs, Damascus and Deir ez-Zor, to name just a few,
where clashes have led to heavy civilian losses.

Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
convening of this meeting on the situation in Aleppo and
the briefings provided by Mr. Feltman and Mr. O’Brien.

Given that alarming situation, the Senegalese
delegation strongly condemns those violations, which
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights has rightly described as displaying monstrous
contempt for the lives of civilians. It is equally
important at this critical stage in the peace negotiations
to urge all parties to abide by the February cessation
of hostilities agreement, which was endorsed by the
Council in resolution 2268 (2016), and to meet their
obligations under international humanitarian law.

My delegation has been closely following
developments in Aleppo and is concerned that the
situation on the ground may threaten the progress made
since the the cessation of hostilities began. However,
we believe that the political forum in Geneva should
be maintained and strengthened. There is no doubt that
the cessation of hostilities has had a positive impact
on the peace negotiations. The scenario in Syria has
changed in recent months, especially in late February
when various opposition groups joined the peace
process, while other groups continued to coordinate
their military operations with the Al-Nusra Front, as
we have seen in Aleppo and other Syrian cities.

These clashes have come at a special juncture in the
negotiating process among the parties to the conflict,
led by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. Senegal therefore welcomes the
meetings among the Secretary of State of the United
States and the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Russia,
Saudi Arabia, France and Germany in an effort to
promote an atmosphere conducive to a resumption of
the ceasefire. We dare to hope that, with the valuable
assistance of the International Syria Support Group,
those efforts will bear fruit for the civilian victims of
the crisis, which is now in its fifth year. Now more than
ever, it is the Council’s responsibility to ensure that
peace talks resume, with a genuine ceasefire in place,
and that a political transition is led by Syrians in a spirit
of reconciliation.
In view of the ongoing significant impact of
terrorism on the conflict in Syria, my delegation wishes
to firmly condemn the persistent terrorist attacks on
civilians in Syria, as is currently the case in Aleppo.
Given the situation, Senegal believes it necessary that
we issue a statement to send a clear message to the
parties to the conflict.
In conclusion, I reiterate my delegation’s full support
for the efforts of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Staffan de Mistura. Likewise, we
welcome the agreement between Russia and the United
States, which has just been announced, and call on the
members of the International Syria Support Group to
continue to strengthen their meaningful contribution to
a political settlement based on the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/523, annex) and resolutions 2254 (2015) 2268
(2016).

The negotiations among the parties in Geneva, as
part of the peace process led by the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, should
be resumed as soon as possible and without conditions.
We reiterate our support for Mr. De Mistura in pushing
for a comprehensive peace process that will prioritize
negotiations as the only way to end the vicious war that
has afflicted that country over the past five years. To
that end, we urge the Syrian opposition to display a
constructive attitude and commit to working to combat
Al-Nusra and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS). We emphasize that such terrorist groups are not
covered under resolution 2268 (2016) and must be fought
and overthrown in accordance with international law.
Regarding the peace negotiations, we believe that
the decision of the opposition’s Riyadh platform does
not contribute to the definitive settlement for Syria
that we all desire. We therefore hope that the countries
concerned can exercise their influence to persuade the
opposition to join the political negotiations, rejecting
the extremist violence of ISIS and Al-Nusra, which
represent a threat to international peace and security,
and to return to the negotiating table as soon as possible.
We hope that all the ethnic factions and minorities,
such as the Kurds, who are an important factor to
bringing about peace in Syria, will be represented. We
must ensure that every sector of civil society in Syria,
including women, participates in the peace talks.
We recognize that the progress that has been made
would not have been possible without the participation
of the International Syria Support Group and its task

16-1262915/20

S/PV.7687

The situation in the Middle East

force in helping to monitor the cessation of hostilities
and ensure humanitarian access. We believe that
the humanitarian response should be guided by a
neutral, balanced approach so as to ensure that it is
not politicized. In that regard, Member States should
work to ensure that the humanitarian response reaches
every sector of society. We condemn the indiscriminate
attacks on hospitals and medical facilities and on
civilians in those facilities. We would like to recall
that such facilities are protected under international
humanitarian law and therefore should not be military
targets, as provided for in resolution 2286 (2016), which
the Council adopted unanimously yesterday.
We must continue to urge for a lasting peace
settlement. We hope the peace process in Syria will be
supported by the people of Syria themselves, without
foreign interference, where the common interest should
be in attaining a country free of terrorists and focused
on its future. Lastly, any solution to the armed conflict
should be political and peaceful, signaling peace
for the people of Syria with respect for the country’s
independence and territorial integrity.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman and
Under-Secretary-General O’Brien for their briefings.
The recent escalation of the conflict in some parts
of Syria, especially Aleppo, has resulted in large
numbers of casualties among civilians and medical and
humanitarian relief workers. China sympathizes deeply
with the Syrian people in their suffering. We condemn
all attacks on civilian and humanitarian facilities.
The Syrian conflict cannot be settled by military
means, which will result only in greater unrest and
disaster. In that regard, China appreciates the new
round of efforts made by the Russian Federation and
the United States. The top priority now is for the
parties in Syria to put the interests of their nation
and people above everything else, cherish their hardwon ceasefire, abide strictly by the relevant Security
Council resolutions, implement the agreement on the
cessation of hostilities effectively and end all attacks
on civilian and humanitarian facilities immediately in
order to regain the earlier momentum of the ceasefire.
The implementation of the agreement on the cessation
of hostilities has played an important role in expanding
the humanitarian relief operations and advancing the
Geneva peace talks.
16/20

04/05/2016

In spite of the recent escalation of tensions in
some areas of Syria, in most parts of the country
the ceasefire has by and large been maintained. The
international community and the parties concerned
should adopt effective measures as soon as possible to
consolidate the results that have been achieved so far.
Other countries in the region should act in the interests
of maintaining regional peace and stability generally
and play a constructive role in achieving a full ceasefire
and a halt to the violence in Syria. The members of the
International Syria Support Group (ISSG) should work
together and consult as soon as possible on specific
measures for controlling the situation, thereby creating
conditions conducive to advancing the political process
in Syria and expanding humanitarian relief operations.
The Geneva peace talks have recently managed
to make progress despite difficulties and setbacks,
with the parties to the talks reaching a preliminary
understanding on some aspects. China appreciates
the important role that has been played in that regard
by Mr. Staffan de Mistura, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria. The more complex the
situation in Syria, the more essential it is to pursue
a political settlement without wavering, to insist on
enabling the Syrian people themselves to decide their
country’s future and destiny and on the role of the
United Nations as the main conduit for good offices, to
firmly support the work of Special Envoy de Mistura
and ensure that the next round of the peace talks in
Geneva is resumed as soon as possible. The parties in
Syria should work on the principle of addressing the
easier issues first and moving to more difficult ones,
meeting each other halfway, establishing mutual trust
and gradually arriving at a solution acceptable to all.
Countering terrorism is an important component of
the efforts to address the Syrian issue. If terrorism is
not eradicated, the Syrian people will have no peace
and the countries of the region will have no security.
International cooperation in fighting terrorism must
adhere to uniform standards and make full use of the
leading and coordinating role of the United Nations
and its Security Council. We should do all we can to
fight all those identified as terrorists by the Council.
Recently, terrorist groups have frequently used chemical
materials as weapons, and the international community
must come up with effective ways to respond to that
issue as soon as possible.
As a permanent member of the Security Council
and a member of the ISSG, China has been working
16-12629

04/05/2016

The situation in the Middle East

tirelessly to achieve a political settlement of the Syrian
question. At a meeting of ISSG foreign ministers,
Mr. Wang Yi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of China,
laid out China’s four-point proposal for a settlement
and put forward a specific programme for advancing
the ceasefire and cessation of hostilities, expediting
progress on humanitarian relief work and advancing
the political process. The special envoy for Syria of
the Chinese Government recently visited Geneva,
Syria and other countries concerned to engage in an
in-depth exchange of views with the parties involved
on the maintenance of the cessation of hostilities, the
expansion of humanitarian relief and the advancement
of the Geneva peace talks. We will continue to
play an active and constructive role in advancing a
comprehensive, equitable and appropriate settlement of
the Syrian question.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): The beginning of the year
seemed to offer fresh and renewed hope for the people of
Syria. A breakthrough was made in securing access for
humanitarian assistance for more than 500,000 people
in besieged and hard-to-reach areas. The violence was
significantly reduced, thanks to the agreement on a
cessation of hostilities. Most importantly, peace talks
aimed at solving the political deadlock had finally
gained some traction. However, in recent weeks the
fighting in Aleppo has intensified. It appears that the
fragile cessation of hostilities is no longer holding and
has collapsed there. We cannot allow the progress so
painstakingly made thus far to unravel.
I would like to thank Mr. Feltman and Mr. O’Brien
for their comprehensive briefings on the latest
developments in Aleppo. We also thank the United
Kingdom for requesting today’s urgent Council meeting
in the light of the deteriorating situation in Aleppo.
It was only yesterday that the Council adopted the
landmark resolution 2286 (2016), which seeks to protect
the wounded and sick and medical and humanitarian
personnel and their supplies and facilities. Yet on the
very same day, the Al-Dabit maternity hospital in
Aleppo was struck, with at least three medical staff
members and patients killed. It seems that scant, if any,
respect is accorded for the neutrality and impartiality
of medical facilities. It is all the more telling when
six medical centres have been attacked in less than a
week. We wish to reaffirm that such attacks, whether
premeditated or otherwise, are simply unacceptable.
Reports of the Government’s aim to encircle eastern
Aleppo, placing its residents under one of the largest

S/PV.7687

sieges of the conflict, are alarming. Besieging that
territory would inevitably lead to another catastrophic
humanitarian situation. The Security Council is dutybound to ensure that the calamity in the four towns of
Madaya, Fo’ah, Kafraya and Zabadani is not repeated
in Aleppo.
We welcome and support the talks between Special
Envoy De Mistura and the Foreign Ministers of Jordan,
Russia, Saudi Arabia, the United States, Germany and
France, as well as the head of the opposition, Mr. Riyad
Hijab. In addition to the truce brokered by the Russian
Federation and the United States in Latakia and near
Damascus last week, we welcome the news of the
days of silence beginning last night in Aleppo. A full
and immediate restoration of the truce in Aleppo and
elsewhere in Syria is key if we are to rebuild confidence,
which was shattered by the sharp escalation of violence
and hostilities in recent weeks.
With the start of the days of silence in Aleppo and
other areas, we call on the parties to the conflict to
commit to the following provisions. First, they should
immediately cease hostilities and attacks against
civilians and civilian objects. Secondly, they should
allow safe, unimpeded and unhindered humanitarian
access to the population in Aleppo. We stress that the
delivery of humanitarian assistance must be allowed
to reach all civilians regardless of their political
affiliations. Thirdly, they should build on the consensus
among the Government and opposition groups during
the most recent round of peace talks on the necessity
for a political transition in Syria. Fourthly, they should
urgently engage with the United Nations, in particular
Special Envoy De Mistura, with a view to resuming
the peace talks in Geneva and recommencing their
deliberations, based on the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015),
including on the political transition.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, and
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Stephen O’Brien, for their briefings.
We are extremely concerned about the latest
developments in Aleppo and the pattern of systematic
destruction of the city, as Under-Secretary-General
Feltman put it, and about the heavy loss of life due to the
brutal clashes between rebel groups and Government
forces in this divided Syrian city. The senseless
bloodshed must stop immediately.

16-1262917/20

S/PV.7687

The situation in the Middle East

The deal struck by the United States and Russia
to stop the bloodshed in Aleppo must deliver, and
deliver without further delay. The surge in fighting
over the past two weeks has already cost hundreds of
lives and, unfortunately, the nationwide cessation of
hostilities, which we hoped could hold, is on the verge
of collapse. Even though we all know, including the
parties to the conflict, that a military solution is not
possible, the reality on the ground is that neither side
wants to relinquish its positions and both seem intent
on undermining the efforts of the Secretary-General’s
Special Envoy De Mistura to solve the crisis through
dialogue and negotiations. That is, of course, due in
large part to the fact that the Security Council and
international and regional stakeholders remain divided
and continue backing the opposing sides in this sinister,
devastating war.
On previous occasions in which we have exchanged
views with Special Envoy De Mistura, there was still
some hope that the Geneva process, which brought
together so many stakeholders and established a series
of deadlines for transition and constitutional reform,
could be successful. We genuinely believed that the
cessation of hostilities would create space for dialogue
and peace. However, the current reality on the ground
makes it clear that the parties concerned are not
interested in dialogue, but rather in playing strategic
games. The situation is further complicated by the
presence of various terrorist groups in civilian areas
and by the fact that those groups are not part of any
negotiating process or ceasefire agreements.
Even though the fight against terrorists is a top
priority, concerted efforts must be pursued, in particular
by the International Syria Support Group ceasefire task
force, by urging the parties committed to the Geneva
process to put an end to military offensives — offensives
that do not specifically target terrorist groups. Also,
considering that the humanitarian situation is getting
worse every day, we strongly urge all parties to respect
the cessation of hostilities proposal, act accordingly
and immediately allow for the delivery of humanitarian
aid and medical evacuations.
It is unfortunate that Security Council statements
have so little effect on the parties to the conflict.
However, we must continue making our voices heard
until reason finally prevails. Inaction on this issue will
be felt for generations. We therefore sincerely hope that
the Geneva process will not collapse and that the parties
18/20

04/05/2016

will put down their weapons and resume negotiating a
peaceful political transition.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Egypt.
I address the Security Council today not only in
my capacity as a representative of a member State of
the Security Council, but also as an Arab and as an
Egyptian citizen who is tormented by the tragedy that
the Syrian people are facing owing to an armed conflict
that has been raging on for five years.
The Syrian popular movement started in March,
2011. It was a peaceful movement that sought change.
However, many factors led to an increase in protests,
confrontations and the killing of innocent people. The
situation has deteriorated over the past five years.
External interference in Syrian affairs has increased
in an unprecedented manner. Militias, foreign terrorist
fighters and weapons have been given access to Syria
to fight on behalf of external and internal parties.
The peaceful movement soon disappeared and the
situation deteriorated into a proxy armed conflict. The
Syrian territory became a safe haven for terrorism,
sectarianism and chaos.
Following long years of Syrian suffering, the
international community has recently been able, for
the first time, through the Security Council and the
International Syria Support Group, to reach consensus
on a political solution. It is important to stress that
the international consensus has been based on certain
parallel pillars, which are as follows: first, putting
an end to the hostilities in Syria in order to achieve
a nationwide ceasefire; secondly, achieving political
transition through negotiations between the Syrian
Government and the broadest possible spectrum of
the opposition, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex); thirdly,
improving the humanitarian situation and ensuring
humanitarian access to people in need in Syria,
including in besieged areas; and, fourthly, combating
terrorism and extremism.
Despite the clarity of the elements of the international
consensus and their compliance with humanitarian and
political law, and despite the positive developments on
the ground in Syria since the beginning of the cessation
of hostilities, we have been surprised once again by the
renewed heavy fighting in Aleppo and the deaths of
many civilians and innocent people. In that regard, I
16-12629

04/05/2016

The situation in the Middle East

would like to reiterate once again that Egypt condemns
the shelling of civilians, especially the shelling of
hospitals and the harrowing scenes resulting from the
shelling. I would also like to stress the need for all
parties in Syria to respect international humanitarian
law and to ensure access to humanitarian and medical
assistance. Egypt is committed to cooperating with its
partners in the Council to ensure respect for resolution
2286 (2016), on the protection of medical personnel and
medical facilities in time of war. The Council adopted
the resolution yesterday based on a draft resolution
submitted by Egypt, Japan, New Zealand, Spain
and Uruguay.
Counter-terrorism remains one of the main pillars
to settle the Syrian crisis and to maintain international
peace and security. However, certain Powers continue to
be reluctant to take action, and that impedes a solution.
Some still believe that they are immune to the dangers
of terrorism and that they will be able to take advantage
of terrorism if they choose to neglect or support it. It
may be high time to be honest with ourselves and to
set matters straight. The Council and the members of
the International Syria Support Group have agreed on
excluding terrorist organizations from the ceasefire.
However, a noticeable reluctance in confronting this
danger and an inexplicable politicization have allowed
the Al-Nusra Front, or the Al-Qaida affiliate in Syria,
to take advantage of the cessation of hostilities to gain
more ground in the country, especially in Aleppo. The
Al-Nusra Front has been able to increase recruitment
into its ranks and to contain some of the armed factions
that have not been designated as terrorist organizations.
Those factions continue to ignore the de-escalation.
They insist on cooperating and coordinating with the
Al-Nusra Front even after two months of the start of the
cessation of hostilities and despite the pleas that they
distance themselves from those terrorist organizations.
That is unacceptable and should not go unnoticed.

S/PV.7687

because of the interest of States and groups and because
of misleading facts. Children and women have suffered.
We need to thwart the narrow interests that have
controlled the fate of the Syrian people over the past few
years. If the situation continues, it will jeopardize the
future of the people of Syria. Therefore, I would like to
reiterate that the Geneva process, mediated by Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura, according to resolution 2254
(2015), which seeks to reach a political transition in
Syria, remains the only beacon of hope for a settlement.
I call on all members of the international community to
stand behind the process and behind the Special Envoy
in good faith. I call on them to give the utmost priority
to the interests of the Syrian people, free from trying
to settle political scores and promoting other interests.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Egypt’s accession to the presidency
of the Security Council for this month.
Yesterday, in Aleppo city alone, 28 civilians were
killed, including infants, in addition to 80 persons
who were wounded following the targeting by armed
terrorist groups — or the “moderate opposition”, as
some in the Council like to call them — of the Al-Zubayr
maternity hospital and many neighbourhoods in
Aleppo. Regrettably, the number of fatalities is likely to
increase, as there are many critically wounded people.

I take this opportunity to call once again on
the International Syria Support Group, especially
the co-Chairs — the United States of America
and Russia — to put an end to that reluctance and
prevarication. The Al-Nusra Front and its allies are as
dangerous as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.
Neither the people of Syria nor the countries and the
peoples of the region will accept them as part of their
present or future.

At this point, I say to the representatives of States
that they either support or cover up terrorist acts in
Syria: Enough hypocrisy, enough politicization and
enough playing with the blood of Syrians. How can
the opposition be called moderate when it kills infants
in medical facilities and when it bombs civilians
indiscriminately on a daily basis? How can that
opposition be moderate when it rains down thousands of
indiscriminate shells on Aleppo, when it has used light
and heavy rockets, explosive shells, gas canisters and
mortars to kill more than 118 civilians, wounding more
than 206 people, including women, children and elderly
just in the past 10 days? This is the very embodiment of
terrorism. It cannot be called by any other name.

The Syrian people is the sole party to bear the
brunt of the Syrian tragedy. Syrian blood has been shed

All this escalation by armed , with the Al-Nusra
Front and allied groups at the helm, was not coincidental.

16-1262919/20

S/PV.7687

The situation in the Middle East

04/05/2016

It came in the wake of the failure by those terrorist
organizations to carry out a wide-ranging attack from
many points against Aleppo city under orders from
well-known States. The attack coincided with the
withdrawal of the so-called Al-Riyadh delegation from
the latest round of the Geneva talks. Two things should
therefore be clear to everyone.

cessation of hostilities and all the efforts made to date
to stem the bloodshed of innocent civilians and free
them from the cycle of political pressures. What the
Syrian Government has been doing in Aleppo city is
merely fulfilling its obligation to protect its citizens
from terrorism, a response to escalation, killing and
destruction by terrorist groups in the city.

First, the Syrian Government has participated in the
Geneva talks, in good faith and with full seriousness,
in order to reach a political settlement to the crisis in
Syria. For its part, the Al-Riyadh delegation came with
the prior intention to abort the talks. That was made
quite clear in its withdrawal from the latest round
of talks.

Today I would reiterate that the Syrian Government
is prepared to effectively participate in any sincere
effort aimed at reaching a political settlement that
would be decided by Syrians alone, in which they would
decide their future and make their choices through an
intra-Syrian dialogue under Syrian leadership and
without foreign intervention. Such a settlement should
ensure Syria’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity and rid from it the scourge of terrorism. In
that regard, let me stress the importance of the support
provided by some States to armed terrorist groups in
Syria. It is essential to control the borders, in particular
the borders between Turkey and Syria, where terrorists
are flowing daily in large numbers.

Secondly, the Syrian Government has abided by the
cessation of hostilities agreement based on its desire to
protect the blood of innocent Syrians, to restore security
and stability and to combat terrorism. At the same time,
the armed groups allied with the terrorists of Jabhat
Al-Nusra have violated the agreement, particularly
in Aleppo. That is a manifestation of the threats
made by the Al-Riyadh delegation, which has called
for burning Syrian cities, thereby confounding the
agreement, and for an escalation of military activities
against the Syrian Government, thereby flouting the

20/20

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4 p.m.

16-12629
