UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2476’”

MEETING:

NEW

12 SEPTEMBER

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2476)
of the agenda

....................................

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*........................

1
1

Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 5947);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent Observer for the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
{S/15948);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Canada to the United Nations addressed to-the President of the
Security Council (S/15949);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15950);
Letter dated 2 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent
Representative
of
Australia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15951)
. . . . . . ..‘..............................................

WPV.2476

1

.r

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplemebof
the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information aboutit
‘is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2476th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
Presidenr: Mr. Noel G. SINCLAIR

(Guyana).

Presenf: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2476)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda

Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15947);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent
Observer for the Republic of Korea to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15948);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Chargt
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Canada
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/15949);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15950);
Letter dated 2 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of Australia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15951)
The meeting was called to order at 4.55 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of the United States of America to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15947);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent
Observer for the Republic of Korea to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15948);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Charge d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Canada to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15949);

12 September

1983, at 3.30 p.m.

Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15950);
Letter dated 2 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of Australia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15951)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions taken
at the. previous meetings on this item [247&h to 2474th
meetings], I invite the representative of Canada and the
Observer for the Republic of Korea to take places at the
Council table. I invite the representatives of Australia,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Bulgaria, Chad, Colombia, Costa
Rica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Fiji, the
German Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of
Germany,
Guatemala, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya,
Liberia, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria, Paraguay, the Philippines, Portugal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Spain, Sweden and Thailand to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
At the invitation of the ,President, Mr. Pelletier (Canada)
and Mr. Kim (Republic of Korea) took pIaces at the Council
table: Mr. Joseph (Australia), Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh),
Miss Dever (Beigium), Mr. GarvaIov (Bulgaria), Mr. Barma
(Chad), Mr. AIbdn HoI&& (Colombia), Mr. Zumbado JimPnez (Costa Rica), Mr. Knipping Victoria (Dominican
Republic), Mr. Albornoz (Ecuador), Mr. KhaIiI (Egypt), Mr.
Radrodro (Fij), Mr. Ott (German ‘Democratic Republic).
Mr. Jelonek (FederaI Republic of Germany), Mr. DeIprPe
Crespo (Guatemala), Mr. McDonagh (IreIund). Mr. La
Rocca (Italy), Mr. Kuroda (Japan), Mr. Wabuge (Kenya),
Mrs. Jones (Liberia), Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya).
Mr. FadziIIah (Malaysia), Mr. Harland (New Zealand), Mr.
Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr. CabeIIo Sarubbi (Paraguay), Mr.
Moreno Salcedo (Philippines), Mr. Medina (Portugal), Mr.
Koroma (Sierra Leone), Mr. Koh (Singapore), Mr. de Pini&
(Spain), Mr. Amneus (Sweden) and Mr. Kasemsri (Thailand)
took the pIaces reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of the Ivory Coast, the Sudan and Venezuela, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In’conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the

.

provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Essy (Ivory Coast),
Mr. Abdalla (Sudan) and Mr. Martini Urdaneta (Venezuela)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the attention
of members of the Council to the following documents:
S/15964, letter dated 7 September 1983 from the representative of Jamaica to the President of the Council;
S/15965, letter dated 8 September from the representative
of Indonesia, to the President of the Council; S/15967,
note verbale dated 8 September from the Mission of Barbados to the Secretary-General;
S/15968, ietter dated 9
September from the representative of Austria to the President of the Council; S/15969, letter dated 9 September
from the representative of Brazil to the President of the
Council; S/15972, letter dated 9 September from the representative of Mongolia to the President of the Council;
and S/15976, letter dated 8 September from the representative of India to the President of the Council.
4. Members of the Council also have before them a letter dated 9 September from the representative of Belize to
the President of the Council [S/Z.5978].
5. Members of the Council have before them, in addition, document S/15966/Rev. 1, which contains the text of
a draft resolution, sponsored by Australia;Belgium,
Canada, Colombia, Fiji, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Paraguay, the Philippines, Thailand, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.
6. Mr. MEESMA&
(Netherlands): With the able and
efficient help of the Secretariat, the sponsors of the draft
resolution have now put before the Council a modified
draft [UZ5966/Rev. Z]. The proposed changes are twofold:
one concerns a reversal of the order of two preambular
paragraphs, and .the other is an addition, also in the
preambular section of the draft resolution.
7, As members will have noted, the earlier fifth preambular ‘paragraph, beginning with the words “Recognizing the
right etc. . . . ” has now become the seventh preambular
paragraph. It was felt that the question of appropriate
compensation should follow rather than precede the mention of an explanation of facts based upon an impartial
investigation.
8. Equally in the preambular section, members will find
an additional paragraph which reads
“Recognizing the’importance of the principle of territorial integrity as well as the necessity that only internationally agreed procedures
should be used in
response to intrusions into the airspace of a State.”
9. The sponsors of the draft resolution would wish to
avoid the impression that they might have any difficulty

with these ideas. Indeed, they do attach importance to
these notions and that is why they have thought it would
be appropriate to include them in the draft.
10. I take it that members of the’council will find these
two changes useful and that they will be able to join the
Council members whose countries’ names appear on the
draft resolution to vote in favour of it. Surely the Council
would not wish to disappoint the hopes placed in it by the
peoples of the world. We feel, therefore, that it should
state clearly that it deplores the incident, at the same time
appealing to all States to see to it that a tragedy of this
nature will not happen again.
11. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Portugal. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
12. Mr. MEDINA
(Portugal)
(interpretation from
French): First of all I should like to say how gratified we
are to see you, Sir, occupying the presidential place in the
Council, whose debates you have been directing with both
skill and effectiveness. May I also, through you, thank the
other members of the Council for having allowed my delegation to speak at this meeting.
13. The Portugese people was shocked and outraged to
learn of the circumstances in which a plane which had
been clearly identified as a Korean civil air liner was shot
down on 31 August. It was a tragic incident which, having
caused the death of 269 people, is therefore among the
most serious in the history of civil aviation.
14. This was a catastrophe brought about by a deliberate attack perpetrated against all accepted rules concerning civil aviation and those applying in the case of a
regularly scheduled commercial flight veering off course.
Numerous precedents exist of diplomatic protests or interception carried out by fighter planes, but there has been
no example of such a brutal contravention of the provisions of the Chicago Convention on International Civil
Aviation of 7 December 1944’ and its annexes as well as
the provisions adopted by the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO).
If these norms are not
respected, there will be created a state of anarchy with
tragic consequences for the orderly and secure use of that
airspace intended for travel and for the security of civilian
aircraft, which is an absolute prerequisite for free and
peaceful coexistence among all States.
15. Portugal therefore joins with other members of the
international community in requesting complete explanations on the part of the Soviet authorities of an incident of
immense international import whose tragic human dimensions they continue to disregard, thus aggravating the suspicions already .aroused by this attack and flying in the
face of all indisputable moral and legal considerations.
16. No argument relating to the security of States can be
invoked as a pretext for the use of force in conditions
which jeopardize the recognized principles of&s cogens
and accepted norms of the international community.

These are principles and rules which the Soviet Government would indeed be the first to invoke were one of its
planes to be subjected to a similar act of aggression. It is
therefore obvious to world public opinion that the Soviet
Union should fully shoulder its responsibility for this incident, grant permission for an inquiry to be carried out on
the spot and give all information that might contribute to
shedding light on this deplorable affair, punish those
responsible and take all measures likely to prevent the
recurrence of such incidents.

far I have heard no motive nor reason which may have
any validity, and, of course, we add our voice to all
those who have condemned this action, which, I
repeat, is totally inexplicable and unjustifiable.”
26. Therefore, my country deems it essential to conduct
an impartial and objective investigation to settle with precision all the unanswered questions which surround this
act. States must realize, when there is a violation of their
airspace, that the principles which govern the norms of
protection and safety of international civil aviation must
be respected and guaranteed. In this connection, as a
member of ICAO, and in conformity with its norms and
procedures, we lend our full support to the proposal that
it conduct the necessary investigations in order to obtain
objective information on this most regrettable situation.

17. Finally, I take this occasion to repeat the condolences and sympathy for the victims of this horrifying incident which the Portuguese Government had previously
directed to the Government and people of Korea.
18. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Venezuela. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

27. My Government deplores and condemns acts such
as this. Venezuela is a country devoted to human rights
and to compliance with international law. We are committed to the maintenance of international peace and believe
that all procedures must be exhausted, and all requirements met, to ensure that events such as this do not recur.

19. Mr. MARTINI
URDANETA
(Venezuela) (interpreration from Spanish): First of all, Sir, I should like to take
this opportunity to congratulate you on your assumption
of duties as President for this month. We are convinced
that with your skills and experience the deliberations
which are being conducted today in this Council will have
a successful outcome.

28. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Ivory Coast. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

20. I should like also to express our gratitude to your
predecessor, Mr. de La Barre de Nanteuil, the representative of France, who, in a most able manner, guided the
deliberations of the Council during the month of August.

29. Mr. ESSY (Ivory
Coast) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, I thank you, as well as the
members of the Council, for having been good enough to
give my delegation an opportunity to take part in this
debate on the sad event which rightly prompted this series
of meetings.

21. My delegation would like, through you, Sir, to
thank the members of the Council for the opportunity
given to us to participate in the discussion of this very
important item.
.:

30. Knowing you personally, Sir, and your intellectual
and diplomatic talents, we are assured that despite all the
difficulties inherent in a debate involving the present protagonists, the Council will be able to take a decision in
keeping with the expectations of the international community, in the face of this human tragedy which shocks all
of us, potential victims that we may be, if an act such as
this were to take place in a different setting.

22. On 31 August last, the peoples of the world were
shocked by the tragic event of the destruction of a cornmercial plane of the Republic of Korea, flight 007, carrymg
269 persons, passenger and crew, flying to Seoul. As we all
know, it never reached its destination.
23. There are 269 passengers on board that flight-269
defenceless men, women and children, unaware of the sad
lot awaiting them, not realizing that they would fall victim
to an inhuman, inexplicable act which would take their
lives on that fateful day of 31 August.

31. In learning of the tragic outcome of the Korean airlines flight, the President of the Republic of the Ivory
Coast addressed to the President of the Republic of Korea
the following message which, with your permission, Mr.
President, I should like to read:

24. The Government
of Venezuela express its profound sorrow at the loss of so many human lives and
conveys its condolences to the families of the victims, the
Governments of the Republic of Korea and the Governments whose nationals died in this tragic incident.
25. It is appropriate to express what was said by our
President, Luis Herrera Campins:

“Profoundly shocked at the destruction by a Soviet
tighter of a Korean Air Lines aircraft, bringing about
the death of 269 people, the Government and people of
the Ivory Coast have asked me to convey through you
our most heartfelt condolences and sympathy to the
families of the victims.

“It is truly inexplicable that at this stage in history
there should occur a tragedy which would so profoundly shock the peace-loving conscience of the
world, particularly of so many people who travel. So

“Fully sharing the pain and sorrow of the Korean
people, we bow our heads to the victims of this
unprecedented act of aggression against a defenceless
civil aircraft.‘*
3

32. All of us in this chamber followed with emotion the
tapes of the events which preceded the disappearance of
the South Korean aircraft. The clipped, emotionless, cruel
professionalism of the pilot announcing that the missile
had been launched and that the target had been hit
seemed more like a science-fiction film where robots without heart or soul were massacring their victims after having methodically tracked them down. Unfortunately, this
was not a film but reality: 269 people were murdered
because they had unintentionally intruded into forbidden
airspace.

New York to Seoul. That tragedv has shocked the international community as a whoL and caused deep grief and
indignation. On behalf of the Government and people of
my country, I should like to express our sincere condolences and sympathies to the families and countries of the
victims.
40. The shooting down of the Korean civil air liner by
the Soviet Union and the great loss of life resulting therefrom are totally deplored and condemned by the Government and people of the Democratic Republic of the Sudan.
All the reasons given by the Soviet Union for its misdeed
can in no way justify the killing of 269 passengers, whose
loss has shocked the international conscience.

33. The establishment of the facts and circumstances of
the events, as presented by the Soviet Union, still leave us
puzzled. First, it was completely silent over the announcement of the disappearance of the aircraft. Then, having
determined that an “unidentified” aircraft had penetrated
Soviet airspace and been tracked by aircraft of its air
defence, it finally acknowledged that those tighter planes
had executed the order to terminate the flight, without
knowing, according to TASS, that it was a civil aircraft.

41. We thought that a super-Power so advanced in the
field of outer space, as is the Soviet Union, would be able
to detect and identify any aeroplane or object flying in its
airspace. Instead of what has happened, the Soviet authorities should have rendered aid and support to the aircraft,
in accordance with the rules of civil aviation. It is regrettable that all the facts of the circumstances surrounding that
incident are not yet before the Council and the intemational community. The Soviet Union should have made
known all the facts and information at its disposal. We
still hope that it will respond to the repeated calls made in
the Council to co-operate with the international community and unveil the facts to enable the Council and competent international organ&&ions
to take all technical,
administrative
and security measures for the improvement of the rules of international civil aviation to prevent
a recurrence of such incidents in the future.

34. A host of questions may indeed be asked about the
circumstances
surrounding
this tragedy, and some of
them, quite appropriately, were raised by the representative of Singapore in his statement before the Council
[2473rd meeting]. For our part, we are convinced that no
provision of public international law, no specific rules
governing international civil aviation, nor any practice on
this subject could have justified this inherently ignoble
act.
35. We want peace and aspire to achieve it. Without it
no development is possible. We shall spare no sacrifice to
contribute to achieving peace between those who can
truly guarantee it. Peace, as President HouphouEt Boigny
said, is not just a word: it is an attitude. We therefore
expect States, particularly when they are powerful, to display an attitude which will truly attest to their wish for
peace, which has so often been stated in their international relations.
.*,

42. My delegation associates itself with the delegations
of other States which have expressed their concern at the
violation of’ the safety of civil aviation caused by the
shooting down of the Korean air liner. Civil aviation has
become one of the most important means of communication and rapprochement among nations and peoples in
our world. Therefore, we believe it necessary to conduct
immediately a thorough investigation of all the circumstances of this human tragedy and to take all appropriate
measures to guarantee the safety of international civil aviation and thereby build confidence among the members
of the international community. We demand that the
Soviet Union pay compensation to the families of the
victims.

36. The’PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Sudan. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
37. Mr. ABDALLA
(Sudan) (interpretationfrom Arabic):
I should like at the outset to convey our heartfelt congratulations to you, Sir, and to the Government and people of
your friendly country on your assumption of the presidency for this month. Your diplomatic expertise and rich
experience will undoubtedly be conducive to the success
of the Council’s business; they will also enable you to
guide its deliberations ably and wisely.

43. Once again, we should like to express to the Government and people of the Republic of Korea and the families of the victims our sincere condolences and sympathies
on this painful ‘incident.
‘.
,’
44. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Canada, on whom I now call.

38. I should like also to convey our thanks and gratitude
to your predecessor the representative of France, whose
skill in conducting the Council’s business last month
deserves our admiration and appreciation.

45. Mr. PELLETIER
(Canada): On behalf of the
Government of ‘Canada, I am grateful to the Council for
this further opportunity to participate in this emergency
debate. It has been exactly 10 days since I last addressed
the Council on behalf of my Government [247&h meeting] to express the horror and outrage felt in Canada and

39. The Government and people of my country learned
with great grief the shocking news of the destruction of a
Korean Air Lines civil aircraft on its regular flight from
4

to propose a series of actions for Council consideration in
dealing with the deliberate destruction of a Korean 747 air
liner.

50. To impress upon the Soviet authorities the gravity
and determination~with
which we view this matter, the
Canadian Government announced its decision to suspend, for a period of 60 days, the rights of Aeroflot to the
use of Montreal’s Mirabel airport for its scheduled and
charter flights. Canada has also suspended further consideration of arrangements for Soviet use of Gander airport.
We hope these actions, together with those of other
nations, will prompt a review by the Soviet authorities of
the merits of continuing to evade their responsibility for
the deaths of Canadians and of so many other innocent
passengers. Canada’s actions reflect the views not only of
the Canadian Government but of Canadians everywhere.
The Canadian public has been outraged by this barbarous
act. In the face of continuing Soviet prevarication, the
growing groundswell of Canadian opinion demands a full
and complete accounting. We welcome actions by other
countries similar to those taken by Canada in an effort to
hasten that day of accounting.

46. In a long-delayed statement, the Soviet Government
finally acknowledged that its fighter aircraft did indeed
“stop” with missiles that defenceless civilian aircraft . The
grudging condolences expressed to the families of the
bereaved by the Soviet Government are far from adequate. Where is any sense or expression of remorse?
When will the Government of the Soviet Union accept
responsibility for the consequences of its shocking acts?
Vain attempts to evade responsibility by blaming others,
inadequate and implausible explanations, and the absence
of any offer of help or assistance to the victims’ families
all mark Soviet retreat into paranoia.
47. In Madrid, on 7 September, Soviet Minister for Foreign Affairs Gromyko stated: “The borders of the Soviet
Union are sacred.” We are not here to quarrel about the
inviolability of Soviet frontiers, but we cannot and will
not accept that the lives of innocent civilians should be so
viciously subordinated to that assertion of Soviet sovereignty. We find the Soviet 1982 law most disturbing. It
violates internationally
agreed rules for interception.
Could this tragedy be repeated should another civilian air
liner innocently stray into Soviet airspace? The Soviet
Union has left no doubt about its intentions. The international community must make every effort to avoid such a
tragic repetition. Borders may or may not ,be sacred, but
the lives of innocent civilians are unquestionably so. May
I remind the Soviet Government of the following comments of President Podgorny on the fiftieth anniversary of
Soviet civil aviation in 1973:

5 1. The Canadian Government has formally reserved all
its rights in international law to compensation from the
Soviet Union for the loss of Canadian lives. On 8 September 1983, Canada officially notified the Soviet Union of
this fact, and is now proceeding to prepare its claim for
presentation to the Soviet authorities. All justifications
provided thus far by the Soviet Union do not alter the fact
that it acted illegally in shooting down the civil air liner.
That wrongful act in itself gives rise under international
law to a responsibility on the part of the Soviet Union to
provide appropriate compensation.
52. Furthermore,
Canada believes that the Soviet
Government should also assist the bereaved families in a
humanitarian fashion-for
example, in a coordinated
international search for remains of the deceased, in the
organization of memorial services for them, and in providing whatever information and documentation can be of
comfort and utility to the famrhes of the victims.

“It is well said that civil aviation needs a clear sky.
Our attitude in .this regard is fundamental
and
unswerving. We set human life and well-being above
everything else.”
Why, I ask, has the Government
repudiated those noble concepts?

of .the Soviet Union

53. We count on members of the Security Council to
deal effectively with this issue, which touches on agreed
principles, procedures, and rules of civil aviation that
affect the safety of us all. We would note that failure to do
so could prove to be a backward step, particularly at this
time, when members of the Council have been informally
exploring ways to improve its effectiveness, a process that
Canada strongly endorses.

48. Canada, an aggrieved party in these events, still has
not received an official response from the Soviet Government to our demand for an explanation of the circumstances surrounding
the tragic death of the Canadians on
board.
49. The Government of Canada maintains its position
that the Soviet Union must fully explain its part in this
disaster. We have provided ample time and opportunity
for it to do-so. On 6 September,, the Canadian Deputy
Prime Minister and Secretary of State for External
Affairs, Mr. Allan J. MacEachen, again,called for a full
and impartial international investigation. I repeat that call
here today. Allegations about weather conditions, the
lights of the Korean Air Lines 747, and the actions of the
Soviet tighter aircraft, can be answered only by such an
international investigation. Then the .international community will be in a position to review and to consider.
improvements to the rules, regulations and practices of
international civil aviation to prevent any recurrence.

[The speaker continued in French.]
L
54. It is not enough to express here our anger and sorrow; the international community must move forward.
The only fitting monument that we can construct to the
memory of these innocent victims is one of improved
international civil aviation safety procedures that will
effectively prevent a repetition of this tragedy. To this
end, Canada supports the convening of a special session
of the Council of ICAO. There is no doubt that the establishment of more effective civil aviation safety procedures,
as well as a better definition of the relationship between
those procedures and military procedures, will benefit
everyone. We therefore expect positive, constructive
5

results from the forthcoming deliberations of ICAO, and
Canada will work actively to that end.

a point 800 kilometres to the north-east of the town of
Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy,
it had already deviated from
its route about 500 kilometres. All that time the flight was
within range of the radar services of American ground
personnel and of United States anti-aircraft forces. In
those conditions “to lose” the plane and not to be aware of
such a considerable deviation from its normal, established
course is impossible; it is simply ruled out. One wonders
why they did nothing to correct this if in fact it was a
regularly scheduled plane. So far no reply on this score has
been received from the United States.

55. The draft resolution submitted to the Council
[S/15966/Z?ev. I] recognizes the plight of the bereaved, the
right to compensation and the need for a full explanation
of the incident. It reaffirms the relevant principles of international law. It deplores the tragedy and calls on the international community to strengthen the safety of international civil aviation through ICAO.
It invites the
Secretary-General to conduct a full investigation, with the
full co-operation of all States, which of course must
include the Soviet Union. The thrust and content of the
draft resolution therefore reflect the concerns and objectives of the Canadian Government. Having carefully followed the debate, we believe that the draft resolution
faithfully reflects the comments and concerns of almost
all the countries that have spoken here. This text is not
mere rhetoric; we believe that it is well-balanced and constructive, as we would wish it to be.

62. It is known that the international route in question is
equipped with modern radio and technological means to
serve the flights. Approximately
12,000 planes travel it
every year. Those responsible for control of flights on that
international route are, in the case of the part of the route
from Alaska to Kamchatka, the ground services of the
United States, and then those of Japan. Special control
points have been established along the route: Nebi, Neevi,
Nippi and others, and at each of these the regularly scheduled planes have to determine their position and report
to the ground, and the ground services track their passage
through those points very closely. Now, one wonders
why, in the absence of such reports on the transit of the
South Korean plane through those specific control points
and particularly since there appeared to be no regularly
scheduled piane on that route, the American services in
that case did not immediately sound the alarm. Up to now
there has been no reply to that question either.

56. My Government believes that the draft resolution
merits the support of all members of the Council and the
whole international community.
57. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): In its statement
of 6 September, the Soviet Government evaluated the incident which occurred with the South Korean air liner on
the night of 1 September. It expressed its regret at the fact
that innocent lives had been lost, and also expressed sympathy with the friends and relatives. At the same time, the
Soviet Government
vigorously condemned this gross
provocation against the sovereignty of the Soviet Union
and emphasized that responsibility for it lay with ruling
circles in the United States.

63. It is particularly noteworthy that the South Korean
plane came within range of the Soviet radar stations precisely where American intelligence planes are regularly on
duty, in particular the RC-135s. This time the RC-135
intelligence plane in that area was discovered at 2.45 a.m.
local time-Kamchatka
time-on
1 September. It was
carrying out some rather peculiar manoeuvres. At 4.51
a.m. Kamchatka time, in the same area and at the same
altitude-that
is, 8,000 metres-a
second plane was
detected whose radar characteristics were similar to the
RC-135 plane. The planes drew together until their images
on the radar screen became completely merged and for
some time, approximately
10 minutes, they travelled
alongside each other. Then one of them, as had frequently
been observed before, set out for Alaska and the other
one proceeded to travel to Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy.
Naturally, at the Soviet anti-air defence command points
the conclusion was drawn that an intelligence plane was
drawing close to Soviet airspace.

58. In view of the importance of what has occurred, the
Soviet Union set up a governmental commission in order
carefully to investigate the circumstances surrounding the
incident. As a result of the investigation which has been
carried out, it has been established that the invasion of the
South Korean civilian plane into Soviet airspace was a
deliberate and carefully pre-planned intelligence operation, directed from the territory of the United States and
from Japan. The civilian plane was deliberately chosen
without even considering-perhaps
very carefully considering-the
possibility of victims.
59. The factual side of events established by the commission was reported on by the Chief of Staff of the Armed
Forces of the Soviet Union, Marshall Ogarkov, at a press
conference held on 9 September in Moscow. The facts
appear as follows:

64. Here I think it would be appropriate to draw attention to the material which has been published in the
American press regarding the activities of American
intelligence planes. For example, on 7 September, Z7ze
Washington Post, reported that American Air Force sources with firsthand
knowledge
of intelligence flights
acknowledged outright that part of the job of these planes
was to determine how Soviet radar installations reacted to
the invasion of alien planes, how many fighters they
mobilized and from what specific bases in order to intercept them. This intelligence data could not be gained
through artificial satellites.

60. The flight of the South Korean plane can be divided
into three stages.
61. The first stage was the start of the flight. Shortly
after takeoff. from an interim stop at the airport of
Anchorage in Alaska, the plane proceeded to follow a
route not established under international rules, but set out
to Kamchatka. When it was discovered by Soviet radar at
6

65. The second stage-the actions over Kamchatka. At
5.30, the intruder approached Kamchatka. It proceeded
directly to the most important base belonging to the
Soviet nuclear strategic forces. It did not reply to any
request made by Soviet ground services or the air defence
planes. At the same time, radio monitoring stations
noticed a number of very short co-ordinated signals which
are normally used for the transmission of intelligence
information.

and did not in fact reply to any signals sent to it. Furthermore, according to an inquiry carried out by the Canadian paper Citizen, which seems to be published in
Ottawa, dozens of people who have flown in South
Korean planes on the Montreal-Anchorage-Seoul
route
have stated that when they draw near Soviet airspace all
lights on those planes, including the cabin lights and the
navigational lights, are normally extinguished and the passengers are advised to lower the plastic window-shades
and turn out their own personal lights so that absolutely
no light is seen from outside. Do we have to count all
these bits of testimony by “Moscow agents” or do we
have to take a rather careful look at what is now being
presented in the West as the true picture of events?

66. During that time, the anti-aircraft
forces were
simply devoting their efforts to getting in touch with the
plane by using the usual call sign, which is carried out on
the established international emergency frequency, 121.5
Mhz, both from the ground and from the anti-aircraft
planes, in order to make it land at the nearest Soviet
airfield, but this was unsuccessful and the intruder continued to proceed towards the Sea of Okhotsk.

72. We are astonished also at the fact that UP to now no
publicity has been given to the record of conversations
between the South Korean pilot and American and Japanese navigational services. It is known that radio communication with this aircraft was maintained throughout
the flight. What, then, was it transmitting to those services
while it was in Soviet airspace? What instructions did it
receive from American and Japanese ground personnel?
The data made public by the Japanese authorities constitute a,mere extract from-the
gist of-the principal conversations between the ground services and the pilots on
board the plane. They are not even a complete recording.
The fact that these recordings have not yet been made
public can indicate either that they contain material which
is unpalatable in certain quarters or that they are being
doctored to be brought into line with Washington’s version of the events.

67. The third stage-actions
near Sakhalin. The actions
of the intruder became provocative. As we have heard, it
did not react at all to the warning signals transmitted by
the Soviet interceptors and, furthermore,
it started to
manoeuvre towards an area and at a height and speed
which was clearly different from those of the pursuing
planes. It is extremely significant that at 6.02 Sakhalin
time the intruder plane suddenly changed course and proceeded to fly round the positions of our anti-aircraftmissile bases and to pass over extremely important
military installations in the southern part of Sakhalin.
There can be no doubt remaining that this was indeed an
intelligence plane.
68. When the intruder reached the south-west part of
Sakhalin, a final attempt was made to induce the intruder
to land at an airfield and, for that purpose, at 6.20 Sakhalin time, four bursts of warning shells were tired, with
tracers, to a total of 120 rounds. Since thereafter the
intruder still failed to obey the demands and tried to
escape and generally to move towards Vladivostok, the
interceptors were ordered to abort the flight, using missiles, and that in fact was done.

73. As to the television show produced in the Council by
the United States delegation, it must be stated quite
bluntly that that use of materials whose authenticity is
more than dubious was simply an attempt to mislead the
credulous. It is a fact that until yesterday American representatives, foaming at the mouth, were attempting to
prove that there was no indication that the Soviet aircraft
had indeed fired any warning tracer shots. Now the United States Administration
has acknowledged
that the
Soviet pilot did in fact tire cannon bursts. How do we
know that further corrections of this kind will not appear
in due course-if,
that is, the American authorities really
want to make them public?

69. That, then, is the factual side of the events surrounding the incident in connection with the South Korean
plane.
70. The representatives of the United States are now
doing all they can in an attempt to prove that the “Soviet
Union, from the very outset, had intended deliberately to
destroy a civilian air liner”. But that is ridiculous. If, in
fact, that had been our purpose, it could have been
achieved many times over and could have been carried
out, in fact, over Kamchatka, with the help of antiaircraft missiles launched from the ground, without even
bothering to scramble tighter planes.

74. Furthermore, even leaving aside the question of the
authenticity of the tapes, there are a number of very
obvious discrepancies between the Russian text and the
English-or
rather, American-translation.
For example,
in Russian the pilot says that the aircraft he is pursuing “is
not responding to the request”. The translation reads that
it has not responded to the “IFF”-the
friend-or-foe
query, which is normally used only by military aircraft.
Needless to say, that sort of addition was by no means
fortuitous, for on the basis of it the American President
and, in his wake, the representative of the United States
here in the Security Council drew extremely far-reaching
and categorical conclusions about the actions of the
Soviet pilot and about the type of equipment aboard
Soviet aircraft.

71. The Soviet pilots flying towards the intruder could
not know that this was a civilian plane. Events over Kamchatka and Sakhalin were going on at the dead of night,
in very cloudy conditions and at the very highest level at
which the intruder was flying. In violation of international rules, it was flying without any navigational lights
7

75. Thus, the propaganda spectacle which was staged in
the Council was a further attempt by the American
Administration
to set the discussion on an incorrect
course and to avoid responding to some central issues.

81. As members of the Council know, the Soviet Union
has recently been taking a number of major foreign policy
measures aimed at clearing the rather thick international
atmosphere, and at improving conditions for holding
talks which are vital to all peoples, talks relating to the
reduction of nuclear arms: of medium-range weapons in
Europe and of strategic weapons. Those measures are
intended to broaden dialogue and to deepen mutual
understanding between Governments, parliaments, public
organizations, and leading citizens in many countries of
the East and of the West, to renew detente and to normalize peaceful and mutually beneficial co-operation. What
would be the point of the Soviet Union thwarting all these
peaceful efforts by taking the actions which the American
Administration,
beginning with President Reagan, is
attempting to impute to it?

76. Those issues are as follows: Why did the South
Korean aircraft, which took off from the United States,
deviate very soon from its international route by approximately 500 kilometres-and
not to the left, towards the
open sea, but to the right, towards the territory of the
Soviet Union? Why did this aeroplane continue for such a
long time to violate the airspace of the Soviet Union?
Why did the route of this plane over Soviet territory coincide precisely with important military facilities? Why did
the plane fly in violation of normal navigational rules and
not react in any way to the attempts by Soviet ground and
airborne anti-aircraft
forces to make contact with its
crew? Why did the American aviation services which were
monitoring and were responsible for this flight not raise
the alarm when the plane left its normal air corridor and
proceeded to fly over the territory of the Soviet Union?
Why was the alarm not raised by the Japanese ground
services when the plane did not appear at the proper time
and the proper place in the area of their responsibility?
Why did neither American nor Japanese authorities contact the Soviet side until it was too late?

82. The contrary is true: the criminal provocation by the
South Korean aircraft must be seen as part and parcel of
the foreign policy pursued by Washington. That policy is
aimed at increasing international tension and at justifying
its sabre-rattling.
It clearly demonstrates Washington’s
“crusade” against communism aimed at sowing hostility
and enmity among peoples, in the spirit of “the cold war”.
An integral part of this is the stepped-up activity of the
United States Central Intelligence Agency under the present Administration. That activity has developed into systematic, unceremonious
violations of the norms of
international law, and a shameless game played with
human life, aimed at creating conflict situations.

77. Instead of trying to find answers to these and many
other questions and to find those responsible for the
“bizarre events” which led to these tragic consequences,
the American Administration
proceeded immediately to
utter slanderous insinuations against the Soviet Union in
an attempt to smear it before the international
community.

83. The noisy anti-Soviet campaign being pursued by
the Amtrican Administration around the incident involving the South Korean aircraft shows that Washington’s
actions are motivated by no means by any humanitarian
feelings or concern about the security of civil aviation, but
rather by completely different factors. Those actions are
an indication of the desire of United States ruling circles
to use this whole tragic event to exacerbate an already
dangerous international situation, to encourage the arms
race and to justify their own militaristic policies and military preparations.

78. It should be noted in this connection that this is not
the first time that the officials in Washington have played
the innocent, denying or simply remaining silent about
things they do not wish to reveal. Many of those present
in this chamber will remember the events connected with
the U-2 spy plane and the American intelligence ship
Pueblo. On those occasions, too, the American authorities-at
the very highest levels, indeed-actually
lied in
their attempts to deny that those were espionage missions,
acknowledging that fact only when the facts forced them
to the wall.

84. In a situation marked by heightened tension, antiSoviet hysteria on the part of the leaders of the United
States is being used precisely in order to evade the crucial
international problems that affect the fate of peoples.
Obviously, the timing of this provocation was no accident: the act occurred at the very time a decision was
being taken on whether to end the arms race, whether the
threat of nuclear war could be removed or whether that
threat was to grow apace. The policy pursued by the
American Administration in recent days indicates that the
United States intends to continue to try and heighten its
confrontation
with the Soviet Union.

79. Quite recently, and by no means willingly, it was
revealed that the American intelligence services had used
and helped the Nazi criminal Klaus Barbie, who was
responsible for the murder of many thousands of innocent people. But when the Soviet Union and many other
countries raise-as they have done for many years nowthe whole question of the American authorities giving
shelter to that Nazi criminal and dozens of others, their
accusations are either ignored or rejected by the United
States Government.

85. All attempts by Washington officials to try and
cover themselves by spouting about “moral values”,
“humanitarianism”
and the “value of human life” are
unable to conceal the obvious truth. These words are used
to camouflage a large-scale intelligence operation on the
part of the United States with the deliberate use of a

80. The incident involving the South Korean aircraft
cannot be considered in isolation from a particular political situation which has arisen in the world.
8

civilian aircraft which from the very outset involved mortal danger for its passengers. Since this civilian plane
served as a shield for the unsavoury and inhuman operations that have been carried out, the United States is now
cynically endeavouring to drag through the Council a
decision which would simply distract attention from those
who are really responsible for the tragedy that has
occurred.

preserve the security of civil aircraft: specific measures
making it mandatory for military personnel to alert civilian authorities when realizing that a civil aircraft is in a
dangerous situation; the speedy installation of compatible
civil and military radio equipment, particularly for aircraft flying in sensitive areas; the introduction of greater
precautions in interception procedures; and, finally, an
amendment to the Chicago Convention containing a commitment to abstain from the use of force against civilian
aircraft within the framework of the Charter of the United
Nations.

86. If there is anv auestion about nossible action bv the
Security Council in connection with-this incident with the
South Korean plane, then once and for all there should be
a definite prohibition on the use of civilian aircraft for
intelligence purposes in deliberate violation of the airspace of other countries.

95. On this last point I should like to recall the fact that
France made a similar proposal 10 years ago at a diplomatic conference held in Rome. Although that initiative
enjoyed wide support, it did not obtain the required
majority. The air tragedy we have just experienced once
again places the international community face to face
with its responsibilities.-Those
who may once again dare
to refuse adopting such a rule will have to answer to
international public opinion.

87. In view of the foregoing, the Soviet delegation will
vote against the draft resolution now before the Council
[S/15966/Rev. I].
88. The PRESIDENT:
I understand that the Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution submitted by the delegations of Australia, Belgium, Canada,
Colombia, Fiji, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Paraguay, the Philippines, Thailand, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America [ibid’j.

96. Mr. LING Qing (China) (interpretation from Chinese): In my statement on 2 September [247&h meeting], I
expressed the Chinese delegation’s shock and regret at the
shooting down of a South Korean civilian air liner by a
Soviet fighter aircraft, causing the death of 269 passengers
and crew members, including quite a number of our compatriots from China’s Taiwan province and Hong Kong.
We wish to express our condolences on the demise of the
victims and sympathy to the bereaved families.

89. If I hear no objection, I shall put that draft resolution to the vote.
90. First, I shall call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the vote.

97. Available information from various sources indicated that the South Korean civilian aircraft strayed from
the usual course and entered the airspace of the Soviet
Union. However, it was a serious violation of the established norms ensuring safety of international civil aviation
for the Soviet Union to shoot down the South Korean
civilian air liner on the basis that it had entered Soviet
airspace.

91. Mr. LOUET (France) (interpretation from French):
In my earlier statement a week ago [247&h meering] I
expressed the feelings‘of indignation and horror of France
at the news of the destruction of a civil air liner in flight.
92. As stated by Mr. Cheysson, “no words can describe
what happened to the Korean Boeing”. In that statement
the French Minister for Foreign Affairs also stressed that
we should see to it that similar tragedies never recur. That
is why France is a sponsor of the draft resolution now
before the Council [S/15966/Rev. Z].

98. The Chinese Government is deeply concerned over
the safety of civil aviation. The Chinese delegation agrees
to the proposal of some delegations that investigations be
conducted into this incident.

93. Aside from the thorough investigation which the
Secretary-General is asked to conduct to shed full light on
the circumstances of this tragedy, the text before the
Council stresses the need to enhance the safety of international civil aviation and prevent a recurrence of such acts.
To this end, it urges all States to co-operate fully with
ICAO.

99. The Chinese delegation has listened with great attention to the statements made by various delegations. In
view of the serious dispute over certain aspects of the
incident, the ,Chinese delegation will abstain when the
draft resolution contained in document S/15966/Rev. 1 is
put to the vote.

94. As was so eloquently emphasized earlier by the Permanent Representative of Canada, it is in this context that
the necessary improvements in civil aviation law must be
established. That is why France supported the request for
an urgent meeting of this body. Over and above the
inquiry to be conducted in keeping with the Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation,’ France will on
that occasion make the following proposals in order to

100. Mr. SALAH (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic):
The downing of the South Korean air liner and the attendant death of 269 passengers and crew, constitute a human
tragedy. We feel deep sorrow and sadness at the loss of
innocent civilian lives. My Government has extended condolences and sympathy to the States whose nationals were
among the victims. We reiterate our heartfelt condolences
to the victims’ families and Governments.
9

.

101. The relationship between this tragic incident and
the safety of international aviation on global routes needs
no further affurnation. But what we must affirm is the
necessity of ensuring the safety of civil aviation through
the implementation of the articles of the Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation of 1944,’ including its
special annexes defining the proper procedures in various
situations. Compliance with those procedures would
ensure the safety of civil aviation which is basic and vital
for the States of the whole world for many reasons, the
most important being the preservation of the lives and
safety of civilian passengers and the maintenance of channels of communication between the peoples and Governments of the world. The safety of civil aviation constitutes
a major factor in enhancing this interrelationship and the
ensuing understanding and openness among peoples.
Hence, international interest and the interests of world
peace necessitate due compliance with rules and regulations governing civil aviation and the prevention of interference incompatible with those rules and regulations. We
understand the interrelationship between sovereignty and
security situations in certain violations and the principle
of the safety of unimpeded civil aviation.

Furthermore,
they have compromised the effectiveness
and prestige of the Council, contributed to the continuation of tension and turbulence in international relations
and made the mission of maintaining a stable and secure
world an even more difficult task.
105. Having said all that. I must declare that we are not
enthusiastic about the form which this tragic incident has
assumed. We have witnessed and we do not approve of
the consequences of the intemationalization
of this incident, which has become an element of the cold war
between East and West.
106. Much as we sincerely sympathize with the Republic
of Korea and with the families of the victims, we do not
subscribe to, nor are we part of, the approach to this
painful human incident in the context of the rivalry
between the super-Powers. Such an orientation, regardless of its motives, which may seem legitimate, does not in
our view serve the basic purpose which we are seeking
through these deliberations, namely, to ensure a greater
commitment to international safeguards concerning the
safety of civil aviation. It is difficult for anyone here to
deny the fact that mutual distrust and suspicion between
the super-Powers cannot be separated from the circumstances which led to this painful incident. Therefore we
would hope that our deliberations here have not doubled
that distrust and suspicion between the super-Powers.

102. Any incident involving a civil air liner that might
result in its loss and the loss of the lives of its innocent
passengers is horrifying and should not be allowed to
occur in the first place. Hence we feel that it is incumbent
upon us, through joint international action, to avoid anything that might lead to the future recurrence of such an
incident. To achieve this objective we feel that the provision of full information pertinent to such incidents is a
matter of principle and necessity.

107. Finally, there are several paragraphs in draft resolution S/15966/Rev.l, of 12 September 1983, which we find
difficult to support. While some of these paragraphs include
prejudgements and are hence incompatible with the call for
a full investigation, as contained in paragraph 6, some of
them contain provisions beyond the scope of the issue
before us. While we may to a certain degree accept the
politicization of this incident, we do not agree with the
content of paragraph 2 in particular. In addition to the fact
that we still lack complete information about the circumstances leading to the downing of the plane and the loss of
the lives of 269 civilian passengers whose death saddens us,
that paragraph makes an absolute judgement on what has
happened. This is done in the absence of full knowledge of
all the circumstances surrounding the incident.

103. In this regard, we note that information pertinent
to this catastrophe under review is still not available.
Hence we support the proposal that further information
be sought, especially concerning the technical role of’
ICAO, with a view to joint action to ensure that such
incidents will not recur in future.
104. Proceeding from these human and technical considerations, I can state that Jordan endorses any action that
will objectively and honestly ensure these considerations.
We also welcome any call to observe the principles of
international law in all circumstances and we expect all
others to follow .suit, especially those bearing a special
responsibility for the safeguarding of international peace
and security. Despite our support for everything that
encourages compliance with the principles of international law and the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, we cannot but feel perplexed at such a selective
approach in this area. I need not go far in reminding
members of the Council of flagrant examples of such
behaviour. The integral link between all the elements of
the maintenance of international peace and security
impels us constantly to recall all practices incompatible
with the search for stability in international peace and
security. We should have liked the principles of international law to be observed by everyone and on all occasions, since selectivity and unilateralism in applying those
principles have deprived such a call of a lot of credibility,
as they affect the credibility of those invoking them.

108. This paragraph is not confined to political and legal
condemnation but includes a moral condemnation of what
has happened. Hence it is difficult, if not impossible, to
identify the moral responsibility, especially in the light of
the discrepancy among the major accounts of this incident.
It also betrays ideological rivalry between East and West,
and the way this reflects on the foreign policy of the two
Powers. Since this is incompatible with the desire for
peaceful coexistence, and is not in full accord with the
provisions of the Charter, especially those provisions that
call for nonintervention
in internal affairs, respect for the
sovereignty of States, the right of self-determination, and
especially the right of peoples to choose their political systems, we find it difficult to accept.
109. The position of Jordan on the draft resolution
before us proceeds from our acceptance of the two sides,
its humanitarian and technical aspects only.
’
10

ing meeting of ICAO, and on this understanding we will
vote in favour of the draft resolution, as amended
[S/15966/Rev. Z].

110. Finally, Sir, while expressing to you our heartfelt
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of September, I need
not afftrm that your wisdom, capability and diplomatic
skills, well known to all of us, will assist you in leading our
work this month to success.

116. The PRESIDENT:
I should now like to make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of
GUYANA.

111. I should also like. to seize this opportunity
to
express to your predecessor, Mr. de La Barre de Nanteuil,
the representative of France and President of the Council
for the month of August, our deep thanks, appreciation
and admiration for his efforts in conducting the business
of the Council with his well-known
expertise, wisdom and
capability.

117. It was with deep distress and sorrow that Guyana
learned on 1 September of the tragedy which befell 269
persons, passengers on board Korean Air Lines flight 007,
travelling from New York to Seoul. The Government of
Guyana profoundly regrets this incident which led to the
loss of so many lives and brought grief to the bereaved
relatives and friends. To them we express our sincere
condolences.

112. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): Since this is the first time I
am speaking in this debate, permit me briefly to compliment you most warmly, Sir, both officially and personally, on your election to the presidency of the Council for
this month, and also on the admirable way in which you
have so far conducted the proceedings of the Council on
matters of the greatest import to world peace and security. I would convey the same sentiments to your
predecessor.

118. The Guyanese people fully understand the grief felt,
for we recall that nearly seven years ago, on 6 October
1976, a Cuban passenger plane was deliberately and callously destroyed by a bomb placed on board the aircraft in
full flight by terrorists trained and succoured in countries
of this region. Although the culprits have been apprehended, they have not yet been brought to justice. On that
plane were 73 persons, among them 11 sons and daughters
of Guyana on the threshold of adult life, who had been
specifically selected to pursue in Cuba courses of advanced
study. We wish, therefore, to reiterate our heartfelt sympathy and our condolences to the relatives of the victims.

113. On the particular issue before us, we do not wish to
enter into the substance, since the events that took place,
unfortunately, have been clouded with too much uncertainty and the full story may perhaps not yet be known.
What is certain is that there has been grievous loss of life to
innocent civilians, and our first duty, therefore, is to regret
the incident and to convey our deepest sense of sympathy
and condolences to the families of the bereaved. We venture
to express the hope that their sacrifice will not have been in
vain; that, in fact, incidents such as this, and those that have
preceeded it will never happen again in future.

119. There are, however, dimensions of the question of
the Korean aircraft other than human tragedy. There is,
for example, the destruction of a civilian aircraft and the
correlative question of the guarantee of the future safety
of civilian flights. There is the violation of a State’s sovereignty, airspace and territorial integrity, and in this
respect we in Guyana have experienced on numerous
occasions the provocation of illegal overflights of our
national territory. Some of these instances have been
brought to the attention of the Council. There is also the
question of aerial espionage.

114. Our primary concern must be to protect civil aviation. In order to attain this objective, it is important that
expressions of outrage and regret on a matter of wide
international concern not be lost in the mists of memory
soon after they are pronounced. By themselves, most certainly, they are not enough. They must be followed with a
deep resolve on the part of all of us, big and small nations
alike, to work to ensure that such calamities will not be
repeated in future. We should, therefore, seek to refine
and enlarge the norms of international conduct which will
ensure that, amongst other elements, nations undertake to
give due notice to civilian aircraft that they are in violation of pertinent regulations, that they provide conditions
for safe landing, if that is insisted upon, and that any
necessary negotiations to ensure the safety of aircraft and
respect for national sovereignty include all countries
involved in any particular situation. We therefore fervently express the hope that the Secretary-General, utihzing expertise and experience gained, will work closely with
ICAO to review and fully explore, with a view to their
eventual acceptance, these and other fundamental elements designed to safeguard civilian aircraft in normal.
conditions and particularly in adverse circumstances.

120. We cannot condone the shooting down or destruction of a civilian aircraft legitimately fulfilling its purposes. Indeed, we deplore all such actions. All the facts
concerning the incident are not known to Guyana and
there are several grey areas. That notwithstanding,
Guyana deeply regrets the evolution of events since 1 September, their cause and their effects.
121. We would urge that the circumstances require careful judgement and mature thought, for what is at stake is
much larger than a victory in debate, a victory which may
be a Pyrrhic victory, at any rate.
122. At stake are principles and objectives fundamental
to the conduct of structured
and civilized relations
between States. These include the acceptance of responsibility where it properly lies, a determination to reinforce
the sense of safety of civilian air transport, full respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, the affirmation of commitment by those who engage in such exer-

115. We have asked for and obtained assurances that
these attempts would be assiduously pursued in the com11

cises to avoid the provocations
which espionage can
induce and, generally, universal respect for international
law.
123. We should seek to derive from the events since 1
September lessons which can benefit the safety of international civil aviation and promote international peace and
security in general. What the tragedy underscores is the
need, consistently stressed by the non-aligned countries,
for a reduction in international tension in general and
between the two super-Powers in particular, for it is the
tension in the relations between those two States which
lies at the heart of the tension prevailing in international
relations today. The tragedy of the Korean air liner is
already an unfortunately high price to pay. Guyana hopes
that the lessons are learnt quickly and effectively before
that objective exacts an even higher price in future.
124. The draft resolution presently under consideration
[ibid] addresses many of the issues I have raised. Unfortunately, like the circumstances surrounding the incident
itself, this text leaves some questions unanswered and
some issues unattended. Regrettably as well, there has
been no attempt, as happened in the past with so many
draft resolutions, to obtain the views of members informally with the objective of reaching broad consensus
through the accommodation of amendments.

impartial investigation and, on the other, calling on the
Secretary-General to report his findings within a particular time-frame-in
this case 14 days. The interests of a
truly impartial investigation seem to my delegation to
require that no time limitation be placed on the SecretaryGeneral. Conceivably the Secretary-General could well
require more than 14 days to ascertain the facts. As my
colleagues are aware, what was being advanced earlier as
hard evidence is now being revised, even to this day.
129. Those are a few of the aspects which presented
some difficulty for the delegation of Guyana and which
we would have welcomed an opportunity to discuss with
the drafters of the document in the manner which is now
so common in the procedures of the Council. Therefore,
while Guyana supports many of the elements contained in
the draft resolution, we believe that the document does
not deal with the totality of the concerns of the international community in this matter, including considerations
of the legitimate uses of civilian air liners, the need for an
impartial approach to the whole question, the need for the
whole truth, the acceptance of responsibility where it
properly lies, the need to reduce the tension in relations
between the super-Powers
and, in general, universal
respect for international law. Guyana will therefore
abstain in the vote on the present draft resolution.
130. I now resume my function

125. After the postponement of our meeting last Friday
[2474th meeting], some of the sponsors did make contact
with Guyana and we articulated to them some of our
concerns. The ideas contained in the new fifth preambular
paragraph reflect one aspect of those concerns, even
though we would have liked to see the question of territorial integrity dealt with in a clearer and more forthright
manner, not simply a reaffn-rnation of the importance of
the principle but an unequivocal reaffirmation of the need
for States to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of other States. As I have indicated earlier, this is an
aspect to which Guyana attaches cardinal importance.

as PRESIDENT.

131. I shall now put the draft resolution
S/l5966/Rev.l
to the vote.

in document

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: France, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands, Pakistan, Togo, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Against: Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Abstaining:

126. Unfortunately,
however, we did have other concerns which neither time nor the nature of the consultation process permitted us to have considered. Guyana, for
instance, would have wished to see some sort of consideration given to the questions of how and why the aircraft
was over Soviet Territory. Was a civilian aircraft being
utilized on a mission which was legitimately and exclusively civilian in character?

China, Guyana, Nicaragua,

Zimbabwe.

The result of the vote was 9 in favour. 2 against and 4
abstentions.
The draft resolution was not adopted, the negative vote
being that of a permanent member of the Council.
132. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on those
members of the Council who wish to make statements
after the vote.

127. Also, in the way .in which some of its paragraphs
are worded the draft raises serious questions in our minds
about the impartiality of its approach to the question we
are supposed to be considering. For example, the need is
stressed for a full and adequate explanation of the facts
based upon impartial investigation. This wording clearly
indicates a prejudging of the results of the investigation.
We believe that the purpose of an investigation must be to
ascertain facts, not to explain them.

133. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom): This is
a sombre moment. The Soviet Union, by vetoing the
draft resolution before us, has shown that it is impervious to the strength of opinion round the world on this
issue. The true callousness of the Soviet position has
been made clear to the international
community.
Speaker after speaker at the Council table during the
past 11 days has expressed shock and distress and a
determination that the world community must learn the
lessons from this tragedy and take steps to ensure that
no such disaster should ever happen again.

128. At any rate, there seems to be an inconsistency
between acknowledging, on the one hand, the need for an
12

or bringing about the detention of the violators cannot be
effected by other means. Setting aside for the moment the
fact that this provision appears to make no distinction
between-in
the present context-foreign
military aircraft
and civilian passenger aircraft, and the fact that it does
not appear to cater at all for the possibility of an innocent
mistake, let us look at the situation through the Soviet law
on its own terms.

134. These views were expressed with a unanimity
which is rare in the Council, the sole exceptions being a
small group of delegations which consider themselves
obliged to follow
the Soviet Union in everything,
whether right or wrong.
135. This spontaneous surge of feeling, prompted by
what the draft resolution referred to as “elementary considerations of humanity”, has also been reflected in the
resounding vote on the text. This text was a sober
attempt to draw practical conclusions from a ghastly
tragedy for which even the Soviet Union no longer
denies all responsibility. Despite the strength of feeling
in the sponsor countries and many others, it was carefully designed to be seen not as a propaganda document
but as a practical document. How sad it is that the
Soviet Union, having shown itself by its actions in the
air on the night of 31 August/l
September to hold
human life in contempt and disregard, should now
reveal the same contempt and disregard for the deeply
held feelings of the world community, as expressed in
the Council and in the draft resolution.

140. Clearly, there was no use of force by the Korean air
liner, nor has this ever been alleged. Clearly, the use of
heat-seeking missiles at close range can only have been
intended to bring about the destruction of the aircraft,
and cannot be regarded as a measure designed to achieve
“the detention of the violators”, in the words of the Soviet
law. Finally, it appears from Soviet statements that the
Korean air liner was in any event on the point of leaving
Soviet airspace, into which it had strayed, so its destruction cannot be considered either as a necessary measure
for “stopping the violation when this could not be
effected by other means “-here
again I have quoted the
Soviet law.

136. By choosing through its veto to deny the right of
the Council to express in measured terms our common
horror at the tragedy which occurred, and our determination to prevent any recurrence in the future, the Soviet
Union has shown contempt for this Organization, the
Charter of the United Nations and the Secretary-General.
By preventing the Secretary-General from investigating
the circumstances of the tragedy, the Soviet Union has
shown that its main concern is to suppress the true facts of
the incident.

141. Even on their own terms, the Soviet authorities
have a great deal of explaining to do, and it is a matter of
deep regret to my Government that they still refuse to do
so. My Government regards such explanations as have
been given as falling well short of a valid justification for
the actions of the Soviet military authorities in international law. The continued failure of the Soviet Union to
respond to requests for an adequate explanation of the
incident, for a proper investigation of the facts, or, indeed,
for a guarantee against any future repetition is especially
regrettable and poses a threat to the safety of international civil aviation.

137. Nevertheless, I appeal to the Soviet authorities
and urge them to respond to the views expressed in this
debate by lending their whole-hearted
co-operation to
the efforts which will continue in other competent international bodies, especially ICAO, to devise practical
measures to ensure the avoidance of any similar situation in the future.

142. We regard the Soviet action as constituting a grave
breach of international law for which the Soviet Union
bears international responsibility. I have already reserved
my Government’s rights before the Council, given that
the United Kingdom is one of the States injured by this
grave breach of international law. At the appropriate
place and time, my Government intends to take such
action as may be necessary in relation to this breach.

138. As I have said, the Soviet response has ignored and
set aside the moral dimension of this tragic incident and
its potentially serious effects on international civil aviation. Instead, the Soviet defence has been of a narrow and
legalistic kind, based upon the provisions of Soviet internal legislation and on claims that Soviet legislation is in
accordance with international regulations. The provisions
of the Soviet internal legislation in question have not been
quoted to us. Whatever their content may be, there is a
basic principle of international law that a State may not
invoke the provisions of its internal law in order to evade
or avoid its international obligations, least of all international obligations of as fundamental a character as have
been an issue in the present debate.

143. In my earlier statement to the Council on 2 September 12470th meering], I said that a frank and honest
account of what really happened would do something to
reduce the damage to the international climate caused by
the destruction of Korean Air Lines flight 007. This is still
not forthcoming. Although the Soviet position has moved
from denial of responsibility to partial admission of it, we
have not yet had a satisfactory explanation. On the contrary, the statements of the Soviet Union have been evasive and couched in cold-war language.

139. My authorities believe that the reference was probably intended to be to article 36 of a new law on the Soviet
State frontiers, passed in December of last year. It seems
that this law authorizes the employment of military force
against violations of the Soviet State frontiers in response
to the use of force or in cases where stopping the violation

144. In my same statement, I expressed the hope that
the appalling action by the Soviet authorities was not
intended to be a signal of their intentions towards international relations as a whole. We still await an assurance on
that point.
13

145. It is for those reasons that my delegation voted in
favour of the draft resolution.

RC-135 reconnaissance plane, which was more than 1,500
miles away from the location of the incident, caused the
Soviet pilot to mistake the two aircraft, thus acknowledging tacitly that the Korean Boeing-747 was not on a spy
mission after all.

146. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
The issue we have been discussing now for more than a
week bears directly upon the ability of all of us, working
together, working singly, to secure and preserve peace in
this world. It bears also on the readiness of Member
States to take responsibility for achieving a civilized and
peaceful international order.

152. Not surprisingly, the testimony of the Soviet pilot
who shot down the Korean plane corroborates the official
Soviet version of events. The Korean pilot is dead and
cannot refute this testimony. But it is interesting and significant, I believe, to note in this context the testimony
given to The New York i’Tmes by Kim Chang Kyu, the
pilot of the Korean Air Lines plane that strayed over
Soviet airspace in 1978, thus becoming the target of a
Soviet missile that sheared off nearly 15 feet of that
plane’s left wing and killed two of the plane’s passengers.
That pilot was able to regain control of the plane and to
make an emergency landing on a frozen lake 400 miles
north east of Leningrad. After I was shot down-the
pilot
recounts-the
Russians made the same claims we’re hearing now. They said, “We tracked you for more than two
hours, flew around the plane, fired tracers in front of
you” -all that. It sounds exactly the same this time.

147. Destruction of the civilian air liner of Korean Air
Lines flight 007 was a deeply shocking act, but more disturbing than the deed itself has been the behaviour of the
Soviet Government in the days since it shot down that
plane. Had the Soviet Government taken responsibility
for the action, admitted that a terrible mistake had been
made, offered compensation to the families for the loss of
life, and, in co-operation with other States, undertaken a
review of the incident to ensure that such a tragedy would
not recur, then the consequences of the event would have
been contained and, to the degree possible, minimized.
Nothing, to be sure, could reclaim the lives of those 269
people, but relations among nations would not have suffered, and civilian air travel might have been rendered less
vulnerable to such errors in the future.

153. Mr. Kim gives a different version of what actually
happened. He tells us he saw the plane only once, off to
the right and somewhat behind him. He thought this was
strange, since international guidelines call for intercepting
lighters to fly to the left of the plane, where the pilot sits.
When Mr. Kim’s co-pilot, who had a clearer view of the
plane, reported that it bore the red Soviet star, Mr. Kim
immediately slowed his speed and turned his landing
lights off and on repeatedly, the recognized international
signal that an aircraft will follow the interceptor’s directions. In addition, Mr. Kim tried to establish contact with
the Soviet craft, but the two planes’ radios were on different frequencies. In any event, the next thing Mr. Kim
knew, a missile fired by the Soviet pilot had torn off a
good part of his plane’s left wing.

148. But, as we all know, the response of the Soviet
Government has been quite different. Instead of admitting error, it has insisted that no error was made. Instead
of taking responsibility for the act, it has lashed out with
groundless accusations. Instead of taking steps to ensure
against a repetition of such an incident, it has emphasized
that it would do the same thing all over again.
149. By taking this position, the Soviet Union has magnified the negative consequences of a tragic incident and
damaged anew the already tattered fabric of international
relations. It has further poisoned the international atmosphere. For this, as for the incident itself, the Soviet Union
must bear heavy responsibility.

154. In the light of this previous incident and in view of
the established fact that the pilot of the Korean air liner
made no radio transmissions indicating that he had been
intercepted, one can only conclude that there was no communication with the pilot of the Korean aircraft in accordance with normal procedures and on normal emergency
frequencies. The fact that the tapes now show that the
Soviet pilot fired cannon bursts six minutes before he destroyed the Korean air liner does not alter this conclusion.
Clearly the Korean pilot was not aware of the Soviet iighters nor was he aware that any warning was given. If shots
were fired six minutes in advance of the fatal shot, it
therefore seems likely that they were not tracers but regular normal cannon rounds, which are not visible. Even
assuming, for the sake of argument, that the Soviet pilot
had tried to establish communication with the pilot of the
Korean air liner, but for some reason that we do not
know had failed to get through, this would not justify
shooting down a civilian air liner.

150. During the past 10 days the Soviet Union has taken
a position at once inconsistent and contradictory. It has
been self-justifying and self-defeating in its statements. In
its determined defence of this indefensible act, the Soviet
Union has demonstrated an attitude that is as contemptuous of the truth as it is callous towards human life, an
attitude underscored by its veto of the draft resolution
before us today [S/Z5966/Rev.Z].
For nearly a week the
Soviet Union refused to admit it shot down flight 007;
then it admitted to having fired warning shots; only after
the public disclosure of the tape recordings in which the
Soviet pilot told Soviet ground control that he had executed the order to destroy the target did the Soviet
Government announce that one of its pilots had in fact
“stopped the flight”, as they euphemistically put it.
151. In the ensuing days we have heard a tangle of
charges from the Soviet Union. On the one hand, it has
been said that flight 007 was itself on a spy mission and
therefore invited destruction; but it has also been said that
the presence earlier in the evening in a remote area of an

155. What conceivable harm could that plane have
done, especially since it was within 60 seconds of leaving
Soviet airspace, a fact that renders absurd the statement
14

by one of the Soviet pilots that the Boeing-747 might have
been “carrying a bomb that might have fallen on my
house” -presumably
located in the Sea of Japan?

tune with common sense.” Yet the Soviet Union finds it
inconceivable that such a breakdown situation, to use
their term, might have occurred in the case of a civilian air
liner, Korean Air Lines flight 007.

156. Let us recall for a moment the incident of almost
two years ago the Soviet W-class submarine penetrated
deep into restricted Swedish waters near Karlskrona
Naval Base and ran aground there. In response to the
protest of the Swedish Government, the Soviet Government said:

161. Now we come to the final Soviet argument, its ultimate line of defence. It was stated in explicit terms last
week by the Soviet Minister for Foreign Affairs, Andrei
Gromyko: “We state that Soviet territory and the borders
of the Soviet Union are sacred.*’ It is on the basis of this
principle that the top Soviet leadership has defended, and
by so doing has assumed responsibility for, the destruction of a civilian air liner. In this context we should like to
ask the Soviet Union: ‘Are the borders of the Soviet Union
more sacred than, say, the borders of Sweden, not to
speak of the borders of Afghanistan? Are they more
sacred than the airspace of the United States-which
has
frequently been violated by Soviet planes flying off-route
over sensitive military facilities, though these planes have
not been shot down as a result of such violations? And
how, may we ask, can the Soviet Union reconcile this
remarkable
doctrine of absolute Soviet sovereignty,
according to which the Soviet Union is within its rights to
shoot down a civilian air liner that strays across its sacred
borders, with its doctrine of limited sovereignty, propounded 15 years ago in relationship with the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia?

“It was expected, of course, that the Swedish authorities would abide by existing international norm under
which, if a foreign warship does not even observe the
rules of a coastal State regarding passage through its
territorial waters, the only thing the coastal State may
do with respect to the given warship is to demand that
it leave its territorial waters.”
157. According to this unique interpretation of international law, if a Soviet warship-a
warship, mind youinvades the territorial waters of another State, that State
cannot even detain the warship, but must simply escort it
out of its territorial waters. But if a civilian air liner with
269 people aboard happens to stray into Soviet airspace,
the Soviet Union is justified in shooting it down, even as it
is about to exit that airspace.
158. Mr. Leonid Zamyatin, the spokesman on the Central Committee for the General Secretary, Yuri Andropov,
went so far as to say that Soviet air defence forces were
humane to have waited so long before destroying the
Korean air liner. How callous it is to talk about humaneness with regard to a ruthless act that resulted in 269
deaths. Is a Soviet warship entitled to more humane treatment than a civilian airplane?

162. In the article in Pravda on 26 Sentember 1968,
where this doctrine of limited sovereignty was pro
pounded, the Soviet Union not only claimed the right to
invade any Soviet-bloc country that threatened to deviate
from the path of fealty to Moscow but also claimed the
right to intervene in the internal affairs of States not
belonging to the Soviet bloc. This same article explains
how the Soviet Union reconciles the doctrine of absolute
Soviet sovereignty with the doctrine of limited sovereignty
for everyone else, as well as with the norms of international law. Accordingly, it states:

159. The Soviet leadership refuses to concede the possibility that a civilian air liner travelling a.scheduled flight
with 269 people aboard might have strayed accidentally
into its airspace, despite the fact that there have been 21
recorded incidents where civilian planes with similar navigational equipment have strayed off course. Here too, the
incident of the Soviet W-class submarine offers an interesting analogy. In its statement to the Government of
Sweden, the Soviet Government rejected the Swedish
charge that this warship was engaged in “carrying out
impermissible activities”-namely,
spying. According to
the Soviet statement, the submarine “went off course” as
a result of the failure of its navigational instruments and
resultant mistakes in position finding and therefore
“entered
unintentionally”
the territorial
waters
of
Sweden. “The Soviet side, taking into consideration the
breakdown
character of the incident, could rightfully
expect at least a manifestation of correct attitude and
objective appraisal of what happened”.

“Laws and the norms of law are subordinated to the
laws of the class struggle and the laws of social development. The class approach to the matter cannot be discarded in the name of legalistic considerations. Whoever
does so forteits the only correct class-oriented criterion
for evaluating legal norms and begins to measure events
with the yardsticks of bourgeois law.”
In other words, there are two forms of law: bourgeois
law-which
includes the Charter of the United Nationsand the laws of the class struggle. And there is no question
that in the Soviet view the former are conditioned by and
subordinate to the latter. This dual conception of international law accords to the Soviet Union absolute rights but
no obligation to respect the rights of others, while it
accords to all other States no rights but absolute obligations to respect the rights of the Soviet Union.

160. Instead, it charged the Swedish Government with
“distorting
facts” and it flatly rejected the Swedish
demand to “prevent the recurrence of such a gross violation”, saying that “in this concrete case, this sounds like a
demand to rule out the very possibility of breakdown
situations occuring at sea. This demand is simply out of

163. The destruction of Korean Air Lines flight 007 and
especially, the manner in which the Soviet Union has
defended that action have illuminated as few events in
recent years the nature of the predicament that faces us all.
15

164. I should like to quote from a letter written by a
Soviet citizen who is surely one of the outstanding and
most courageous persons of our age. I am referring to Mr.
Andrei Sakharov, whose letter was secretly transmitted to
the outside world from within the Soviet Union, where he
has been internally exiled. In his letter from exile, Mr.
Sakharov warns that

171. It is our most sincere hope that the facts and circumstances surrounding this tragedy will be fully explained by
all the parties concerned, with a view to preventing a repetition of such tragic events in the future.
172. While our delegation regrets the tragic loss of
human life in this incident, and while we urge that every
effort be made to ensure maximum safety and security for
international
civil aviation, we have, however, been
unable to vote for the draft resolution put before this
Council, because we are not satisfied that all the facts and
circumstances about the matter have been made known
and fully explained to the international community.
Moreover, we have yet to be convinced that other factors
not relevant to the incident have not been brought to bear
upon the international community’s consideration of this
matter.

“The world is facing very difficult times and cruel
cataclysms if the West and the developing countries,
trying to find their place in the world, do not show the
required firmness, unity and consistency in resisting the
totalitarian challenge. This relates to Governments, to
the intelligentsia, to businessmen and to all people. It is
important that the common danger be fully understood. Everything else will then fall into place.”
165. If the destruction of the Korean air liner helps us to
understand the nature of the world in which we live and the
dangers to our rights and laws therein, and helps us to’show
the necessary clarity and firmness in defending precisely the
principles of international law contained in the Charter,
then perhaps the 269 people aboard that ill-fated air liner
will not have died in vain.

173. In these circumstances. therefore. we felt that an
abstention was the most appropriate action.
174. Mr. TINOCO FONSECA (Nicaragua) (interpreration from Spanish): Since this is the first occasion we have
had to speak in the Council in the month of September,
we should like to express our appreciation to you personally, Sir, and to the country you represent and our pleasure at seeing Guyana, a member of the Non-Aligned
Movement, presiding over the Council.

166. In closing, 1 should like to say that if there is one
question which, above all, confronts the Council and the
world in this debate and which is responded to by the draft
resolution we have adopted, in spite of the veto, it is this:
Does a nation which is not at war have the right to shoot
down planes that enter its airspace without authorimtion?
That is the question confronting us. The answer to that
question must be no. We do not believe that the protection
of the sovereignty of any nation gives that nation a right to
shoot down any plane in peacetime, flying any place over its
territory. We believe that this principle has beem endorsed
by a majority of the Council in the draft resolution we have
considered this afternoon. We stand ready to work with our
colleagues to ensure greater safety for all passengers and
pilots, indeed for all people.

175. We also wish to express our appreciation to the
representative of France for the work done when he presided over the Council in the month of August.
176. With regard to the item the Council has been considering, the delegation of Nicaragua can only express its
profound regret at the loss of human lives resulting from
this incident. .We express our sincere condolences to the
families of the victims.
177. It is undeniable that the regrettable event we are
deading with falls within the context of the high degree of
tension characterizing the world situation at present. It is
even more obvious, that, as a result of this new incident,
tension has become more acute and, unfortunately for
our small non-aligned countries, is being reflected in the
focal points of crisis and tension in the third world in the
form of a hardening of policies and greater aggressiveness
against our peoples and their aspirations for justice,
national independence and peace.

167. Mr. MASHINGAIDZF
(Zimbabwe): The delegation of the Republic of Zimbabwe is very pleased, Sir, to
see you in the Chair this month, and we are very confident
that under your wise and experienced leadership the
Council will deal with all the matters before it in a very
balanced manner.
168. We wish also to express our appreciation for the
manner in which the representative of France, your predecessor, led the Council during the month of August.

178. Unfortunately,
this situation is serving’ as fuel for
those who wish to escalate war against peoples such as
those of Palestine, Lebanon and Central America, among
others. The Council cannot allow this regrettable situation of aggravation of international tension, no matter
what the circumstances, to lead to or justify the taking of
political and military decisions involving the use or threat
of force in any region of the world.

169. I wish now to say a few words in explanation of my
delegation’s vote on the matter regarding the tragedy
which befell the Korean plane, Korean Air Lines flight
007, on 1 September.
170. The Government of the Republic of Zimbabwe
joins all those who have already expressed deep regret at
the loss of 269 human lives. Needless to say, our deep
condolences and sympathy go to the bereaved families
and relatives, as well as to the Governments whose citizens were the unfortunate victims of this tragedy.

179. The task of the.Council as the supreme guardian of
international peace is to promptly and in good faith
devote its efforts towards the elimination, or at least the
reduction, of present levels of the cold war and sources of
16

regional tension in order to bring about stable and lasting
peace in the world.
180. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Japan. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
181. Mr. KURODA (Japan): At this time I wish to register on behalf of the Government and the people of Japan
our deeply felt indignation and strong protest against the
Soviet Union for vetoing the draft resolution which, COsponsored by many countries, including Japan, represents
the conscience of the world.
182. The evidence which Japan provided the Council
through the United States delegation on 6 September
[247Ist meeting] proved beyond a doubt that the Soviet
Union committed the outrageous and barbaric act of
shooting down with a missile an unarmed and defenceless
civilian aircraft carrying 269 innocent passengers and
crew members. Despite this disclosure of irrefutable facts,
the Soviet Union has not only refused to admit responsibility for the destruction of the aircraft, but has also been
futilely attempting to shift its responsibility onto third
countries through various false allegations.
183. The Soviet Union’s irresponsible and arrogant attitude is contrary to even the most elementary norms of
conduct required of any member of the international community and, therefore, it must be firmly denounced.
184. Furthermore, the Soviet Union has just now committed still another act of blasphemy against world public
opinion. Its rejection of this draft resolution which reflects
the feelings of people throughout the world and is supported by the majority of Council members is nothing but
a flagrant abuse of the veto power of ‘a permanent
member of the Council.

august body four times. I now take the floor for the last
time, follo&g
the veto by the Soviet Union of the draft
resolution contained in document S/15966/Rev. 1. I wish
to take this occasion to express my profound gratitude to
you, Mr. President, and other members of the Council for
having provided me with such opportunity.
191.

From

the first

urgent

meeting of the Council

[247Oth meeting], the distinguished delegate of the Soviet
Union has offered us nothing but lies and evasions. And
today the Soviet Union shamelessly cast a veto on a draft
resolution in which the Council calls for, among other
things, a full investigation by an impartial authority,
namely, the Secretary-General of the United Nations. The
Soviet refusal to alloiv an investigation by an impartial
authority can only be interpreted as an admission of guilt.
192. The distinguished representative of the Soviet Union’
this afternoon told us that the Soviet Government set up a
commission to conduct an investigation into the tragic incident Ipam. 581. It is, I believe, interesting to note in this
regard that, while the Soviet Union talks about its own
governmental commission for investigation, it has consistently rejected all requests from the interested parties to be
allowed to approach the area of the tragic incident. The
Soviet Union has also rejected all calls for an investigation
by an impartial international body; that includes the specific call by the Council in the draft resolution for a full
investigation by the Secretary-General
of the United
Nations. While rejecting all such calls for investigation by
an impartial international organiiation, the Soviet Union
continues to offer lies without evidence and evasions without justification. Despite its massive propaganda efforts,
however, the Soviet Union has completely failed to enlist
the support of a single State having any degree of political
independence.
193. In my first statdment before the Council on 2 September [247Oth meeting], I presented the facts, as my Government knew them, regarding the destruction of Korean Air
Lines flight 007 and the death of 269 innocent civilians
aboard that plane.
;;
1
194. During the course of this discussion in the Council,
nothing has been said to disprove any of the facts I presented to the Council.

185. In view of the continued brazen behaviour of the
Soviet Union, Japan, in collaboration with friendly nations
the world over, will not relent in its efforts to investigate all
the facts and compel the Soviet Union to accept its
responsibility.‘.
186. And so Japan once again strongly urges the Soviet
Union to respond immediately and in good faith to the
calls which my country and other members of the international community have made in this chamber.

195. The verity of the information we had at the outset has
been irrefutably demonstrated as more details surrounding
the tragic incident became available. The evidence provided
by the Japanese Government has conclusively established
that the responsibility for the tragic incident lies with the
Soviet Union and with the Soviet Union alone.

187. The PRESIDENT: The Observer for the Republic of
Korea has asked to speak, and I now call on him.
188. Mr. KIM (Republic of Korea): It was a sad and
tragic event that led my Government to ask for a meeting
of the Council 10 days ago [S/1595@
:

196. To be sure, the Soviet Union did try to deny at first
even the fact of shooting down the unarmed civilian plane.
Later, when confronted with the hard, irrefutable evidence
presented in this chamber, the Soviet Government took the
step of acknowledging its destruction of the civilian plane
while denying responsibility for the crime. In fact, it went so
far as to try to shift the responsibility for the crime to a State
whose nationals were among the victims of the murder
committed by Soviet military authorities.

189. It was al& a most -brutal a& of barbaric violence
against innocent defenceless civilians that necessitated the
meeting of the Council over these past 10 days.
190. Since the Security Council was called into session, I
have been given the distinct privilege to speak in this

17

197. In the course of moving from denial to a uartiai
acknowledgement of its deed wiihout accepting itsguilt, the
Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
offered the world and this august body lies, evasions and
more lies.

to express our profound gratitude to all the nations which
have-shown us friendship, compassion and common concern. I would particularly like to thank all those- who
supported my Government’s
position in the Council’s
deliberations.

198. Marshal Nikolai Ogarkov, the Chief of Staff of the
Armed Forces of the Soviet Union, for example, when
asked at a Moscow press conference on 9 September to
explain the discrepancy between the Soviet assertions that
the Korean Air Lines Boeing-747 was showing no navigation lights and the tape recordings provided by the Japanese Government that had the tighter pilot making
references to the lights, said that “the voice on the tape
was the voice of one tighter pilot referring to the lights of
another interceptor’:.

206. As for the Soviet. Union, I reaffirm my Government’s determination to seek just fulfilment of our legitimate demands.
207. We reaffirm our demands not simply on our own
behalf but to secure the future safety of all air travehers,
whatever their nationality, and to prevent the use of
armed force against international civil aviation.
208. Mr. President, if you will permit me, I should like
to remind the Council members of one further point that I
made in my first statement on 2 September. I explained
that one of the reasons my Government is deeply troubled
by the Soviet action on the night of 1 September was that
the Soviet action was so clearly inconsistent with the goal
of peace, and tension reduction, a goal my Government
has been pursuing in the tense and historically troubled
region of North-East Asia.

199. But, as we all know, the tape we heard in the Council last Tuesday clearly had the Soviet pilot saying “the
target’s pilot is blinking”--“‘the
target’s pilot is blinking”.
200. Can it be that Soviet pilots routinely refer to each
other’s aircraft as a target? Such obviously cannot be the
case. The truth must be, and I am sure it is, that Marshal
Ogarkov was not telling the truth about what happened
on the night of 1 September.

209. As is well known, the Republic of Korea is a
divided nation. Having suffered through a tragic war not
of our own making, our peopie’yeam for peace, and my
Government pursues a policy of peace above all. We have
declared many times our willingness to open our doors to
all those nations which harbour no hostile intentions
against us and are willing to open their doors to us. Dialogue, reconciliation and normalization, we believe, are
more conducive to peace and reduction of tension than
hostile silence, rivalry and the absence of normal
relations.

201. I should also like to call your attention to what Mr.
Andrei Gromyko, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Soviet Union, said on 7 September. At the closing session
of the Madrid meeting of the Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe, Mr. Gramyko declared “Soviet
territory, the borders of the Soviet Union are sacred”. Mr.
Gromyko also added that anyone intruding beyond the
“sacred” borders of the Soviet Union would bear “the full
brunt” of the kind of response the Soviet Union gave to
the Korean Air Lines flight 007.

210. It was with such belief that, on 12 January 1981,
President Chun Doo-Hwan
of the Republic of Korea
extended an invitation to the leader of North Korea to
meet with him, to visit the Republic of Korea at any time
of the latter’s choosing and to discuss any issue in an
effort to prevent war, assure peace and bring about the
peaceful unification of the entire Korean peninsula.

202. Does Mr. Gromyko mean to say that to the Soviet
Union its borders are “sacred’* but innocent human Lives
are not? The Soviet Minister’s statement amounts to a
declaration of war on anybody, any plane which may
happen’ ro stray into the Soviet airspace for whatever reason, be it mechanical or human error or any one of possible circumstances which may force a civilian air liner to
veer off its predetermined course.

211. Peace on the Korean peninsula, however, cannot
be secured in isolation from its regional and global environment. This realization led my Government to view
regional and global situations with intense interest and
deep concern. The same reaiization pow leads us to a deep
and serious concern over the troubling implications of the
Soviet’s behaviour in this tragic incident.

203. In fact, Mr. Gromyko’s
statement is nothing less
than a rejection of legal and moral obligations the Soviet
Union, as with all other civilized nations, must necessarily
accept in order to ensure the safety of international civil
aviation.
204. When I first reported the incident to the Council
[ibid.], I outlined five steps my Government rightly
believed itself entitled to demand of the Soviet Union.

212. Do the Soviet leaders realize the harm they have
done to the cause of peace in North-East Asia and the
world? Are they aware of the harm they have done to
their own interests? Are they capable of understanding,
although belatedly, that only through a candid admission
of their responsibility for the tragic incident and a clear
demonstration of willingness to fulfil our just demands,
they can begin to help build a more peaceful world for
which ail yearn?

205. Since then, my Government has received eloquent
expressions of deep sympathy for our tragic loss and
strong support for the demands we put forward to the
Soviet Union, which I duly conveyed to my Government
and people. On behalf of the Government and people of
the Republic of Korea, I would like to take this occasion
18

213. More than any other nation, the Soviet Union talks
loudly of peace. But honest men and women everywhere
know that peace is not achieved by slogans and propaganda. Those who are truly committed to peace must be
willing to live by the rules which a civilized world observes
to assure orderliness among its sovereign States. When
the Soviet Union so clearly, so ruthlessly violates those
rules and ignores protests from the injured, as it has been
doing in this tragic incident involving the Korean Air
Lines plane, the world has no choice but to conclude that
all the talk of peace and all the slogans of peace so loudly
and so busily propagated by the Soviet Union are nothing
but an empty gesture at best, hypocrisy calculated to
deceive the world and mislead the innocent.
214. I have already taken up more than my share of the
Council’s valuable time. Let me simply conclude by quoting from the words President Chun Doo-Hwan spoke on
7 September, a day which was declared by my Government as the National Day of Mourning for those who
were killed aboard the Korean Air Lines plane shot down
by the Soviet Union:
“No compassionate person could hold back tears at
seeing a father who has lost his son throw the boy’s

sweater into the cold waters of the high seas near Sakhalin, crying out, ‘My son, you must be freezing’. The
grief-stricken, bereaved families suffer even greater sorrow because they could not hold funerals. They could
not hold funerals because they could not even recover
the bodies of the dead.
“Even if all our demands are met, it will not bring
back their lost lives. But we hope to console the souls
of those who met an undeserving death so that those
who bear a grudge will be able to rest, even though
belatedly, in peace.”
215. The PRESIDENT:
The Council has now concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item
before it.

73e meeting rose at Z2.5 p.m.

NOTE
’ United

Nations,

Treufy

Series,

vol.

15, No.

102.

-&I
i;uI~,.lc;spL;I.~WI~L*;I~~~j~l~~~~

- L&l1

. j-z;r

4 3 h+

4 +

rj

$6J@l!#iNxQlawiE#J
B~~~f~h4tB~~~~~WBB~B~~~~
rl&Tail#l~%,
HOW

TO OBTAIN

$1

UNITED

NATIONS

aI,+

,.,. id1
. -AI

rLI

Jc JrpLl
i&s

-91 : +!+I

L&

Jc J,dI

jx,

,i k+. ok

jll

~~~B~W~SM~~~3~~PBA~~
PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Safes Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT
SE PROCURER
LES PUBLICATIONS
DES NATIONS
UNLES
Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente darts les librairies et les agences depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupms de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
ICAK

l-IOJIY=DiTb

H3.ILAHHrl

OPI-AHH3AHHM

H3AniuIunOpr~El3auuuO6aeAnHeHHblxHauugMO~KHO
kl~~~~lga~~o~ceXp~O~~Mupa.H~o~Te
Mara3mie
HAR ,,U,AUTe
UO aApeQ':
OpraHIi3aIXHX
IIpOAZOKe
&i3AiUiHfi,
HbdiopX
HAH XeHeBa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

.OEZBJ@iHBHHbIX

HAHHH

Q'lIHTbBXHHXCHblXMa~a3UHaX
cnpamoi 06 H3AaHmXB
BaUIeMKtiHxHOM
06aeASiHeHHblX
HauntI,
CeKIlHR

DE LAS NACIONES

Ii0

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccicht de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.
