S/PRST/2001/24

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 September 2001
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4377th meeting of the Security Council, held on 20 September 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Angola”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council remains concerned at the continuing conflict in
Angola. It reiterates its position that the primary responsibility for the
continued fighting lies with the leadership of the armed faction of the União
Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA) headed by Mr. J.
Savimbi which is refusing to fulfil its obligations under the ‘Accordos de Paz’
(S/22609, annex), the Lusaka Protocol (S/1994/1441, annex) and relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, which remain the only viable basis for
political settlement of the conflict in Angola.
“The Council considers the four point agenda for peace proposed by the
Government of Angola a useful indication of areas where an agreement or
progress should be reached. It calls on UNITA armed faction headed by Mr. J.
Savimbi to cease all military action and to enter into a dialogue with the
Government of Angola on how to conclude the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol on this basis.
“The Security Council condemns in the strongest terms the terrorist
attacks by UNITA forces on the civilian population of Angola. It stresses that
such attacks are unacceptable and cannot be justified by any political goals.
The Council reminds their perpetrators that such acts are in violation of
international law and may have further implications.
“The Security Council reaffirms that the failure by the armed faction of
UNITA to implement its obligations under the ‘Accordos de Paz’, the Lusaka
Protocol, and its relevant resolutions remains the reason for the Security
Council sanctions against UNITA. The Council is determined to keep sanctions
in place until it is convinced that the conditions in its relevant resolutions are
met. It reiterates its call on all States to implement strictly the sanctions regime
against UNITA and urges them to strengthen, where appropriate, their internal
legislation related to application of sanction measures imposed by the Council.
The Council reaffirms its intention to keep sanctions under close monitoring
and periodic review in order to raise their effectiveness, including as they
relate to UNITA activity abroad.

01-54489 (E) 200901

*0154489*

S/PRST/2001/24

“The Security Council notes with satisfaction that, at their recent summit,
the Heads of States and Governments of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) countries undertook to prepare a report on how SADC
countries implement Security Council resolution 1295. The Council
encourages SADC countries to cooperate fully in their efforts to implement the
Security Council’s measures against UNITA.
“The Security Council encourages the Government of Angola to promote
the peace process and in this regard welcomes the initiatives by the
Government of Angola, as well as by the Angolan people, including the Civil
Society and the Churches. It calls on the Angolan authorities to continue
efforts aimed at national reconciliation and stabilization of the situation in the
country in consultation with all segments of the Angolan society, including the
Civil Society and the Churches. These should focus on re-establishment of the
state administration, improvement of the social and economic situation of the
population, promotion of the rule of law, protection of human rights, the
activity of the Interagency Committee and of the Peace and Reconciliation
Fund.
“The Security Council supports the intention of the Government of
Angola to hold elections as a part of the ongoing democratization process in
Angola in conformity with the universally accepted democratic principles and
standards. It stresses the need to create the necessary conditions for elections
to be free and fair. The Council requests the Secretary-General to provide
appropriate support, in coordination with the Government of Angola, in
preparation of elections, including through the work of the ongoing United
Nations technical assistance mission.
“The Security Council notes the positive contribution that the United
Nations Office in Angola (UNOA) is making towards finding the solution to
the Angolan conflict. It reiterates its full support for the work of UNOA and
the Representative of the Secretary-General.
“The Security Council is seriously concerned with the plight of the
Angolan population particularly the internally displaced persons and, in order
to alleviate its suffering, calls again on all parties concerned to facilitate the
delivery of emergency relief assistance. The work of the United Nations
agencies and other international organizations delivering assistance to those in
the affected areas is of the utmost importance and must continue unobstructed
with the financial support of the international community.”

2
