F.

G.

Application of the Republic of Moldova

Application of Turkmenistan

Decisions

Decisions

At its 3045th meeting, on 29 January 1992, the Council,
following the adoption of its agenda, decided to refer the
application of the Republic of Moldova383 for membership in
the United Nations to the Committee on the Admission of New
Members for examination and report, as provided in rule 59 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

At its 3048th meeting, on 5 February 1992, the Council,
following the adoption of its agenda, decided to refer the
application of Turkmenistan 386 for membership in the United
Nations to the Committee on the Admission of New Members
for examination and report, as provided in rule 59 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

At its 3047th meeting, on 5 February 1992, the Council
discussed the report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members384 conceming the application of the Republic of
Moldova for admission to membership in the United Nations.

At its 3050th meeting, on 7 February 1992, the Council
discussed the report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members387 conceming the application of Turkmenistan
for admission to membership in the United Nations.

Resolution 739 (1992)
Resolution 741 (1992)

of 5 February 1992

of 7 February 1992

The Security Council,
The Security Council,

Having examined the application of the Republic of
Moldova for admission to the United Nations, 383

Having examined the application of Turkmenistan for
admission to the United Nations, 386

Recommends to the General Assembly that the Republic
ofMoldova be admitted to membership in the United Nations.

Recommends to the General Assembly that Turkmenistan
be admitted to membership in the United Nations.

Adopted without a vote at the 3047th
meeting.

Adopted withou/ a vote al the 3050th
meeting.

Decision
Decision

At the same meeting, following the adoption of Security
Council resolution 739 (1992), the President of the Council
made the following statement on behalf of the members: 385

At the same meeting, following the adoption of resolution
741 (1992), the President made the following statement on
behalf of the members of the Council:388

"The Security Council has just recommended that the
Republic of Moldova be admitted to membership in the
United Nations. lt is with great pleasure that, on behalf of
the members of the Council, 1 congratulate the Republic
of Moldova on this happy and historie occasion. We look
forward to this further strengthening of the principle of
universality.

"1 am pleased, on behalf of the members of the
Council, to extend our congratulations to Turkmenistan on
the occasion of the Council's recommendation that
Turkmenistan be admitted to membership in the United
Nations.

"Ail the members of the Council are confident that
Turkmenistan will make a significant contribution to the
work of our organization. We note with great satisfaction
Turkmenistan's commitment to uphold and fulfil the
Purposes and Principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

"The Council notes with great satisfaction Moldova's
commitment to uphold the Purposes and Principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. Ail the members of the
Council look forward to the day, in the near future, when
Moldova will join us as a member of the United Nations.
We look forward to meeting the representatives ofMoldova, and to working closely with them."

"1 would also like to extend to Turkmenistan the
warmest greetings of members of the Council."
113
