S/2019/343

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 April 2019
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004)
Twenty-ninth semi-annual report of the Secretary-General
1.
The present report is the twenty-ninth semi-annual report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). It provides a
review and an assessment of the implementation of the resolution since the issuance
of my previous report on the subject, on 15 October 2018 ( S/2018/920), and covers
developments up to 8 April 2019.

I. Implementation of resolution 1559 (2004)
2.
Since the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004) by the Security Council on
2 September 2004, limited progress has been made in its implementation and a
number of provisions, including with respect to the existence and activities of
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, remain pending.

A.

Sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence
of Lebanon
3.
Through the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council sought to
strengthen the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence of
Lebanon under the sole and exclusive authority of the Government of Lebanon
throughout the country, in accordance with the Taif Accords of 1989, to which all the
political parties in Lebanon had committed themselves. That objective has remained
the priority of my efforts.
4.
Nearly nine months after parliamentary elections were held, the Prime Minister,
Saad Hariri, announced on 31 January 2019 the formation of the new Government of
Lebanon, as noted in my report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2019/237). The Government, comprising 30 ministers, reflected the result of
legislative elections, as detailed in my report on the implementation of resolution
1559 (S/2018/480), the Kata’ib party remaining in opposition. The Cabinet includes
four women, one of whom is the first female Minister of the Interior in the Arab
region.
5.
In a statement made on 1 February, I welcomed the formation of the Government
and reiterated the commitment of the United Nations to supporting Lebanon in
strengthening its sovereignty, stability and political independence in a ccordance with
the Taif Accords and the Baabda Declaration, and its effective implementation of

19-06827 (E)

010519

*1906827*

S/2019/343

Security Council resolutions 1701 (2006), 1559 (2004) and other relevant resolutions
that remain essential to the stability of Lebanon and the region.
6.
As noted in my latest report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2019/237), the Cabinet approved a ministerial statement on 7 February 2019
following consultations with political parties. In the statement, the Government ’s
commitment to implementing an economic, reform, investment, service and social
programme was emphasized. The new Government won a vote of confidence on
15 February, with 111 out of 128 votes in Parliament.
7.
As in 2016, the Government reiterated in the statement its commitment to
resolution 1701 (2006) and its intention to support the army and security forces. It
also reiterated “Lebanese citizens’ right to resist the Israeli occupation, repel its
attacks and regain occupied territories”. As was the case previously, the statement
also contained a pledge to “strengthen the Lebanese-Palestinian dialogue so as to
prevent further tensions in the camps, […] in accordance with the unified Lebanese
vision pact”. The Government reaffirmed its commitment to the dissociation policy.
In the statement the Government renewed its pledge to continue to consolidate the
rights and role of women in public and political life and to eliminate all forms of
gender discrimination. Contrary to 2016, ho wever, the recent statement did not
contain a reference to the national dialogue or a national defence strategy.
8.
During the reporting period, the Prime Minister publicly reiterated his
Government’s commitment to the disassociation policy, most recently on 3 April in a
meeting with ambassadors of the European Union in the region.
9.
The issue of the normalization of relations between Lebanon and the Syrian
Arab Republic and the disassociation policy continued to colour the political
dynamics. In this regard, the Prime Minister reportedly stated on 19 March that, “as
for the normalization of relations with the regime, Lebanon applies a disassociation
policy and is committed to the stance of the Arab League and its decisions about the
Syrian regime”.
10. The number of registered refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic hosted by
Lebanon totalled 944,613, as at 31 March 2019. At the third Brussels Conference on
Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region, held from 12 to 14 March, participants
announced their pledges for both the Syrian Arab Republic and the region, including
Lebanon, amounting to $7 billion for 2019 and multi-year pledges of close to
$2.4 billion for 2020 and beyond. In addition, international financial institutions and
donors announced around $20.7 billion in loans on concessional terms.
11. In its resolution 1680 (2006), the Security Council strongly encouraged the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to respond positively to the r equest made
by the Government of Lebanon to delineate their common border. This remains
critical to enable proper border control and management, including the movement of
people and the potential movement of arms.
12. The delineation and demarcation of the boundaries of Lebanon also remain
elements that are essential to guaranteeing national sovereignty and territorial
integrity. While border delineation is a bilateral matter, progress on the issue remains
an obligation for Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic, in accordance with
resolution 1680 (2006). There were no reports of cross-border incidents on the eastern
and northern borders up to March 2019.
13. Israel continued to occupy the northern part of the village of Ghajar and an
adjacent area north of the Blue Line, in violation of the sovereignty of Lebanon and
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).

2/8

19-06827

S/2019/343

14. There was no progress in relation to the issue of the Shab‘a Farms area.
Furthermore, neither the Syrian Arab Republic nor Israel has responded to the provisional
definition of the area contained in my predecessor’s report of 30 October 2007 on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2007/641). In his speech at the thirtieth
summit of the League of Arab States, held in Tunis on 31 March 2019, after the
decision made on 25 March by the Government of the United States of America to
recognize Israel’s sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan, the President of
Lebanon stated that the decision of the United States “threatens […] the sovereignty
of the Lebanese State, which possesses land gradually [annexed] by Israel,
particularly in the Shebaa Farms and the Kafrshuba hills and the northern part of
Ghajar. Lebanese ownership of these territories is documented by internation ally
recognized documents and maps”. In a tweet on 30 March, referring to the decision
of the United States, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Gebran Bassil, referred to “Arab
support to the right of Syria to retrieve the occupied Golan and [the Lebanese r ight to
retrieve] Shab‘a Farms, Kfar Shuba Hills and the northern part of Ghajar village ”. In
a speech on 26 March, the Secretary-General of Hizbullah, Hassan Nasrallah, stated
that “whoever is still doubting and confused should be convinced that the only option
after Jerusalem and the Golan Heights for the Syrians to restore the Golan and the
Lebanese to restore the Shebaa Farms and the Kfarshouba Hills and the Lebanese part
of Ghajar […] is resistance, resistance, resistance”.
15. Uncrewed aerial vehicles and fixed-wing aircraft, including fighter jets, of the
Israel Defense Forces continued to make almost daily overflights of Lebanon during
the reporting period, in violation of Lebanese sovereignty and resolutions 1559 (2004)
and 1701 (2006).
16. As stated in my report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2019/237), the Israel Defense Forces, on 4 December 2018, informed the Head of
Mission and Force Commander of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon,
announced in a letter to the President of the Security Council ( S/2018/1082) and
notified the media that it had launched “Operation Northern Shield” to expose and
neutralize tunnels allegedly built across the Blue Line by Hizbullah. In a letter dated
6 December 2018 addressed to the President of the Security Council and to me
(A/73/631-S/2018/1091), the Permanent Representative of Lebanon conveyed her
Government’s condemnation in the strongest possible terms of what it said was the
“political and diplomatic campaign being waged by Israel against Lebanon, which it
fears is a prelude to the launch of further attacks”. She added that the campaign was
“being accompanied by a number of extremely serious acts, of which the most recent
is that Israel has breached the Lebanese communications grid by hacking into the
telephone network and sending recorded messages to peaceable civilian inhabitants
of the southern part of the village of Kafr Killa warning them of imminent explosions
to take place on Lebanese territory that might put their lives at risk ”.
17. In identical letters dated 26 December 2018 addressed to the President of the
Security Council and to me (A/73/695-S/2018/1162), the Permanent Representative
of Lebanon to the United Nations conveyed her Government’s message that, on
25 December, “Israeli warplanes violated Lebanese airspace to carry out air strikes
against the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic,” stating that, “with this new
violation, Israel has reverted to the dangerous practice of using Lebanese airspace to
carry out air strikes against Syrian territory” that she called on the Security Council
to condemn. It was further noted in the letter that “this serious violation posed a threat
to civilian aircraft traffic in Lebanese airspace and almost caused a major air
catastrophe”. That concern was further reiterated in identical letters dated
27 December 2018 from the Permanent Representative addressed to the President of
the Security Council and to me (A/73/713-S/2018/1170), noting that it “placed the
lives of hundreds of civilians at grave risk”.
19-06827

3/8

S/2019/343

18. In its ministerial statement, the Government stated its commitment “to
establishing and bringing to light the truth about the assassination of former Prime
Minister Rafik Hariri and his companions”. It reiterated its intention to “follow up on
the progress of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, which was origin ally established to
pursue truth and justice without politicization or retribution and to do so in a manner
that does not affect the stability, unity and civil peace of Lebanon”. In his statement
on 14 February in commemoration of his father’s death, the Prime Minister reiterated
that the verdict would not serve to take revenge but rather lead to justice. Lebanon
made its contribution to the 2019 budget of the Tribunal on 28 Februa ry.

B.

Extension of control of the Government of Lebanon over all
Lebanese territory
19. The Government of Lebanon continued its efforts to extend the authority of the
State throughout all the Lebanese territory, as called for in the Taif Accords an d in
resolution 1559 (2004).
20. The overall security situation in Lebanon remained stable during the reporting
period. At a conference on 26 November on the theme “Eradication of terrorism in
the region and its impact on the African continent,” organized by the General
Directorate of General Security, the former Minister of the Interior, Nouhad
Machnouk, reportedly stated that “Lebanon defeated terrorism thanks to cohesive
national unity, mindful politics, and the military and security institutions”. At that
same conference, the Director General of the General Directorate of General Security,
Major-General Abbas Ibrahim, reportedly stressed the need to confront the threat of
terrorism through the adoption of a “trans-boundary security policy”.
21. The Lebanese Armed Forces continued to take steps to protect the country’s
security. On 29 December, two soldiers of the Lebanese armed forces were reportedly
wounded during an army raid on a house of a wanted person in Brital as the assailants
opened fire on the patrol.
22. Despite an overall improved security situation, a significant issue of concern for
Lebanon is the potential return to the country of fighters associated with the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). In that connection, the Lebanese armed forces
continued to arrest individuals allegedly affiliated with or supporting extremist
groups. On 9 January, the General Directorate of General Security arrested members
of a cell reportedly belonging to ISIL and planning to carry out operations against
Lebanese army posts and patrols in Arsal.

C.

Disbanding and disarmament of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias
23. In its resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council called for the disbanding and
disarmament of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, a key provision of the
resolution that has yet to be implemented. The provision reflects and reaffirms a
decision to which all Lebanese committed themselves in the Taif Accords.
24. Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias within the country continued to operate
outside the control of the Government, in violation of resolution 1559 (2004). While
several groups across the political spectrum in Lebanon possess weapons outside
government control, Hizbullah is the most heavily armed militia in the country. In a
democratic State, it remains a fundamental anomaly that a political party maintains a
militia that has no accountability to the democratic, governmental institutions of the
State but has the power to take that State to war.

4/8

19-06827

S/2019/343

25. The self-acknowledged maintenance of arms by Hizbullah and other groups and
the alleged increase by Hizbullah of its arsenal pose a serious challenge to the State ’s
ability to exercise full sovereignty and authority over its territory. In an interview
with a television channel on 26 January, the Secretary-General of Hizbullah reiterated
his claim of 20 September 2018 that Hizbullah possesses precision missiles (see
S/2018/920). In response to a question, he stated “of course we possess precision
missiles, and with a sufficient number to confront [Israel] in a future war, to strike
any target we want in the course of our war plan […]. We possess precision missiles
in the amount we need and what we need no longer needs to be transferred.”
26. There has been no tangible progress towards the disbanding and disarming of
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, as called for in the Taif Accords and resolution
1559 (2004). Since the adoption of that resolution, no specific steps have been taken
to tackle that crucial issue, which lies at the heart of the sovereignty and political
independence of Lebanon. The maintenance by Hizbullah of a military arsenal outside
of a legal framework and its involvement in the Syrian Arab Republic continued to
be denounced by a number of voices in Lebanon, who consider those issues to be
destabilizing factors in the country and ones that undermine democracy. M any
Lebanese see the continued presence of such arms as an implicit threat that the
weapons could be used within Lebanon for political reasons.
27. In a letter dated 26 October 2018 addressed to the President of the Security
Council and to me (S/2018/960), the Permanent Representative of Israel denounced,
on behalf of his Government, Hizbullah’s “missile conversion activities,” further
alleging that they were “amid mass civilian population centres”. He called on the
Lebanese authorities to “conduct the necessary due diligence to ensure that facilities
and funding are not being used” for Hizbullah’s activities. As noted in my report on
the implementation of resolution 1701 (S/2019/237), in a letter dated 28 February
addressed to the Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the
Deputy Permanent Representative of the Permanent Mission of Israel to the United
Nations conveyed, on behalf of her Government, that “the Iranian regime continues
to bolster Hezbollah’s weapons capabilities in various ways, including through the
precision-guided missile conversion programme it has established inside civilian
population centres across Lebanon, and the proliferation of mass weapons
manufacturing capabilities to Hezbollah in Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic ”.
In the letter it was alleged that reports over the past few months had revealed a drastic
increase in weapons transfers from Tehran to Rafic Hariri International Airport in
Beirut. It was further stated that the “Iranian regime is also providing Hezbollah with
technical training and assistance to manufacture, maintain and use these weapons and
advanced capabilities independently”. The United Nations is not in a position to
verify the information provided.
28. The participation of Hizbullah and other Lebanese in the conflict in the Syrian
Arab Republic continued to breach the policy of disassociation and the principles of
the Baabda Declaration. In an interview with a television channel on 26 January, the
Secretary-General of Hizbullah, referring to the announced withdrawal of United
States troops from the Syrian Arab Republic, stated that Hizbullah ’s reason to remain
there still stood, given that it was based on a request from the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic. In a letter dated 13 March 2019 addressed to the President of
the Security Council and to me (S/2019/234), the Permanent Representative of Israel,
on behalf of his Government, stated that the Israel Defense Forces had exposed a
“Hezbollah terror network” ranging “from the town of Hader, at the northern end of
the Golan Heights, to the towns of Arneh and Khan Arnabeh and to Quneitra ”.
29. In his interview on 26 January, the Secretary-General of Hizbullah stated that,
should Hizbullah be invited to discuss the national defence strategy, it would be ready

19-06827

5/8

S/2019/343

to do so “without prior conditions and at any time,” stating that it had already
presented its vision on the matter in 2006.
30. The security situation in the Palestine refugee camps remained relatively calm
during the reporting period. However, several Palestinian armed groups continued to
operate in the country, inside and outside the Palestine refugee camps. On 15 October,
violent clashes broke out in the Mieh Mieh camp between supporters of the
Ansarullah Movement and Fatah, involving the use of heavy machine guns and
rocket-propelled grenades. Six fighters were reportedly killed, and 2 6 people were
injured in the clashes. The fighting resulted in the displacement of most residents of
the camp, extensive damage and the temporary suspension of operations of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East . The
President of Lebanon stated on 25 October that the Lebanese armed forces would
continue to take the measures necessary to maintain security and stability in the area.
A ceasefire went into effect on 28 October. In a visit to the town of Mieh Mieh on
30 October, the former Minister of Information, Melhem Riachy, reportedly stated
that “it is unacceptable to have weapons outside the State […]. The Lebanese army,
which is shouldering its responsibilities to the fullest, is the one responsible in this
matter.” A shoot-out that reportedly involved the son of fugitive Bilal Abu Arqub,
affiliated with the Bilal Badr extremist group, left four wounded in Ein El Hilweh on
15 March.
31. The presence of Palestinian armed groups outside the camps also continued.
Notwithstanding the decision taken in 2006 in the context of the national dialogue,
and confirmed at subsequent sessions, to disarm Palestinian militias outside the camps
within a six-month period, no progress was made during the reporting period with
regard to dismantling the military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada in the country.
32. On 21 January, the intelligence branch of the Lebanese armed forces stated that
it had arrested an individual who it said had carried out reconnaissance and
monitoring operations on behalf of Israeli intelligence agencies in the case of the
attempted assassination of a Hamas official, as mentioned in my report of May 2018
(S/2018/480).
33. UNRWA continued its efforts to deliver essential health, education, relief and
social services to Palestine refugees in Lebanon, in the face of serious funding
shortfalls. The Agency has called for a total of $1.2 billion to fu nd its vital core
services and life-saving humanitarian aid for 5.4 million Palestine refugees in Jordan,
Lebanon, the Syrian Arab Republic, Gaza and the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. In its ministerial statement, the Government pledged to “work with sister
and friendly countries on finding a solution to the funding crisis ” of the Agency.

II. Observations
34. I welcome the formation of the Government of Lebanon and encourage
Lebanese leaders to use the present momentum to deliver on the priorities set forth in
the ministerial statement, the dividends of which Lebanese citizens are keen to see.
The nomination of four women to the Government is notable and I reiterate my call
for political leaders to further pursue efforts to enhance the fu ll and effective
participation of women in Lebanese politics.
35. I note the stated intention of the Government of Lebanon to focus its efforts on
addressing the economic situation as a matter of priority. This is essential in order for
Lebanon to address the challenges it currently faces. It is also important that other
priorities be addressed, notably on the development of a national defence strategy

6/8

19-06827

S/2019/343

through a Lebanese-led, Lebanese-owned process in line with the country’s
international obligations. I reiterate my earlier encouragement to the President to
spearhead a renewed dialogue on a national defence strategy and to political leaders
to support him in that endeavour. It is important that such a dialogue addresses the
need to achieve a State monopoly over the possession and use of weapons and the use
of force, a crucial issue that stands at the heart of the sovereignty and the political
independence of Lebanon.
36. The renewed commitment to the disassociation policy, as expressed in the
ministerial statement, is welcome. I call again on the Government and Lebanese
parties and actors to abide by the disassociation policy and the Baabda Declaration in
their actions.
37. Hizbullah’s continued involvement in the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic
is not only in breach of the disassociation policy and the principles of the Baabda
Declaration, but also carries a risk of entangling Lebanon in the regional conflicts and
poses risks to the stability of Lebanon and the region. Furthermore, it demonstrates
the failure of Hizbullah to disarm and its refusal to be accountable to the very State
institutions that the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) was intended to
strengthen.
38. The widespread presence of weapons outside the control of the State, combined
with the existence of armed militias, continues to undermine security and stability in
Lebanon. The maintenance by Hizbullah of sizeable and sophisticated military
capabilities outside the control of the Government of Lebanon remains a matter of
grave concern. I note with concern the renewed claim by the Secretary -General of
Hizbullah that Hizbullah possesses precision weapons.
39. I call again upon Hizbullah and all other parties concerned not to en gage in any
military activity inside or outside Lebanon, consistent with the requirements of the
Taif Accords and resolution 1559 (2004). It is critical that the Accords be preserved
and implemented by all to avoid the spectre of a renewed confrontation among
Lebanese citizens and to strengthen the institutions of the State. All concerned must
contribute to efforts to reinforce the institutions of the Lebanese State. The State
should increase its efforts to achieve a monopoly over the possession of weapons and
the use of force throughout its territory. I continue to urge the Government and the
armed forces of Lebanon to take all measures necessary to prohibit Hizbullah and
other armed groups from acquiring weapons and building paramilitary capacity
outside the authority of the State, in violation of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701
(2006).
40. The reported involvement of Hizbullah, as well as that of other Lebanese
elements, in fighting elsewhere in the region remains a concern. I call upon countries
in the region that maintain close ties with Hizbullah to encourage the transformation
of that armed group into a solely civilian political party, and its disarmament, in
accordance with the requirements of the Taif Accords and resolution 1559 (2004), in
the best interests of Lebanon and of regional peace and security.
41. I condemn all violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
They undermine the credibility of the Lebanese security and State institutions and
generate anxiety among the civilian population. I renew my calls for Israel to adhere
to its obligations under relevant Security Council resolutions and to withdraw its
forces from the northern part of the village of Ghajar and an adjacent area north of
the Blue Line, as well as to cease immediately its overflights of Lebanese airspace.
The use of Lebanese airspace by the Israel Defense Forces to strike targets in the
Syrian Arab Republic is deeply concerning, because of the risk it poses of a wider
confrontation. Any overflight of Lebanese airspace by Israeli military aircraft is a

19-06827

7/8

S/2019/343

violation of Lebanese sovereignty and territorial integrity and of resolutions 1559
(2004) and 1701 (2006).
42. The continued support of the international community to the Lebanese armed
forces, the internal security forces and other security institutions is welcome and a
key instrument in building the monopoly over the use of force by the State. I
encourage donors to follow through on their pledges at the second Rome conference
on Lebanon.
43. I express my gratitude for the commitments of sustained funding to Lebanon
expressed at the third Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the
Region, including Lebanon. I encourage donors to continue to support the remarkable
generosity and hospitality of Lebanon in hosting Syrian refugees, including by
delivering promptly on their pledges at the conference, while also working actively
to create the conditions to facilitate the safe, voluntary and dignified return of Syrian
refugees.
44. The renewed commitment of the Government, through its ministerial statement,
to preventing tensions in Palestine refugee camps is positive. It is also critical that the
maintenance of weapons by non-Lebanese militias be addressed and that the earlier
decisions of the national dialogue be implemented. This includes following up on the
efforts of the Government of Lebanon to deal with “quality-of-life, social and
humanitarian issues with regard to Palestine refugees living inside and outside
refugee camps,” as decided by the national dialogue in 2006.
45. I encourage donors to renew and sustain their efforts to provide funding to
UNRWA so that it can continue to perform its essential role and deliver services,
which are vital to the dignity and security of Palestine refugees. Such efforts are
without prejudice to the need for the just resolution of the Palestine refugee question
in the context of a comprehensive settlement in the regio n.
46. As the Special Tribunal for Lebanon moves forward in its proceedings, I
reiterate that it is in the interests of Lebanon and in line with its obligations under
international law to ensure that those behind terrorist acts, including political
assassinations, are held accountable and that violence is not committed with impunity.
I welcome the Government’s commitment to establishing the truth in that connection,
as expressed in the ministerial statement.
47. Lebanon faces an opportunity to make progress on the outstanding provisions
of resolution 1559 (2004), including by addressing the maintenance of weapons
outside State control. I count on the continued commitment of the Government of
Lebanon to its international obligations and I call upon all parties and actors to fully
abide by resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006). The United Nations
will continue its efforts towards the full implementation of those and all other
resolutions pertaining to Lebanon.

8/8

19-06827
