General Assnnbly-Twmty-secOftd Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SPECIAL POLITICAL

COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
Dat•ll{
•dot,tio,.

Pa(III

25 October 1967

19

35

13 December 1967

19

37

13 Decell'lber 1967

20

34
34

19 December 1967
19 December 1967

21
21

Till•

2258 (XXII)
2307 (XXII)

2308 (XXII)
2341 (XXII)

Effects of atomic radiation (A/6869) ..
The policies of apartheid of the Government of the Republic of
South Africa (A/6914)
......... .
Comprehensive review of the whole question of peace-keeping
operations in all their aspects ( A/6959) . .
Report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(A/7004)
Resolution A
Resolution B

7. Recommends that all the parties concerned should
continue their co-operation with the Scientific Committee;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Scientific Committee with the assistance
necessary for the conduct of its work and the dissemination of its findings to the public.
1592nd plenary meeting,
25 October 1967.

2258 (XXII). Effects of atomic radiadon
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December 1955,
which established the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and its subsequent resolutions reaffirming the desirability of the
Committee's continuing its work,
Concerned about the potentially harmful effects on
present and future generations resulting from the levels
of radiation to which man is exposed,
Conscious of the continued need for compiling information about atomic radiation and for analysing its
effects on man and his environment,
l. Notes with appreciation the report adopted by
the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects
of Atomic Radiation at its seventeenth session ;1
2. Commends the Scientific Committee for the valuable contributions it has made since its inception to
the wider knowledge and understanding of the effects
and levels of atomic radiation ;
3. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its
programme, including its co-ordinating activities, to
increase the knowledge of the levels and effects of atomic
radiation from all sources ;
4. Notes the intention of the Scientific Committee
to hold its eighteenth session in April 1968 and to
report further to the General Assembly ;
5. Commends the World Meteorological Organization for its work in carrying forward the scheme for
monitoring and reporting levels of atmospheric radioactivity;
.
6. Expresses its appreciation for the assistance rendered to the Scientific Committee by the specialized
agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency and
the non-governmental organizations concerned;

2307 (XXII). The poHciee of apartheid of the
Govemment of the Republic of South
Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on this question and reaffirming, in particular, resolution 2202 (XXI) of 16 December 1966,
Recalling Security Council resolutions 181 ( 1963)
of 7 August 1963, 182 (1963) of 4 December 1963,
190 (1964) of 9 June 1964 and 191 (1964) of 18
June 1964,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government
of the Republic of South Africa, 2
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the
International Seminar on Apartheid, Racial Discrimination and Colonialism in Southern Africa, held at Kitwe,
Zambia,8
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on his consultations with the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development,4
2 Ibid.,

agenda item 3S, documents A/6864 and Add.I.
a A/6818 and Corr.I.
4 Official Records of the Genwol Assembly T'Ulfflty-second
Session, Annexes, agenda item 66, document Ai682S.

1 Official

Rtcords of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Sission, Annexes, agenda item 36, document A/6814.

19

20

General Asaembly-Twenty-11econd Seesion

Noting with grave concern that the racial policies of
the Government of South Africa have led to violent
conflict and an explosive situation,
Convinced that the situation in the Republic of South
Africa and the resulting explosive situation in southern
Africa continue to pose a grave threat to international
peace and security,
Considering it essential to promote a greater and
closer co-ordination of international efforts to eliminate
apartheid, racial discrimination and colonialism in
southern Africa,
·
1. Reiterates its condemnation of the policies of
apartheid practised by the Government of South Africa
as a crime against humanity ;
2. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of the people of South Africa for human rights
and fund:unental freedoms for a11 the people of South
Africa irrespective of race, colour or creed ;
3. Strongly reiterates its conviction that the situation
in South Africa constitutes a threat to international
peace :md security, that action under Chapter VII of
the Chnrter of the United Nations is essential in order
to solve the problem of apartheid and that universally
applied mandatory economic sanctions are the only
means of achieving a peaceful solution;
4. Once again draws the attention of the Security
Council to the grave situation in South Africa, and in
southern Africa as a whole, and requests the Council
to resume consideration of the question of apartheid
with a view to ensuring the full implementation of its
resolutions and the adoption of more effective measures
to secure an end to the policies of apartheid of the
Government of South Africa ;
5. Condemns the actions of those States, particularly
the main trading partners of South Africa, and the
activities of those foreign financial and other interests,
all of which through their political, economic and
military collaboration with the Government of South
Africa and contrary to relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions are encouraging that Government to persist in its racial policies ;
6. Requests all States, particularly the main trading
partners of South Africa, to comply fully with the resolutions of the Security Council on this question, to take
urgent steps towards disengagement from South Africa
and to take all appropriate measures to facilitate more
effective action, under the auspices of the United
Nations, to secure the elimination of apartheid ;
7. Reiterates its request to the International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development to deny financial,
economic and technical assistance to the Government
of South Africa and, in this connexion, expresses the
hope that the Bank will stand by its assurance that it
will avoid any action that might run counter to the
fulfilment of the great purposes of the United Nations;
8. Appeals to all States and organizations to provide
appropriate moral, political and material assistance to
the people of South Africa in their legitimate struggle
for the rights recognized in the Charter ;
9. Invites all States to encourage the establishment
of national organizations for the purpose of further
enlightening public opinion on the evils of apartheid
and to report annually to the Secretary-General on the
progress and activities of such organizations ;
10. R_equests all States to commemorate, during the
International Year for Human Rights, 21 March 1968

-the International Day for the Elimination of Racial
Dis~rimination-with appropriate solemnity, in solidarity with the oppressed people of South Africa;
11. Commends to the attention of all United Nations
organs the report of the Seminar on Apartheid held at
Brasilia1 and the report of the International Seminar
on Apartheid, Racial Discrimination and Colonialism
in Southern Africa held at Kitwe, Zambia ;
12. Requests the Special Committee on the Policies
of Apartheid of the Government of the Republic of
South Africa to intensify its co-operation with other
special organs concerned with the problems of racial
?iscrimination and colonialism in southern Africa, taking
mto account the relevant General Assembly resolutions
and the conclusions and recommendations of the Intern~ti~nal Seminar held at Kitwe, in so far as they fall
w1thm the mandate of the Special Committee under
General Assembly resolution 1761 (XVII) of 6 November 1962;
13. Requests the Special Committee on the Policies
of Aparth~id of the Government of the Republic of
Sou~h Af:1ca _to continue to discharge its mandate and
to mt~ns1fy its efforts to promote an international
~amp~1gr:i against apartheid and, to this end, authorizes
it, w1thm the budgetary provisions made for this
purpose:
(a) To hold during the International Year for
Human Rights a special session away from Headquarters;
( b) In consultation with the Secretary-General to
arra?ge for the_ advisory services of experts or s~ial
studies on specific aspects of the campaign ;
( c) To consult with the Secretary-General and the
specialized agencies, regional organizations and nongovernmental organizations concerned and to submit
to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session a
report on measur_es which might appropriately be taken
to ensure the widest dissemination of information on
the evils. of apartheid and the efforts of the international
commumty to secure its elimination ;
. 14. _Re~uests t~e Secr~tary-General to intensify the
d1ssemmatto~ of mf?rn:1at1on _on the ~vils of apartheid
and to publish penod1cally mformat1on on economic
and financial relations between South Africa and other
States;
!nvites States, specialized agencies, regional orgamzat1ons and non-governmental organizations to cooperat~ with the Secretary-General and the Special
Cormmttee on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South Africa in the accomplishment of their tasks under the present resolution.
1629th plenary meeting,
13 December 1967.

1?·

2308 (XXD). Comprehensive review of the whole
question of peace-keeping operations in all
their aspects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2006 (XIX) of 18 February
1965 and 2053 A (XX) of 15 December 1965,
Recalli'!g fu'!ther it~ resolution 2249 (S-V) of 23 May
1967, which, inte~ alw, requ~sted the Special Committee on Peace-keepmg Operations to continue the review
of the whole question of peace-keeping operations in all
11 ST/TAO/HR/27.
