A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/124
20 January 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 106
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/54/595)]
54/124. Follow-up to the International Year of the Family
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 44/82 of 8 December 1989, 46/92 of 16 December 1991, 47/237 of
20 September 1993, 50/142 of 21 December 1995 and 52/81 of 12 December 1997 concerning the
proclamation, preparations for and observance of the International Year of the Family,
Recognizing that the basic objective of the follow-up to the International Year of the Family should be
to strengthen and support families in performing their societal and developmental functions and to build upon
their strengths, in particular at the national and local levels,
Noting that the family-related provisions of the outcomes of the world conferences of the 1990s continue
to provide policy guidance on ways to strengthen family-centred components of policies and programmes
as part of an integrated comprehensive approach to development,
Emphasizing that equality between women and men and respect for the rights of all family members is
essential to family well-being and to society at large,
Noting with concern that the contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund on Family Activities have
steadily decreased, reducing its resource base, and that, unless this trend is reversed and the Fund
strengthened, many priority concerns relating to family issues will not be met,

00 24644

/...

A/RES/54/124
Page 2

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the follow-up to the International Year of the
Family,1
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General1 and the recommendations contained therein;

2. Invites Governments to continue their actions to build family-friendly societies, inter alia, by
promoting the rights of individual family members, in particular gender equality and the rights of the child;
3. Urges Governments to continue to take sustained action at all levels concerning family issues,
including studies and applied research, to promote the role of families in development and to develop
concrete measures and approaches to address national priorities to deal with family issues;
4. Recommends that all relevant actors, including Governments, research and academic institutions
and civil society, contribute to developing strategies and programmes aimed at strengthening the economic
and sustainable livelihood of families;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to play an active role in facilitating international
cooperation within the framework of the follow-up to the International Year of the Family, to facilitate the
exchange of experiences and information among Governments on effective policies and strategies, to
facilitate technical assistance, with a focus on least developed and developing countries, and to encourage
the organization of subregional and interregional meetings and relevant research;
6. Invites the Commission for Social Development, when adopting its next multi-year programme of
work, to consider undertaking a review of the global situation of the family in 2004, bearing in mind that,
in different cultural, political and social systems, various forms of the family exist;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session, through
the Commission for Social Development and the Economic and Social Council, on the appropriate ways and
means to observe the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family in 2004.
83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999

1

A/54/256.
