United Nations

GE
AS~SE

Friday,

O#iciul Records
FIFTH

EMERGENCY

SPECIAL

CONTENTS

President: Mr. Abdul Rihrnan

1

PAZHWAK

(Afghanistan).
AGENDA

ITEM

YORK

“Bearing in mind the resolutions adopted and the
proposals considered during the fifth emergency
special session,

5

Letter
dated 13 June 1967 from the Minister
for
Foreign
Affairs
of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics
(A/6717)
(continued)

1, The PRESIDENT: The representative
has asked to spdak, and I now call on him,

NEW

5. It is in that spirit and in the conviction that the
ideas just outlined enjoy wide support amongst the
Members that I, speaking in the name of the delegations of Austria, Finland and Sweden, have the honour
to introduce the following draft resolution:
“The General Assembly,
“Having considered the grave situation in the
Middle East,

Page
Agenda item 5’:
Letter dated 13 June 1967 from the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics (A/671 7) (continued). . .

SE@lON

21 July 1967,
at 3 p.m.

“1. Recommends to the Security Council to sesume its consideration of the tense situation in the
Middle East as a matter of urgency;
“2. Requests
the Secretary-General
to forward
-the records of the fifth emergency special session
to the Security Council;
“3, Decides to $djourn the fifth emergency special
session temporarily
and to authorize the President
of the General Assembly to reconvene the,session
as and when necessary, nu
This draft resolution has been handed to the Secretariat
for immediate distribution,
In view of the fact that it is
not yet in the hands of the representatives
in any language, I should like to read it out again.

of Sweden

2. Mr. ASTROM (Sweden): The General Assembly
has now been in session for over four weeks considering the urgent and grave question of the situation
in the Middle East, Intensive efforts have been made
by delegations and groups of delegations to work out
a draft resoluti.on which could serve as a substantive
basis for the establishment of a situation of peace
with justice in the area. During the consultations it
has become clear that there is in fact broad agreement on many basic purposes and principles.
However, as Members are well aware, it has not been
possible to formulate these purposes and principles
in such a manner as to command the support required
.for the adoption of a resolution.
3. In these circumstances, the three delegations on
whose behalf I have the honour to speak-Austria,
Finland and Sweden-have come to the conclusion,
after wide consultations, that it would be advisable
to adjourn this session temporarily.
This does not
mean an end to, nor a suspension of, our efforts to
reach peaceful solutions through the United Nations.
Therefore, in our view, the President of the General
Assembly should be authorized to reconvene the session as and when necessary. Furthermore,
a recommendation should be addressed to the Security Council,
which is’ already seized of the question, to resume its
consideration of the tense situation in the Middle East
as a matter of urgency.
4. By these two provisions, the General Assembly
would stress that although it has not been able at this
time to arrive at a resolution on the substance of the
problem before us, the United Nations has a contiliuing
responsibility,
as indeed have all Member States, to
contribute to the solution of the urgent and grave problems pertaining to the area, We axe convinced that
such a resolution would in no way be prejudicial
tp
the interests or positions of any Member State.

The representative of Sweden read out again the text
of the drti resolution.

6. Mr, ASTROM (Sweden): This draft resolution will
be circulated shortly. It is our hope that a decision on
it will be taken today,
7. The PRESIDENT:
The draft resolution introduced
by the representative of Sweden [A/L.5291 willbedistributed within ten minutes, I wish to thankthe representative of Sweden for having stated so clearly the
wording of the draft resolution and for having read it
out twice for the information of the Members.
8. If there is no objection, I propose, on the basis of
the semarks of the representative of Sweden, that the
Assembly proceed to vote on this draft resolution.
9. Mr. PACHACHI
(Iraq): We are grateful to the
representative
of Sweden for having read out very
clearly the draft resolution which his delegation and
the delegations of Finland and Austria have presented
to the General Assembly for consideration.
In spite
of the clarity of my friend’s diction, it seems to me
that It would be helpful, and indeed necessary, for the
Members of the Assembly to have the written text
before them before proceeding to a vote, As the repreu Subsequently

1

circulated

a8 document

A/t.S29.

A/PV.1558

2

!

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

Special Session - Plenary

Meetings

sentative of Sweden stated at the outset of his remarks,
this is a substantive decision, this is not a procedural
draft resolution, and therefore
it cannot be treated as
a simple procedural
motion which can be disposed of
on the basis of an oral presentation.
It is a substantive
draft resolution of some importance, with very serious
implications
for the General Assembly,
the United
Nations and future peace and security in the area,

13. At this point, my delegation would like to take
the opportunity to thank all those delegations that have
co-operated with us in a sincere search for a constructive
solution to this very difficult situation, We
have worked long hours, we have carried out protracted negotiations, and from time to time it seemed
as if we might achieve the desired results if it were
not for the forces I have already mentioned.

10. I would therefore
urge that this draft resolution
be accorded the importance
that it clearly deserves
and should not be adopted in this fashion, without
representatives
having had an opportunity
to study
and consider the text. After all, the draft resolution
was read out in English,
and I imagine there are
many representatives
in the Assembly
who heard it
through the simultaneous
interpretation,
which perhaps was not so clear as the text will be when it has
been translated
and circulated
to Members. I therefore reqest
that we defer the vote on this draft
resolution until we have had time to study it in written
form.

14. To you, Mr. President,
our gratitude for your
patient guidance of this session and your unfailing
efforts to assist the A.ssembly in its task, The Tanzanian delegation, out of a desire not to encroach
too much upon our time, will not enter into a detailed analysis of the present situation, which certainly warrants
the concern of all those who have
the interests of this Organization at heart.

11. Mr. FOUM (United Republic of Tanzania): It will
be remembered
that, at the beginning of this session
of the Assembly,
Tanzania expressed its considered
opinion regarding the events which have occurred in
the Middle East in connexion with the aggression
perpetrated against three countries of the Arab world
and Africa [1530th meeting]. It was our hope that the
General Assembly would execute its clear duty, which
was to condemn the aggression, reiterate the principle
prohibiting any gains from the fruits of aggression,
and seek the immediate and unconditional withdrawal
of the occupying forces from the occupiedterritories.
To our consternation
and dismay, the General Assembly has presented
a lamentable
spectacle
of
paralysis
and disarray.
The circumstances
which
have led to this state of affairs might be summed up
as being the result
of undue influence of certain
major Powers, and acquiescence,
if not appeasement,
by a certain section of the membership
of this Organization. That unfortunate correlation
of forces has
led the fifth emergency special session of theGenera
Assembly to its present impasse. The draft resolution
before this Assembly
would put the stamp of formal
approval upon this deplorable state of affairs.
12. The Tanzanian
delegation
would
like to pay
tribute to the good intentions
of the sponsors of the
draft resolution.
However,
we have grave doubts
about the propriety
of the proposals
it contains, as
well as about’ its utility and implications,
When one
takes into consideration
the present
international
situation as a whole and the hopes of people the world
over that the United Nations will play a constructive
role in the maintenance of peace and the protection
of the rights of small nations and States, the present
draft resolution
is a sad disappointment,
We cannot
help fearing that, if tomorrow
or next week one or
another of us were to experience a similar situation,
then the Assembly
would react in a similar
manner.
Where, then should lie the hopes of the smaller
nations in the protection
promised by the Charter of
this Organization?
Where, then should the countries
of the Third World look for a safeguard
against
rampant imperialism,
colonialism,
and international
forces of neo-colonialism7

15. For the reasons iiven, the Tanzanian delegation
will not be able to support the present draft resolution,
16. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): This is amomentous period in the life of the UnitedNations.
I say this
because this may turn out to be the crossroads:
Either we will have an effective international organization, or-as has been the case since the United Nations
was founded and as was the case before, in the League
of Nations-we
will have an organisation
that will be
sort of a window dressing
for power politics, for
spheres of influence and for the assertion of policies
dictated by the powerful States.
17. I mentioned in the Security
Council about a
month ago [1358th meeting] that the question of peace
and war was the prerogative
of that body. I warned
the Council that I did not see any reason or wisdom
in referring
this question of Israeli aggression t0 a
special emergency
session of the Assembly.
HOWever, pressure
was brought upon the membership
of the United Nations-and
if it was not pressure,
at
least persuasion
was used to convince members that
peace would be served by convening a special emergency session. I was not convinced at the time, and I
said that the result would be zero. I am sorry to say
today that the result is below zero.
18. In 1950, I witnessed none other than my friend,
Yakov Malik, walk out of the Security Council, Some
Powers
seized that opportunity
in the Council to
transfer
the Korean question to a session of this
Assembly.
The result was the famous Uniting for
Peace resolution
[resolution
377 (V)], and today
there are two Koreas-one
people bisected. Furthermore, there is no assurance that this question will
not be shuttled betweeh the Council and the Assembly
and then between the Assembly
and the Council, and
a decade from now the question of Israeli aggression
will still be before the Council and the Assembly.
19. It would seem that the politicians who direct the
affairs of nations have learned nothing from the past.
The League of Nations was founded in order to
transcend political arrangements, secret treaties
and the policies which the spheres of influence dictated. The League of Nations foundered. We would
have thought that the United Nations, after twenty
years, would learn a lesson from the failure of the
League of Nations. I am sorry to say that the United
Nations is following the pattern of the League of

:

1558th meeting - 21 July 1967
NationsTa pattern which I personally observed
I was in Western Europe in the thirties.

when

20. Why do I speak with such vehemence? It is because I speak with assurance.
I do not have to look
for the portents on the wall. They are already before
US.

21. Through the courtesy of my good friend and colleague, the representative
of Sweden, I have a copy of
the draft resolution [A/L.5291 he has submitted with
two other colleagues, the representative
of Finland
and the representative
of Austria. In appearanc’e, this
draft resolution is what might be called a procedural
resolution forwarding this question backto the Security
Council from the Assembly and also keeping this Assembly in abeyance, so that, if the Security Council
fails, the question can perhaps be shuttled back into
the Assembly; and then if the Assembly fails it will
be shuttled back to the Security Council. And year
in and year out we will be seized of this question-if
the Organization survives such machinations, because
I really feel very worried about the health of this international Organization. It is now a sick organization.
Organizations
can die, like patients. And there is no
assurance that if we followed this course of action,
this Organization would be immune to disease or even.
demise.
22. The draft resolution refers to the “grave situaa
tion”. I should like to remind my good friend, none
other than the Foreign Minister
of the Soviet Union,
of the letter [A/6717] he submitted-the
letter which
was the raison d’&tre of this emergency special session, That letter asked for the withdrawal
of Israeli
forces from the Arab lands which they bad occupied
since 5 June.
23. The same day that that letter was submitted,
none other than Ambassador Goldberg, another friend
and, colleague of ours, broadened the whole question.
It was no longer only the aggression of Israel but how
to liquidate the whole problem arising from the incursion of Israel in the midst of the Arab homeland.
The result is that the aggression has now been watered
down to merely a “grave situation”; the,aggression becomes a ‘grave situation It+ There are grave situations
everywhere in the world, There is a grave situation in
Rhodesia. There is a grave situation caused byapartheid. There is a grave situation in the Congo. There
are multifarious
grave situations-and
this Israeli
aggression
has been reduced to a mere “grave
situation”,
24. Where is the conscience of this Assembly7
Is it
only a “grave situation” or is it aggression?
Or do
many of you subscribe to the idea that 2,000 years
ago there was a Kingdom of Judea or Israel in that
part of the world? I do not have to elaborate on this
invalid argument, as I have dealt with it many times
throughout the twenty years of my presence
in the
United Nations,
25. This draft resolution states in its second preambular paragraph: llBearing in mind the resolutions
adopted and the proposals considered. a .“. I suppose
that the resolutions
referred to here cover the three
resolutions that were passed by this Assembly, namely,
the so-called humanitarianresolution
and the two resolutions pertaining to Jerusalem which are lugged in,

3

together with the proposals that f&led because of the
pressures
that were used, as they had been used in
1947, on people in capitals of countries to see to it
that the resolution which spelt out Israeli aggression
and the necessity of Israeli withdrawal
would not receive a two-thirds
majority,
Friends of mine in the
United Nations who were 7,000 miles away from
Palestine arrogated unto themselves the responsibility
to tell us how to act and how to behave-it
was if, the
Arabs, God forbid, even if they had the power, would
arrogate
unto themselves
the responsibility
to tell
the countries
of the new hemisphere
or of Western
Europe how they should decide their affairs.
26. It is not permissible
for the Assembly,to
lug in
the two resolutions
pertaining
to Jerusalem
[2253
(ES-V)
and 2254 (ES-V)] with the proposals
that
failed, instead of at least segregating those two resolutions and taking any action that would lead to their
implementation.
I beg my three colleagues from
Austria,
Finland and Sweden to take this into consideration.
Since when have we taken it upon ourselves to recommend to the Council what it should
do in the case of such a momentous draft resolution
as the one we have before us? This could easily have
been done by the Secretary-General
through a consensus which could have been taken by the President,
27. NO, this is not such an innocent draft resolution
after all, for the reasons I have mentioned, And there
are other points which I still have to mention, without
having to dissect each word of it-because
theobvious
cannot be hidden, just as you cannot hide a fire under
a bush. We see such words as thesein the draft resolution in operative paragraph 1: l’Recommends to the
Security Council to resume its consideration
of the
tense situation
in the Middle East, 0 a’ The word
“tense”
is equivalent here to the word “grave”.
It is
a question of diction: I would not say that they are
synonymous in the English language, A war and occupation of the territory
of three Member States of the
United Nations and the trampling of the dignity of 100
million Arab people have taken place and for people
who.are 6,000, 7,000 or 8,000 miles away this constitutes only a grave and tense situation, not aggression.
28. I hope that sufficient time has passed to enable
the Secretariat
to circulate this draft resolution
SO
that every Member can scrutinize in his own conscience
the implications
that it has. At the same time I mUSt
mention, as I have done time and again, that Governments, whether &rab or non-Arab, will come and go,
but the Palestine question will remain because the
Palestinian
people are not negotiable. It would be
shameful if we in this international Organization overlooked the self-determination
of the indigenous people
of Palestine, which since 1945 has been guaranteed in
the United Nations Charter.
29. Nor are the Arab people at large negotiable, For
your information,
secret societies are already banding
together to kill and assassinate
anyone amongst the
Arabs who tried to work out an accommodation such
as is envisaged by many of our colleagues either in
their statements
or by their support of certain resOlutions. When I mentioned this to a friend of mineand I do not have to name him; in fairness to our colleagues from the Soviet Union I must say that he was
of the Western camp-he said, “That is your problem” e ,

I

4

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency Special Session - Plenary Meetings

In other words, let the situation continue as it is and
there will be no peace and Israel will remain in occupation of the Arab lands. Andwhen I said, hSuppose the
leaders are killed or the Governments overthrown?”
He said, “That is your problem”. Let other Governments come into being; never mind, change them just
like you change your clothes in the morning. That is
how cynical certain Wester,n Powers are regarding
our people. And if only one of their nationals is insulted, let alone killed, in a foreign land, good Lord,
what they do not do in order to obtain redress for a
single person.
30, But let it be known from this rostrum that the
Arab people are not negotiable. The Arab people, I
am sorry to say, will have alongperiod
of instability,
of uprisings, of turmoil and turbulence if this Assembly does not treat the case of Palestine with the
justice which is due it and which has been due it since
1947.
31. I conclude my statement by saying that inasmuch
as I, like all of you, would like to see peace prevail
not only in the Middle East but the whole world overincluding South-East Asia; however, I must repeat
that there shall be no peace in the Middle East if this
Assembly still thinks that the indigenous people of
Palestine and the Arab people at large are negotiable.
32. The PRESIDENT: May I draw the attention of the
representative of Saudi Arabia to the fact that there is
now a draft resolution before the Assembly whichis a
procedural one in the view of its sponsors, Any references to the substance of the whole problem are not
proper at this stage. In addition, I am quite sure that
all Members would want to avoid discussing other issues which are not before the Assembly.
33. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President,
may I continue?
34. The PRESIDENT:
With the understanding that
you will heed my appeal, you may continue.
35.. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President,
you are sitting directly behind me. I was taking up my
papers and concluding my statement, But, becpse of
the friendship that price bound us together, and I am
sure still binds US together, you seem to have a genius
for interrupting my speech thirty seconds or so before
I conclude. I was not going to talk about Viet-Nam. All
I was saying was that I, like all of you, would like to
see peace prevail in the Middle East as well as in all
parts of the world, including South-East Asia-and I
am not going to discuss South-East Asia. Mr, President, why did you not interrupt Mr. Gromyko or Mr.
Goldberg when they talked about that? Poor Baroody,
he is your cousin-never
mind, This is a Joha story.
There was a man called Joha who could only silence
his own cousin , , .
36. The PRESIDENT:
tive once again.

May I appeal to the representa-

BAROODY (Saudi Arabia):
I stand on my
sovereign rights.
38. The PRESIDENT:
I do know something about Joha,
and the information that I have about him is quite sufficient for me to know that he is not on the agenda
of this Assembly.
37, Mr.

39. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President,
allow me to finish my statement once and for all,
40. The PRESIDENT: I shall be very pleased to give
you the opportunity to finish your statement if your
statement is in order. However, I must tell you that
it is my duty to rule out of order any statement which
I do not consider to be completely in order.
41. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): May I proceed?
42. The PRESIDENT: You may proceed, Sir, if your
statement is in order.
43. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I accept what you
say, Mr. President, but, before closing, I request you
to use the same yardstick with respect to others who
sometimes may take moxe liberties than I have taken.
I believe that I have not been taking liberties, but that
I was speaking in my own styie.
44. The PRESIDENT:
The appeal which I have extended to you I have extended to all delegations, namely,
that when they speak they should observe the same
requirement that I have asked you to observe.
45, Mr, BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): All right, I ImISt
thank you for your considerationandyour
forbearance.
Let no one think that this incident will in any way
vitiate the xespect that I have for you as a person.
However, if I said what I had to say, I did so standing
on my own rights,
46. Having said that, I would conclude by saying that
I wish peace to prevail everywhere, and there shall
be no peace in the Middle East if this Assembly thinks
that the indigenous people of Palestine and the Arab
people at large are negotiable.
47. Mr. KEITA (Mali) (translated from French): The
delegation of the Republic of Mali would like to express its gratitude to the three delegations of Sweden,
Austria and Finland, which, after much serious effort,
have produced what is now submitted to the Assembly
as a “procedural draft resolution”.
48. At this point, my delegation would like to say the
following: to begin with, we are not, we have not been
and we shall not be in favour of referring this matter
back to the Security Council, on the one hand because
we think that the question is still before the Council,
and on the othex because we know perfectly well, as
do all those here, what the situation is in the Security
Council.
49. We all know that it is because no solution could
be found in the Security Council that an appeal was
made to all the States Members of the Organization
to come together and reach a decision on a very important matter. As the fifteen members of the Security
Council were unable to find a solution, all Member
States were asked to study the problem with a view
to finding a solution for it.
50. The delegation of Mali would like to point out
that during the discussions in the corridors
and in
the course of unofficial contacts, we often heard it
said “We are agreed on the withdrawal”. But it was
never possible, either in the Security Council ox at
this emergency special session of the General Assembly, to secure the withdrawal of the Israel occupation forces. It seems to me, therefore, that the impasse in the Security Council has been reflected in

1558th meeting - 21 July 196’7
the General Assembly,
And this cannot but be very
disquieting, particularly
for the small countries,
the
young nations. In point of fact, this inability to secure
the withdrawal
of the Israel troops
from the territory they have conquered and whichthey are now OCCUpying is, as we see it, a reward for territorial
conquest, We are not ready to endorse this and we do not
think that anyone here who claims to respect the Spirit
of the Charter can in honesty endorse it.
51. All the States represented
here, and more particularly
the small States which have followed the
work of this Assembly and seen the results that have
been achieved, feel anxious when they realize: “Tomorrow it might be my country. Here they will amuse
themselves
with talking; stories will be told in the
Security Council and capped here, before this Assembly, After which: nothing. Our COLIntrY
Will
still
be occupied, the occupier will still be there”.
Such
is the lesson to be drawn from these discussions,
for the small countries.
52. We said in the Security Council that we are not
anti-Jewish,
or anti-white, or anti-yellow,
or anti-red.
From the start of this matter we have emphasized,
in the Council, that it must be studied seriously
and
in its fundamental aspects. That means that the right
of the people of Palestine who have been driven from
their land to return to their native soil, to the home
of their forefathers,
must be recognized. We continue
to stress this point, We have never claimed that the
Jews must be driven out of Palestine or put to the
sword. We say that they are human beings. But we
consider that the Palestinians
must recover
their
national territory.
This is what has not been done,
and until this problem is dealt with there will be
bloodshed and disturbances.
58. Here, through our inertia, which I shall not
hesitate to dub complicity, by our collusive inaction,
we are demonstrating to the whole world that aggression does pay, Thus anyone, any State, may tomorrow
engage in aggression. We shall hear the same speeches;
we shall see the same comings and goings, the same
contacts, the same little groups; and the aggressor
will remain in the territory
he has conquered.
54. It is a different task that we are asked to perhere, and we, for our part, are ready to set
about it at once,

form

55.’ I want to stress this point: as long as there are
still troops occupying foreign territory,
there will
be no peace. We must realize this. All those who admire and support Israel, those who want to do something for it, should understand,
that they would be
doing it a disservice
by, encouraging it to remain in
the conquered territories,
They
must understand that
the true owners of these lands’ will never allow this
occupation to continue indefinitely and they would be
creating a permanent state of war for Israel. They must
raalize that the occupied Arab lands cannot remain in
ISrael's
hands, Those who really wish to do Israel a
service must therefore put pressure on it to restore
the lands which it now occupies. By doing so they
would be proving that they love Israel, that they want
t0 see it live and develop, that they have its interests
at heart. But to encourage it to stay in lands conquered by force is an ill service,
a bad lesson, no

5

proof of friendship for Israel on the part of those who
seem or who claim to be its friends.
56. This must be made .clear , for the situation oannot remain as it is. No country can occupy another’s
lands by force in the hope that the victim will do
nothing, will stay with his arms folded, This is not
possible.
57. The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution
[A/L.529].
It may look like a procedural
resolution,
but my delegation thinks that in fact it also touches on
the substance of the matter to a certain extent. For
the substance of the question is that shortcoming
of
which we axe all guilty, Why not say so? We have shown
ourselves
wanting, we have not succeeded in being
honest either with ourselves or with the Charter. Yet
this failure
incites us, instead of seeking the true
remedy, simply to flee our responsibilities,
This is
the point we have reached. We have not honestly accomplished
the task that was entrusted to us. And
now we are looking for a way to esc;ape our responsibilities;
we are talking about suspending the session,
adjourning, because we have not succeeded in finding
a solution,
This is why I consider
that the draft
resolution does to some extent touch on the substance
of the question, From the point of view of individual
morality
as well as international morality,
each one’
of US should tell himself that this is not what was
expected of us.
58. For this reason, my delegation does not and will
not support a draft resolution ofthis kind, which bears
witness
to weakness,
incapacity and discouragement
on the part of all States. If Isay discouragement,
it is
because the draft resolution in fact accepts things as
they are. It is tantamount to saying: “This is how the
situation stands; we can do nothing to change it; let US
leave it as it is.” It is exactly what the Security Council
has already done and it is this which has permitted the
occupying troops to go on with their occupation: it is
this which has encouraged the occupation. My delegation, I repeat, is not willing to accept this once again
in the General Assembly,
59. I have already spoken of the questionof referring
the matter back to the Security Council, We all know
in advance what the situationthere
wouldbe. We therefore find it rather ridiculous
that we should now say
that we must go back to thesecurity
Council. In saying
this I am not prompted by any desire to slight the
good intentions of our friends of Finland, Austria and
Sweden, who have made this effort to enable the ASsembly to get out of its difficulty one way or another,
to save face in regard to the ordinary task which was
entrusted to it.
60. I shall simply say this, Let me remindyou of the
attitude adopted in the Security Council: aggressionis
a good thing, aggression
pays: when you are strong,
you can occupy small countries and impose your Will
upon them.
61. In this Assembly,
all Member States, large and
small, on an equal footing, have been asked to gather
together to study a problem which the Security Council
was unable to solve and to find a solution for it. Unfortunately,
it looks as though we have taken the same
road as the Security Council, that is to say, the road of
endorsing victories and territorial
conquests
achieved
c

6

General

Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

by force, of admitting that might is right. This is why
I have been at pains to point out to all the delegations
here how great a responsibility
we in the Assembly
had. In fact, we were all given an opportunity to reflect upon this problem, first by ourselves and then as
the United Nations,
in order to find the proper solution, Unfortunately,
our weakness seems to have been
such that not only have we been unable to solve the
problem whioh was put before us but we are now trying
to shirk our responsibilities,
to find some way out, no
matter what; in point of fact, we areno longer looking
for results, positive or otherwise;
we are only looking
for a way to get rid of the problem.
62. It is for the reasons I have just stated that my
delegation does not and will not support the draft resolution before us.
63. The PRESIDENT:
Before calling on the next
speaker on my list, I should like to inform Members
that draft resolution AL.529
has nowbeendistributed
to the Assembly
in written form,
64. I would also inform Members that, after the list
of speakers is exhausted, I shall wish to ascertain
from the authors of the draft resolution
whether or
not their motion to have it put to the vote at this meeting was a formal one. That was not quite clear to me
from the statement which was made on this point. We
shall then, of course,
have to consider and deal with
the situation in the light of the statement of the representative of Iraq,
65. Mr, BUD0 (Albania) (translated
from French):
After the setback which the work of this emergency
special session of the General Assembly
culminated
in on 4 July, we were forced to the conclusion that no
really positive results
could be achieved during this
new phase of the Assembly’s
work. In fact, everything
that has happened in these three weeks of work, both
in the Assembly and in the corridors
andeven outside
the United Nations, has provided enough evidence to
convince any honest man of the deplorable
state of
affairs
in this Organization
and the inability of the
General Assembly
to carry out its duties in the face
of the situation that has been created in the Middle
East by Israel’s
imperialist
aggression
against the
Arab peoples.
66. The fact that the General Assembly has not condemned the aggression
of which the Arab peoples are
the victims,
and that attempts have been made to
impose conditions on the evacuation of ‘the Arab territories usurped by Israel by means of armed aggression, is the high point of all the injustice and perverseness that we have witnessed in this international
institution, one of whose principal purposes, according
to the Charter, is to prohibit the use of force against
the territorial
integrity
or independence of a State
and to condemn and punish any aot of aggression.
67. It is well known, and we have brought this out
on many occasions,
that all this is due to the pernicious hold which the United States of America
has
on the United Nations and to the collusion between
that imperialist
power and the revisionist
leaders
of the Soviet Union, in accordance
with their coordinated plans to stifle the revolutionary
movement
for the liberation
of peoples and nations, to share
between them zones of influence and worlddomination

Special Session - Plenary

Meetings

and to use the United Nations
policy.

as an instrument

of that

68. It should be noted, however, that this criminal
policy on the part of the two great Powers and their
open or clandestine supporters
has been upheld here,
to our deep regret, by certain small countries which,
deliberately
or not, have so to speak fallen in with
that policy. In fact, the ignominious stand taken here
in regard to the Arab countries, the object of the most
perfidious treachery
and of Israel’s
imperialist
aggression, a stand which disregards
in the most scandalous fashion the fundamental
principles
of the
Charter and of international
law, has been defended
here in this Assembly
with unprecedented zeal precisely by the representatives
of the small countries.
The danger of such an attitude on their part, not only
for peace and general security but alsofor the security
of their own countries, cannot be overemphasized.
69. The result of this whole lamentable situation, in
which the United Nations, faced with so grave a problem, has proved powerless and incapable of concluding
its work with any positive action such as the adoption
of just and effective measures, has been to encourage
the United States and its tool, Israel, the American
imperialists
in their hateful intransigence and insane
pretensions,
and the Zionist racists in their vanity
and covetousness
and their defiance of world public
opinion and of the United Nations and its decisions, as
in the case in particular of the resolution on Jerusalem
[2254 (ES-V)]. We have been given typical evidence of
this on many occasions here by the representatives
of
the Zionists of Israel who, drunk with the temporary
military gains which their imperialist
masters have
procured for them, and disregarding
all the lessons.of
history,
have made speeches full of arrogance
and
hateful insolence that remind us of the shouting of
Hitler’s fascists.
70. Thus, whether we like it or not, the United Nations,
because of the pernicious sway that the United States
of America exercises
over it, finds itself embarked
upon a course diametrically
opposed to that laid down
for it in the Charter, encouraging and supporting aggression, and supporting and protecting the-gains resulting from aggression, Is not this a very important
service to the policy of aggression and domination of
the United States imperialists
and their chief collaborators? Today the world is faced with a monstrous
situation. Israel, this fascist creature and tool of imperialism, primarily
of the United States of America,
is installed on the Arab territory
it invaded by armed
aggression
and, enjoying the support of the United
States imperialists
and their open or clandestine
partners, does not scruple to exploit the situation and
to try, from a position of strength, to impose on the
Arab countries so-called peace negotiations and other
arbitrary
conditions
in accordance with its expansionist ambitions.
Are not these the same sinister
tactics as those the United States aggressors
and the
Soviet revisionists
are practising
against Viet-Nam,
where they are trying, by threats of the most savage
war and ‘the cruellest bombardments
and devastation,
to bend the iron will of the heroic Viet-Namese
people
and force them to accept the trick of “peace negotiations”
so that they will capitulate and lay down
their arms?

1558th meeting
71. These vile practices were recently most cynically
confirmed when Kosygin, arriving
in Paris after his
secret bargaining with Johnson, declared that it lay
with the Viet-Namese
people and the Viet-Namese
Government to choose between war and peace, ignoring
the fact that it is the United States aggressors
who
have travelled thousands of miles to invade this country
where they are waging the most savage war, and forgetting that the heroic Viet-Namese people are fighting
the invaders for their freedom and the welfare of their
country.
72, The Albanian delegation cannot do other than see
things as they are and give them their true name. This
is in accordance with the basic principles
of our
Government’s
policy. In particular
we consider that
it is our most pressing duty to warn the small peaceloving and freedom-loving
countries of the threat that
this criminal conspiracy between the two great Powers
constitutes for peace and security in general and for
the security of each of them.
73. Draft resolution
A/L.529,
which as everyone
knows has been concocted by the two great Powers,
is entirely unacceptable to us. The proposal to transfer
to the Security Council the question of the imperialist
aggression of Israel against the Arab countries in no
way contributes to the settlement of this problem in
accordance with the fundamental principles
of the
Charter and of international
law. On the contrary,
it
would be tantamount to leaving the settlement to the
discretion
of the two great Powers which dominate
the Security Council, where they can manceuvre more
easily in order to impose a settlement in conformity
with the decisions
already taken by Johnson and
Kosygin at Glassboro.
74. In our view, the adoptionby theGenera Assembly
of such a resolution,
after all that has happened at
this session, would signify its abdication in favour of
the Security Council, which would be highly dangerous
not only for the question at issue but also for the future
of the Organization and the cause which according to
the Charter it ought to serve. For our own part, we
cannot agree to subscribe to such an act, for it would
be contrary to our presence here, contrary
to the
struggle of principle which we wage constantly in this
Assembly, which is the highest tribunal of the Organization, the tribunal on which all Member States are
represented;
it would be contrary to our efforts for
the .adoption of a just position in respect of Israel’s
imperialist aggression.
75. Some representatives,
while recognising
the
impasse in which the General Assembly finds itself,
claim that nevertheless
something must be done,
some resolution must be adopted in order at least to
save the faces of the Soviet leaders, who took the
initiative of convening this session of the General
Assembly.
76. But why are we here? Is it to serve the ends of
the internal or external propaganda of the revisionist
Soviet leaders, which their Foreign Minister here is
worrying
about, resorting
to every kind of pressure
and to every means at his disposal so that he can, as
The New York Times says this morning, “go home
to Moscow with somethingn? Are we here to save the
faces of the leaders of a particular
Government and
to work for their propaganda, regardless
of the merits

- 21 July 1967

7

of the proposals
that would thus be adopted and the
consequences that would ensue from them7 We cannot
envisage the role of Members of the UnitedNations
in
this way; it would be contrary
to the dignity and
sovereignty
of the sovereign Member States and contrary to this Organization’s
mandate under the Charter.
‘77. We for our part shall never agree to play such a
role, and still less in the case of the Soviet revisionist
leaders, who bear a heavy responsibility
for events in
the Middle East and for all that they are plotting with
the United States imperialists
at the expense of the
Arab peoples. On the contrary,
we regard it as our
highest duty to denounce all those who have any responsibility
for the imperialist
aggression
of Israel
against the Arab countries, so that the peoples of the
world may become better acquainted with them and
may be able to recognize who are their enemies and
who are their friends.
In the present state of international affairs, this is a very important contribution
to the cause of peace and freedom,
78. The Albanian delegation has tried to present’the
problem on this session’s
agenda in its true light, in
regard both to the events in the Middle East and to the
provisions
which the General Assembly
should adopt
concerning the Israel imperialist
aggression against
the Arab countries
and the consequences which have
resulted from it.
79. In submitting to the General Assembly the proposals in document A/L.521, the Albanian delegation
was guided above all by the necessity,
more urgent
and vital than ever before, of condemning aggression
and not allowing
its perpetrators
to benefit in any
way from the results
of force, and of eliminating all
its consequences,
It is unthinkable that the General
Assembly
should remain indifferent
or impotent in
the face of a perfidious and intolerable armed aggression perpetrated by the imperialists
and Israel, their
tool, an aggression
which has resulted in the occupation by Israel of large parts of the Arab territories
and the submission
of thousands of human beings to
the most savage racist tyranny.
80. The rejection of our proposals is one more proof
that in the present circumstances
here at the United
Nations, because of the hold exercised over it by the
United States, the Organization is incapable of adopting
the measures
that are called for by the imperialist
aggression
of Israel.
81. It should be noted, nevertheless,
that inpresenting
this problem in an objective and realistic
light and in
submitting
to the Assembly
the proposals which are
called for under the Charter, the Albanian delegation
has done a great deal, together with other delegations
to demonstrate
who are responsible
for the situation
that has been created in the Middle East, who, in one
way or another, support the aggression,
and who condemn and oppose it. This is very important.
It is,
moreover,
the only advantage that has been derived
from the discussions
of this session of the General
Assembly.
82. In point of fact, in the present international
circumstances
this achievement is of great importance
to, all the small countries which, like Albania, are
the constant targets of threats and conspiracy on the
part of the imperialists
and their collaborators.
This

8

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

is of prime importance,
for, by strengthening
their
resolve in the face of United States imperialism,
as
the number one enemy of the peoples, and of the
treachery
of the Soviet revisionists
and of all those
who work in favour of the criminal policy of those two
Powers, the peace-loving
and freedom-loving
countries will realize even better that the only way of salvation open to them at this juncture is for each to count
above all on its own resources,
to prepaxe constantly
for future struggles,
and for all together to strengthen
their solidarity and close their ranks, to fight bravely
by every means against the common enemy until the
final, certain victory.
83. The Arab peoples, like the people of Viet-Nam
and all freedom-loving
countries and peoples throughout the world, understand today better than ever that
this is the only way open to them, They know that final
victory will be theirs provided that they shrink from
no difficulty and that they fight with resolution.
The
Albanian people proclaim
their complete solidarity
with their Arab brothers
and stand firmly
by their
side. They are sure that their just cause will triumph,
84. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): May I first of all state the
view of my’delegation on the status of the draft resolution [A/L.5291 presented by the representative
of
Sweden.
85. The representative
of Sweden himself said that
the draft resolution
deals with matters of substance,
It is a substantive draft resolution
in the sense that,
in its operative paragraph
1, it recommends
to one
of the principal organs of the United Nations that it
consider
a question of grave importance
to international peace and security,
Under Article I.0 of the
Charter,
as you know, one of the first and most important duties of the General Assembly
is precisely
to make such recommendations,
Therefore
there can
be no question at all that this is a substantive
question
of the highest importance.
If there was any doubt, it
of course was dispelled by the statement of one of the
sponsors of that draft resolution,
I say this in order to
remove any doubt or ambiguity regarding
the procedural aspect of the problem.

Special Session - Plenary Meetings
88. If the Security Council is indeed seized of this
question, one is entitled to ask: why the insistence
upon including a paragraph
in the draft resolution
recommending to the Council that it resume its consideration? It is true that, while this Assembly was
in session, the Security Council met to consider certain aspects of the problem that had been before it
since last May. Why is it, therefore, that there is in
the draft resolution a specific recommendation to the
Security Council to resume its consideration
of the
situation? This recommendation
read in conjunction
with operative paragraph 2, which requests that the
records
of this emergency special session be forwarded to the Council, means that the impression is
that the work of this Assembly
has really ended for
all practical purposes, There is no better proof of
that than the provision
that its records are to be
transferred
to the Security Council andthat the Council
is asked specifically
to resume its consideration of
the problem. This is obviously the aim of this draft
resolution,
Had this not been the aim, there would
have been no necessity to include a specific recommendation to the Council to resume its consideration.
Therefore, these two operative paragraphs,
in conjunction with the omission of any mention of the fact
that the Council is presently
seized of the matter,
nullify, in our view, the effects of operative paragraph 3 of the draft resolution. It is clear that operative paragraph 3, which asks that the emergency special
session be adjourned, really becomes a meaningless
and empty phrase with no practical application, since
the Council not only would be seized of the question
but would have the records
of this Assembly before
it when it resumed consideration of the whole problem.

86, May I say that we are fully aware of the good
intentions and worthy efforts of the three sponsors of
the draft resolution
in order to have the Assembly
adopt a draft resolution
that, in their opinion, would
be acceptable to the majority of the Members of this
Organization. Unfortunately,
however,
in spite of their
good, intentions, I think they have erred in one or two
very serious respects.

89. What are the implications
of this? The most
serious implications
are an admission of failure by
the General Assembly, an abdicationof responsibility,
an acknowledgement
of hopelessness.
This is very
serious because it is in the General Assembly
that
the small countries of the world have a voice. It is in
the General Assembly that the small countries of the
world feel that they have protection more adequate
than that afforded to them in the Security Council, Can
we forget the efforts made by the very Sponsors of
in other circumstances,
t0
this draft resolution,
strengthen
the prerogatives
and functions
of the
General Assembly in matters relating to the preservation of international peace and security? NOW, however,
with this recommendation
to the Security Council, We
are weakening for all time the efforts of this Assembly
to discharge its very important &sponsibilitlesunder
the Charter.

8’7. There is an inherent contradiction
in the draft
resolution.
The representative
of Sweden, in introducing it, stated that the Security Council at present
is seized of the problem, but that fact is not reflected
in the draft resolution
before us. It is not mentioned
at all. I submit that this wag not accidental because
this omission, considered in conjunction with operative
paragraphs
1 and 2, means that the sponsors of the
draft resolution
had in’view not a procedural
aim but
an important substantive
aim whidh, as I said in my
previous statement, has the most serious implications
for this Organization
and indeed for the powers and
prerogatives
of the General Assembly,

90. But eve? and above all these serious implications
for the Organization,
there is another very serious
implication:
that the General Assembly,
having for
more than a month debated a question resulting
from
a premeditated and planned attack on Member States
of this Organization-and
I have not yet heard one
single word in this Assembly denying that the attack
was planned beforehand and carried out according ti
predisposed
military
operations-has
left untouched
the two very important questions which go to the very
core of the Charter of the UnitedNations:
the fact that
an attack occurred on Member States, and the fact that
territories
of Member States have been occupied by
the armies
of another, The implication
is that the

1558th meeting
General ,Assembly-and,
indeed, the United Nationshas recognized its impotence to deal with a matter
of such great concern to humanity and to international
peace and security.
91. Where do we go from here? The representative
of Mali, who is a member of the Security Council and
perhaps in a better position to know, has informed the
Assembly how difficult it is for small countries that
have been subjected to aggression to obtain any help
and succour from the Security Council. If there is
any hope in the United Nations, it is here in the General
Assembly, which represents the collective conscience
of mankind and which perhaps can afford some hope
to the small countries that have been subjected to
aggression.
92. We may be asked, then, why didyouvote in favour
of a draft resolution which asked that the Security
Council take up all the questions relating to this
situation? Yes, we voted in favour of that draft resolution but in the context of a decision of the Assembly
that would have asked for immediate withdrawal of
the occupying forces from Arab territories.
Then,
and only then, would the Security Council have been
in a position to take up all the questions and ramifications of this problem in a clear-cut context, and
not without the guidance and expression of view of
the General Assembly.
93. The representative of Sweden stated that there
has been a wide measure of agreement on certain
aspects of this situation. May I state that the wide
measure of agreement evidenced in the debates of
the General Assembly has been precisely on the
question of withdrawal of the occupying forces from
Arab territories.
It is on this point, and this point
only, that there has been a wide measure of agreement in the General Assembly. And yet it is not reflected in any way in this draft resolution, which
thereby fails to give the Security Council the proper
guidance and a proper context in which it can do its
very important work in the future.

- 21 July 196’7

9

which has particular merit. We witnessed the ineffectiveness of the Security Council during the period in
which the aggression was committed.
It may be xecalled that, when Israel launched its aggression, two
things began to emerge with startling and disturbing
clarity as the Israeli war machine grew more confident and Israel secured its expansionist aims: first,
we witnessed that some members of the Security
Council seemed to disregard the necessity of labeling
the aggressor State; second, there was a cynical acceptance of what many commonly term the realities
of the situation. The principle of the fait accompli had
taken the place of the application of those principles
of the United Nations Charter which many piously
evoke when their own immediate interests are involved
but which in this particular situation were obviously
disregarded.
96. The situation in the Middle East is not beyond
solution, and it is certainly not beyond the capacity of
this Assembly to find a solution which will give justice
to the victims of this aggression. Most speakers in the
course of this debate have expressed agreement on
two points: first, that no rights can flow from an act
of aggression; second, that there can be no reduction
.of tension, no elimination
of danger, and no hope for
peace while a Member State continues to occupy the
territory
of other States by force and in defiance of
the United Nations Charter.
97. My delegation is of the opinion that, consistent
with the practice already established by the United
Nations, this Organization’s
call for a cease-fire in
the Middle East should have been followed by the
withdrawal of the aggressor forces, Such withdrawal.
is absolutely necessary if it is desired to create an
atmosphere conducive to a settlement of the issues
involved in the dispute.

94. For all those reasons, I wish to ask fox a separate vote on operative paragraph 1 of this draft resolution. If that is done, then my delegation will vote
against this operative paragraph. If that operative
paragraph is removed as a result of the vote, then
the draft resolution automatically
becomes a procedural one, because it would merely contain two
decisions-the first, to forward records to the Council
and the second, to adjournthis session of the Assembly
temporarily,
But the recommendation
to the Councila principal organ of this Oxganization-presumably
under Article 10 of the Charter, is a matter of substance and must be treated as such. Onthe other hand,
if operative paragraph 1 is retained, then my delegation will be compelled to withhold its support from the
draft resolution and vote against it.

98. Throughout the negotiations that have takenplace
in the corridors of the United Nations, there has been
an attempt to force resolutions upon the victims of
the aggression which would impose conditions or which
would exact from the victims rights which are highly
debatable,
99. Only when the aggressor withdraws its forces
would it be acceptable for this Assembly and its appropriate organs to enter into the legal and political aspects of the problem with all the firmness, urgency
and justice which the situation demands, My delegation believes that the responsibility
of the General
Assembly
in this particular
situation has neither
diminished
nor ended, Furthermore,
we do not believe that it can be transferred.
The work of the
General Assembly is still incomplete and CantIOt be
disposed of in the manner proposed in the draft
resolution.
100. Fox those reasons, my delegation will Vote
against the draft resolution,

95. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): It is a sadcommentary on
the General Assembly that, after six weeks of debate,
it should not be able to find a solution acceptable to the
majority of the Assembly based strictly on the pxinciples and purposes of the United Nations Charter. My
delegation is not convinced that the proposal by the
representative
of, Sweden [A/L.5291 to transfer the
matter to the Security Council is the right one or one

101, Mr. BOUTEFLIKA
(Algeria) (translated from
French): The Algerian delegation had not intended to
intervene at this stage in the debate, However, before
embarking on the comments which I find myself compelled to make in connexion with the so-called procedural draft resolution now before the General Assembly [A/L.529], I should like to thank my friend,
the representative
of Iraq, for intervening so that

10

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

you, Mr. President,
could give us time
the draft resolution in writing.

to examine

102. The sponsoring
countries
have friendly relations with my country that go back to the time before
it was a legal entity, and before it began to take part
in the work of this Assembly. They also share with my
country a deep attachment to the principles
of the
United Nations Charter.
103. Nevertheless,
this profound attachment of ours
to the principles
of the Charter
compels me to say
that we are at a moment in the history,of
this Organization when, because of our inability to take decisions, we must tell ourselves
some home truths. I
shall try to state these home truths, as simply as
possible,
104. It is unimaginable
that we should be talking
about a procedural
resolution
when the Assembly
has met in emergency special session precisely
because the Security Council-which,
incidentally,
still
has the famous Middle Eastern question before it-had not arrived at any specific and positive decision.
105. When the Soviet Union asked for the convening
of this Assembly [see A/6717], its positive action was
hailed by all the Members
of this Organization-all
or almost all, since only the allies of the aggressor
were opposed to the convening of this session. That is
to say that all the Members of the Assembly
sincerely
expected that we should be able to workout
a resolution
which would reflect the reasons for which theGenera
Assembly
had been called into emergency
special
session.
106. If you will allow me, I shall saythat the aims in
view were: (1) to condemn aggression,
and I am deliberately using an impersonal
tone inorder to remain
within the spirit of the United Nations Charter;
(2) to
secure the immediate and unconditional withdrawal
of
troops; and (3) to obtain material compensationfor
the
damage caused by the aggression.
10’7. We have lived through some fascinating weeks;
we have lived through busy weeks;
we have lived
through weeks that have taught us how far our apprehensions at the beginning of the session, great as they
were, were justified.
On 19 June, the Algerian Chief
of State, even before this session
was convened,
stated publicly that the international
situation was
such that unfortunately
we could not expect all that
we were entitled to expect from international
institutions and more particularly
from the General Assembly of the United Nations.
108. This was not sour grapes,
still less was it
scepticism.
Algeria’s
position
was the outcome of
long analysis. Inevitably since the nineteenth session
we have submitted to you all the complaints
which we
have against the General Assembly,
which we also
have against the Security
Council;
and I owe it to
myself to say that although we have complaints against
the Assembly,
we could have still more against the
Security Council, which is very far from reflectingthe
true face of the world’s peoples.
109. The Soviet Union, in requesting
the convening
of this emergency special session, went somewhat beyond the doctrine of the great Powers,
which is to
uphold the notion of the government
of the world by

Special Sessi.on - Plenary

Meetings

the great Powers,
and for once gave the General
Assembly
an opportunity to state its opinion, as it
had been unable to do on other problems that were
just as burning and which still prick our consciences;
I am thinking particularly
of Viet-Nam;
for once,
therefore,
a great Power gave the Assembly
the
chance to pass judgment on the problem of peace in
the Middle East,
110. I can only regret, as the representative
of a
small country which is a Member of this Assembly,
that the non-aligned countries did not think it appropriate and necessary to seize this exceptional opportunity to bring out, to emphasize and to demonstrate
how increasingly necessary and urgent it is to secure
a fairer balance and a more equitable sharing of responsibility
between the Security
Council and the
General Assembly of the United Nations.
111. But I must state quite simply that the fact that
we were unable to achieve any result, is attributable
to the pressure,
visible to the naked eye, which we
and elsewhere,
witnessed
here, in the corridors
being exerted upon the Members
of this General
Assembly.
112. It is indeed paradoxical
that countries
which
are morally
bound by regional organih;ations
and
charters,
which have very deep common interests,
can find themselves
suddenly separated in the face
of situations
which ordinarily
would have elicited
extremely simple responses needing little imagination
for they would merely have reflected the principles
of the Organization.
113. Thus the unanimity which was demonstrated
on
behalf of convening this session crumbled as the days
and weeks went by, and the solidarity
which was a
natural bond between most of the Members
of this
Organization-particularly
the countries of the Third
World-dwindled
day by day to the point at which we
presented a lamentable spectacle of disunity. But this
lamentable spectacle does not represent
the failure
of any particular group; I regret that I must say with
all due solemnity that this spectacle of disunity represented the bankruptcy of the United Nations as a whole,
It is my duty to emphasize with all the necessary
force
that the United Nations has failed a test and that the
Assembly has been unable to work out any resolution
on the problem of the threat to peace in the Middle
East.
5
114. I do not see how, in the presence of this failure
which might perhaps inspire us to more pertinent
reflection,
deeper and more serious
reflection
on
the future of international institutions,
my delegation
could associate itself with an attempt to camouflage
it by a procedural
resolution,
the more so in that if
we, the representatives
of the non-aligned countries,
were to accept this situation, I do not for myself believe that our attitude could for a moment deceive the
people whom we represent as regards the lamentable
failure of this session,
115. It please me to point out that those who weye
the aggressor’s
allies have continued to be so, according to an implacablelogic.
116. It pleases me, too, to note the fervent attachment
of. the forces of peace and progress
in the world to

1558th meeting
legality, their immense and admirable faith in international institutions
and in the principles
of the
Charter. But it also pleases me to say that this attachment to the principles of the Charter so admirably
demonstrated by the forces of peace and progress in
the world cannot authorize us now to endorse this
failure in one way or another, and to find ourselves
once again in contradiction
with one of the fundamental
principles of our policy, namely the need to restore
a balance of responsibilities
between international
institutions.
117. I must therefore
endorse wholeheartedly
the
comments of the representative
of Iraq, who said
that, once the question had been placed before the
Security Council, there was no point insayingpublicly
that the General Assembly-having
failed-had
no
resort other than the Security Council.
118. This is an extremely
serious conception
of
international responsibility,
conception which it is
our duty to denounce in the strongest terms, a conception which cannot satisfy either our consciences
or our peoples, above all the peoples whom we represent here and who constitute an overwhelming majority
of the peoples of the world.
119, These peoples of the third world-called
so
probably because they represent more thantwo-thirds
of mankind-will
be able to say one day that these
stylistic manoeuvrings are no longer in keeping with
the traditions of international relations.
120. This is why I wished to emphasize that the
Algerian delegation-which
fully appreciates the good
intentions of the distinguished
sponsors of the draft
resolution-cannot,
for the reasons which I have been
at pains to state, subscribe in any way to paragraph 1.
If we were to do so, it would run counter to our policy,
to our conscience, and to the hopes and aspirations
of
the overwhelming majority of this General Assembly.
121. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to*seek the cooperation of the Assembly
at this stage by asking
Members to agree with me that the list of speakers
for those representatives
who wish to speak before
the vote should be considered closed at 6 o’clock this
evening. If there is no objection, the list of speakers
before the vote will be closed at 6 p.m.

- 21 July 1967

11

jectives and the very essence of the draft resolution,
we asked ourselves-and
do so again-whether
its
adoption may not bring about the irrevocable
decline
of this Organization.
125. For countries
such as Guinea, which has been
fighting for ten years for the greater democratization
of United Nations structures,
it is strange to see some
countries
desiring and provoking
a decrease in the
prerogatives
of the General Assembly, In our eyes, this
Assembly
is the most democratic
organ and we,think
that the small countries
should unite their efforts to
strengthen
the structures
of the Assembly,
which is,
as it were, the epicentre
of our concern and our
anxieties.
126. This draft resolution
is bound to give jurists
food for reflection,
for when we look at it closely we
see that in both form and content it is a juridical
monster
whose political consequences
are incalculable, sapping the very foundations of the Organization, particularly
if we remember the differences of
position between Member States regarding the constitutional considerations surrounding the interpretation
of the Charter, with one group of countries insisting
on pre-eminence for the Security Council because of
their power, and a majority of small countries, as I’
recalled earlier, fighting to ensure that the General
Assembly, being more representative, can play a re-’
sponsible role in the destinies of mankind.
127. The real nature of this text emerges, Iam sorry
to have to note, from a historical contradiction, which
history itself in its ineluctable march forward will not
fail to correct and clarify, I will not expatiate further
on this point, but I am sure that history will bring out
the meaning of the actions of all sides and will reveal
to us the profound reasons which lie behind the attitude
of certain pdwers.
128. In any event, we for our part interpret this draft
resolution as collusion between the Great Powers with
a view to imposing their will on the small Powers.
My delegation’s attitude will be determined by the
considerations I have just outlined.

123. The delegation of Guinea, for its part, has no
intention of settling down into this manceuvre;
its
mind is preoccupied with the tragic fate of the Arab
peoples under the occupation of the aggressor, Israel.

129, Mr. FAKHREDDINE (Sudan): The draft resolution [A/L.5291 presented by the representative of
Sweden on behalf of the three co-sponsors appears
to my delegation to pose too many prbblems for us
to consider it as a merely procedural draft. In the
first paragraph of its preamble, it takes account of
the grave situation in the Middle East, and then it
proceeds, in its first operative paragraph, to recommend that the Security Council should resume its
consideration of the, situation, But this special session of the General Assembly was held because the
Security Council had been unable to come to a decision condemning the Israeli aggression anddemanding
the withdrawal of Israel’s aggressive forces. It was
on that understanding that my Government supported
the convening of this emergency special session. We
had hoped that the General Assembly might succeed
where the Security Council had failed.

124. On looking at the draft resolution submitted by
Austria, Finland and Sweden (A/L.529), we must say
we are touched by the spirit of generosity in which it
was drafted. But after a serious examination
of the
text and after critical scrutiny of the nature, the ob-

130. The draft resolution before us seems tosuggest
that the 121 Member States of the United Nations
were unable to condemn aggression and were unable
to affirm their adherence to the Charter of the United
Nations.
That, In fact, is the case. It is sad and re-

It was so decided,
122, Mr. M’BAYE (Guinea) (translatedfromFrench):
It is strange to see how procedural
manoeuvres can
lead our Assembly to turn away from its essential
concern, At the moment when an African land is occupied by an aggressor,
at the moment when the Arab
peoples are laid low by injustice through Israel’s
aggression, it is at this precise moment that our
Assembly is encouraged to subside comfortably
into
a procedural manceuvre.

12

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency Special Session - Plenary Meetings

greteable, but it is important
to acknowledge it. The
remedy for that situation, it appears to my delegation, is ndt to shuffle the issue back to the Security
Council,
Mr. Tinoco
Chair.

(Costa

Rica),

Vioe-President,

took the

131. Secondly, the Assembly need not in its emergency special session remind the Security Council
of the gravity of the situation, The situation, let us
remind ourselves, is one where the Charter of the
United Nations has been violatedand where aggression
and unlawful occupation have been perpetrated and have
not been condemned. The General Assembly has failed
to condenin aggression. We should acknowledge that
failure and not try to cover it up by advancing and by
adopting a draft resolution that says: we are aware
of the situation, but let the Security Council deal with
it. The Security Council has beenaware of the situation.
And when the Security Couricil dealt with the situation,
it was unable to do so effectively.
132. Perhaps this truth of our failure is not palatable,
particularly to the smaller nations whose only hope for
justice is in the United Nations. But to acknowledge
this truth and to acknowledge this failure is the first
step in the right direction which the smaller nations
must take, if they are to conduct their policies in the
future with full awareness of the realities that obtain
within this Organization.
The smaller nations should
not be concerned about the failure of this special session. They should not be concerned that the ‘IJnited
Nations has failed on this question. It is important
for them to know the reasons why the United Nations
has failed,
133. My delegation is prepared, for one, to face the
facts and to acknowledge with regret the failure of
the General Assembly to deal with aggression, But
we are ntjt prepared to say that this is a matter for
the Security Council and therefore think that we have
relieved ourselves of a11 responsibility,
because we
are as responsible for this failure as ‘any of the other
delegations.
134. My delegation, therefore,
in honesty will not
be able to endorse referring this matter by a decision
of the General Assembly to the Security Council, We
shall vote against this draft: resolution if it is put to
the vote as a whole, and if it is voted upon paragraph
by paragraph, my delegation will vote against the
first operative paragraph.
135. Mr. KABANDA
(Rwanda) (translated
from
French): My Government
responded favourably to
the request from the Soviet Union [see A/6717]-circulatep to the delegations by the Secretary-General
and concerning the convening of an emergency special
session on the crisis in the Middle East-and sent the
following reply:
“The Government of the Republic of Rwanda has
no objection to the convening of an emergency special
session, in view of the fact that the parties directly
concerned do not seem opposed to it.”
136. In making this reply, the Government ofRwanda
cherished the hope that the General Assembly would
play the part of mediator and conciliator
and thus assist the parties to sol& their problem by means of a

1~

negotiated solution. In fact, my Government counted
on the interest which the parties involved havealways
shown in the cause of peace and world stability.
137. I repeat: a negotiated solution, Indeed, my
Government thinks that this is the only means of overcoming the present crisis and that it is possible-my
Government
is still convinced-to
find a solution
through this approach. It is encouraging, for example,
to find in the General Armistice Agreement of 24 February 1949 between Egypt and Israel, the principle
whereby “the right of each party to its security and
freedom from fear of attack by the armed forces of
the other shall be fully respected”.ZI
138. We believe that the spirit which presided over
the preparation
and signature of this agreement is
still alive, among both our Egyptian and our Israel
.
friends.
139. Since the debate on the question opened, more
than a month ago, we have heard official statements
and we have heard accusations directed against one
or other of the parties involved. Many of the delegations here have accused the General Assembly, or
the Sectirity Council, or the Organization itself of
being powerless, These delegations are right, if they
are considering the results which our discussions
generally achieve. But they are also wrong, and why
not say so, if they think that the States which make up
this Organization and. which belong to different ideological families must necessarily have the same appreach to problems. Nevertheless,
our role here Is
first of all to have confidence in those who represent
this Organization and who represent their countries
on the Security Council, because their concern-we
know-is for peace and security. To accuse our
institWons is to accuse ourselves, which is not a good
approach to the solution we are seeking,
140. My Government and my delegation have alWaYS
been guided by realism. Our position on the Middle
Eastern question is realistic,
That is why we are
convinced that the +role of this Assembly is not ti
adopt resolutions which cannot be applied, but to seek
out realistic approaches which can bring an acceptable
and lasting settlement of the crisis.
141. We consider that the elements of the Middle
Eastern problem are all inter-connected
and must
all be the object of a comprehensive settlement, and
we think that the proper framework for this-even
if
it is institutionally
imperfect-is
theSecurity council,
because under the Charter it is the Security Council
which is competent to deal with problems which relate
primarily
to international
peace and security, and it
is the Security Council which has the power to take
steps to see that its resolutions are applied.
142. We therefore greet with special interest the
draft resolution submitted by the representative
of
Sweden on behalf of three delegations [A/L.629]:
We
should, however, have liked the draft resolution
to
include an express recommendation
to the Security
Council to study all the aspects of the problem and
to apply to it the measures prescribed in the Charter
of the United Nations.
g See Official
Special Supplement

Records
of the Security
Council.
No. 3, document S/1264/Rev.l,
para.

Fourth
3,

Year,

1558th meeting
143. We think, therefore, that we should adjourn our
work at this juncture, leaving it to the SeCUrity
COUriCil
to pursue the study of the problem and find a solution
to it, for I am convinced that within that framework
a
solution is possible.
144. Mr, 8AYEGH (Kuwait): I should like to announce
and explain the vote of my delegation on the draft
resolution contained in document A/L.529.
146. We shall vote against this draft resolution because, in our opinion, it is a mask and a disguise,
and, by their very nature, masks and disguises are
reprehensible.
But in this instance what this draft
resolution
is designed to disguise is even more
reprehensible.
146. Not only is this draft resolution,
then, an attempt to conceal a fact, but also the fact which this
draft resolution attempts to conceal is in itself deplorable. What is the fact that it attempts to conceal7
It is. none other than that on 4 July this Assembly
passed a vote of no confidence in the Charter of the
United Nations: on 4 July this Assembly refused and
failed to give its vote of confidence to the Charter of
the United Nations; on 4 July this Assembly announced
in the eloquent language of the unerring arithmetic
of the vote and in the eloquent symbolism of the electronic green, red and yellow of our voting machine,
that two thirds of the Members of the Assembly
could
not be prevailed upon to uphold the Charter
of the
United Nations.
147, This is all the more reprehensible
inasmuch as
there was no reason why our proclaimed faith in the
Charter should not have been accompanied
by an
active translation
of that faith into a practical resolution. None of the explanations
advanced for our
failure to translate the Charter into a resolution can
stand the scrutiny and tests of our reason. It is not
that the facts are not known, because, as the representative of Iraq said a short while ago, there was
hardly a voice in this hall that expressed any doubt
about the facts of the situation: the fact that there
was a resort to armed force: the fact that that resort
to armed force was premeditated and calcuIated; the
fact that that resort to armed force, contrary to the
Charter, resulted in the occupation of territory;
the
fact that that occupation still exists; the fact that in
part of the occupied territory,
annexation-w
whatever name ‘it has been called-has
been put into
effect; and the fact that in the remainder of that territory there have been statements
made by leading
representatives
of the aggressor
indicating possible
annexation in the future and actual reluctance to give
up the occupied territory.
All these facts are not in
dispute, not in question: so we cannot say that we
failed to apply the Charter to the case at hand because
the case at hand was not clear and the factual elements of the case were not well known, Nox can we
advance another explanation: that there were some of
US who failed to apply the Charter
to the case at hand
because we lacked guidance, we lacked principles
to
guide US in what to say, we lacked precedents for the
United Nations to guide us in what to do. Cn the contrary, the principles of the Charter are clear and the
precedents of the United Nations are such that in
Weti
single instance, without exception, in which a
Similar case has been brought before the Crganiza-

- 21 July 1967

13

tion, the United Nations has ruled for immediate withdrawal to take place, without linking such withdrawal
to distracting
and diversionary
arrangements
or requests, Therefore
we cannot say that we have failed
to uphold the Charter because the facts are now known;
nor can we say we have failed to uphold the Charter
because the guide-lines are laaking.
148. ‘Nor can we say: We have failed to apply the
Charter because the practical results of a suspension
of the Charter
might serve the spirit of the Charter
better. There have been some who have argued that if
unconditional
and complete withdrawal
is requested,
we shall go back. to the conditions obtaining before
5 June, and that as a result of this, the explosive
situation
in the Middle East would be back with us
again. But do those delegations really believe that,
by not ensuring the withdrawal
of the aggressor,
we
are going to have tranquillity
in the Middle East?
Do they really believe that, by not requesting
the
complete,
unconditional
and immediate withdrawal
of the aggressor,
the aggressor
will withdraw
voluntarily,
or that the victims will indefinitely acquiesce
in the continued occupation of their lands?
149. No, none of the explanations that might be advanced in justification
of the failure to uphold the
Charter
can stand the test of scrutiny,
Therefore,
a resolution
designed to conceal the fact that we
have failed to apply the Charter is only one that conceals from our eyes the reasons for our failure. And
the reasons for our failure are evident: we failed to
uphold the Charter because Some Powers-unfortunately, founding Members
of the United Nations,
Powers
that participated
in working
out the initial
draft on which the Charter was based-have
chosen
to use their considerable
power and influence not
responsibIy,
not judiciously,
and not in furtherance
of ‘respect
for the Charter,
but irresponsibly,
arrogantly and uncharitably.
And we have failed because
there were among’ us Members that were willing to
be accomplices,
willing
to be docile followers
of
those great Powers that pre-empted
the will of the
General Assembly
and sought to manipulate its decisions.
We have failed because there were great
Powers that abused their power, and because there
were small nations that surrendered their sovereignty
when it came to standing up fox the Charter, when
their attitude was put to the test of the vote.
150. But there has been a heartening
number of
delegations
which, undes pressure,
under cajolery,
under inducement,
under all these influences, have
nevertheless
chosen to stand by the Charter, to maintain its principles
and to apply them forthrightly
to
the case at hand, To these delegations that withstood
every pressure
in order to remain faithful to the
Charter,
we say that we in the delegation of Kuwait
are proud to have served with you in this sincere
upholding
of the Charter;
for by maintaining the
Charter
and by standing against aggression,
even
though we bave not been that majority
that could
give the Charter a vote of confidence, we have nevertheless proved that there is an independent-minded
group in the United Nations that still believes in the
United Nations.
151, It
majority

is this fact, and the opposite fact that a
was not found to reaffirm the Charter, that
c

14

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency Special Session - Plenary

this draft resolution
is designed to conceal-and
are opposed to the concealment of the truth.

we

152. Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria)
(translated
from
French):
For the past four weeks the General Assembly, meeting in emergency special session, has
been considering
the question of the aggression
committed against its neighbours by a country that owes
its very existence
to a United Nations
resolution
against its neighbours.
153. It cannot be said that the discussions
and the
opinions expressed
by the representatives
who have
spoken from this rostrum one after another have not
shown quite clearly that an act of aggression has been
committed and who committed it. The aggressor
is
perfectly well known. The existence of the aggression
has also been clearly demonstrated
by the fact that
part of the territory
of the Arab countries
is now
occupied by the forces of the aggressor.

Mr. Pazhwak (Afghanistan) resumed

the Chair.

154. The Security
Council, too, discussed the question of Israel’s
aggression for a whole month without
arriving at any solution worthy of the United Nations,
without being able to adopt a resolution
opposing the
aggression
and without being able to condemn the
aggressor.
The Security Council’s
inability to come
to a decision on such a clear andunmistakable
case of
aggression
as that. committed by Israel against the
Arab countries
is not due to any lack of desire on
the part of international
public opinion to see aggression and the aggressor
condemned, It is due exclusively to the pressure exerted by certain circles and
certain western States, in particular
and above all by
the United States of America, on other countries with
which they have specific connexions and over which
they are able to exercise enormous
influence and
pressure,
155. Despite the ardent desire of the peoples of the
whqle world and, despite international
public opinion,
which the pawers
of wealth have tried to work upon
through the propaganda media available to them, even
t?ying to substitute propaganda for opinion, the medium
for the message,
the imperialists
have mobilized all
their forces and have for the tifie being succeeded
in blocking the adoption of an effective resolution by
this emergency
special session of the General Assembly also.
156. During the discussions,
however,
and in the light
of the draft resolutions
submitted,
it has become
appa+rent that a vast majority
are in favour of the
withdrawal
of the aggressor’s
troops and against the
occupation by the aggressor of the territory
of other
countries, against rewarding aggression.
157. This finding emerges also from the two resolutions which the General Assembly
has adopted in
connexion with the measures taken by Israel to annex
the City of Jerusalem,
a decision which is illegal
according to the Charter but which was takenin order
to serve as a precedent for the policy of annexation,
conquest and odlonization which the leaders of Tel
Aviv are promoting
in the Middle East and carrying
out on behalf of others and on their own behalf.
158. If the General Assembly is now reduced-Imight
say driven-to
trying to adopt a procedural resolution,

Meetings

it is because it has not so far been able, and is still
unable, to overcome the pressure and the opposition
of those imperialist
circles
which are siding with
the aggressor and have come to the aidof aggression,
159. The present draft resolution (A/L.529),
though
procedural,
would nevertheless
enable the General
Assembly and the United Nations to pursue their work
in regard to the settlement of the question before
them. From the way in which the people of the whole
world have reacted, it is obvious that they condemn
the aggression-and
the aggressor
too in this caseorganized by extremist circles in Israel against their
neighbours, the Arab peoples, despite the fact that the
General Assembly
has been prevented from taking a
decision by the underhand maneuvring
of the imin particular
the United States. World
perialists,
opinion has condemned the aggression,
and the delegations which have spoken here have also condemned
it. Both in its discussions
and inthe draft resolutions,
the .General Assembly has expressed a desire not to
see aggression rewarded.
160. There has certaiily
been evidence of a deep
desire to preserve world peace by maintaining it in
the Middle East and by muzzling Israel’s
aggression
and the aggressor
itself. At the same time, the Assembly has stressed
the fact that it is absolutely
essential to find solutions to the burning problems
that have been caused by developments in the Middle
East, particularIy
the aggression that is still developing, the permanent aggression constituted by the OCCUpation of Arab territory
by Israel troops.
161. Despite the momentary
setback caused by the
pressure
of imperialist
circles in some countries,
especially
the United States, eve’ry effort must be
made to find a solution to this problem within the
framework
of the United Nations. Failing a solution
by the international
community, there would be no
solution for the peoples struggling against aggression
save on tiie battlefield and we do not at this point
want a solution on the battlefield for that would be a
world catastrophe. That is why the international
community , the United Nations,
must find a waS; to
check Israel’s
aggression and t’he aggressor,
instead
of rewarding
it.
162. The PRESIDENT: As members
are aware,
list of speakerg was closed at 6 o’clock.

the

163. I indicated previously that I wo&d attempt to
clarify the situation with regard to how the Assembly
should now proceed. The representative of Sweden,
when he introduced the draft resolution on behalf of
its sponsors, said, “It is our hope that a decision on
it will be taken today”. I would ask the representative
of Sweden to state his delegation’s formal position,
so that the Assembly may have a clear understanding
of it.
164. Mr. ASTROM (Sweden): In response to the question wliich the President put to me as one of the three
sponsors of the draft resolution, I should ljke my
earlier remarks expressing our hope that the vote
would take place today to be interpreted as a motion
to have the vote today. Should any delegation wish the
Assembly to act otherwise, it is for that delegation
to say ~0.

I

1558th meeting
165. The PRESIDENT:
The Assembly has heard the
clear statement just made by the representative
of
Sweden.
166. Mr, TILAKARATNA
(Ceylon): The Assembly
received this draft resolution only a short while ago,
and different views have been expressed.
I would
plead with you, Mr. President,
to allow a short recess, perhaps of about an hour, to consider the draft
resolution before the vote is taken.
167. The PRESIDENT: I consider that the representative of Ceylon has made a suggestion under rule 78
of the rules of procedure, which reads as follows:
“During the discussion
of any matter, a representative may move the suspension or the adjournment of the meeting, Such motions shall not be debated but shall be immediately
put to the vote. We
shall now vote on the motion of the representative
of Ceylon.
The motion was adopted by 36 votes to 34, with 40
abs ten tions .
The meeting was suspended
sumed at 8 p.m.

at 6.40 p.m. and re-

168. Mr. JAKOBSON (Finland): May I say first that I
am speaking on behalf of the three delegations sponsoring the draft resolution
[A/L.5291 before the
General Assembly, the delegations of Austria, Sweden
and Finland.
169, We listened, of course, with close attention to
the statements made here this afternoon, and we have
taken note of the arguments presented and the objections and doubts expre$sed in those statements.
170. During the period of the recess, the three sponsors have reconsidered
the draft in the light of those
arguments, and we now wish to propose a revised
text, which we hope will remove the objections and
the doubts that were expressed here. We do SO in the
same spirit of co-operation and understanding that has
animated our three delegations throughout these
discussions.
171. The revisions we have made are as follows:
firstly, to add the following new preambular paragraph
after the first paragraph:
“Considering that the Security Council continues to
be seized of the prohlem,~~
Secondly, to delete operative paragraph 1; thirdly, to
add to the present operative paragraph 2 the following
words, at the end of the sentence: “in order to faoilitate the resumption by the Security Council, as a matter of urgency, of its consideration of the tense situa* tion in the Middle East, ‘I The operative paragraphs
will have to be &numbered acqordingly.
172. I should now like, for the sake of clarity, to read
out in full the revised draft resolution, which I believe
Will be circulated to delegations very shortly. The
revised text [A./L.529/Rev.l] is as follows:
“The General Assembly,
“Having considered the grave situation in the
Middle East,
“Considering that the Security Council continues
to be seized of the problem,

- 21 July 196’7

15

“Bearing in mind the resolutions adopted and the
proposals considered during the fifth emergency
spectal session of the General Assembly,
“1. Requests the Secretary-General to forward
the records of the fifth emergency special session
of the General Assembly to the Security Council in
order to facilitate the resumption by the Security
Council, as a matter of urgency, of its consideration
of the tense situation in the Middle East;
“2. Decides to adjourn the fifth emergency special
session temporarily and to authorize the President
of the General Assembly to reconvene the session as
and when necessary.”
173. The three delegations sponsoringthis draft resolution hope that this new text will remove the objections
which have been expressed here andthat the Assembly
can now proceed to a vote.
174. Mr. FAKHREDDINE (Sudan): Since the beginning
of this emergency special session there have been
delegations that have sought to uphold the Charter of
the United Nations and to support its principles. They
have worked untiringly and have endeavoured, through
various means, to reach a solution that would preserve the dignity of this Organization. To those delegations I say, as the representative of Sudan, and
perhaps speaking on behalf of the other A.rabcountries,
we must be grateful. We must acknowledge our indebtedness to them because of their untiring efforts.
175. However, with respect to the revisions just submitted, we find that we still have certain difficulties
because the draft, even as revised, in actual fact
takes the matter from the General Assembly to the
Security Council, We have the situation in this case
where both the Security Council and the General A.ssembly are seized of the same question, and we find
some difficulty in that, We find that we are really
unable to vote for the draft resolution as revised. To
enable us to show that we are co-operating in this
matter, I would request a separate vote on operative
paragraph 1 in order that we may be able to vote for
the rest of the draft resolution.
176. The PRESIDENT: A separate vote has been requested by the representative of Sudan on operative
paragraph 1 of the draft resolution before us.
177. Under rule 91 of the rules of procedure:
“A representative may move that parts of a proposal or of an amendment shall be voted on separately. If objection is made to the request for division, the motion for division shall be voted upon.”
178. Is there any objection to the request made by
the representative of Sudan? There being no objection,
we shall proceed to votefirst onoperativeparagraph 1
of draft resolution A/L.529/Rev.l.
A vote byroll-call
has been requested.
k vote was taken by roll-call.
Netherlands, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote first.
h favour:: Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Romania, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sweden,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad andTobago, Ukrainian Soviet

16

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of A.merica, Upper Volta, Uruguay, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Czechoslovakia,
Dahomey, Denmark, Ethiopia, Finland, Gabon, Ghana,
Wungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Laos, Liberia, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Mexico, Mongolia, Nepal.
Against: Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan,
Syria, Tunisia, United Arab Republic, UnitedRepublic
of Tanzania, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia, Afghanistan,
Albania, Algeria, Burundi, Congo (DemocraticRepublit of), Cuba, Guinea, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco.
’

Abstaining: Nigeria, Panama, Portugal, Senegal,
South Africa, Spain, Turkey, Uganda, Venezuela,
Cameroon, Ceylon, Congo (Brazzaville), Costa Rica,
Cyprus, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
France, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia,, Iran, Israel, Kenya, Malta.

Special Session - Plenary

Meetings

180. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call upon those
representatives who have asked to speak in explanation of their votes after the voting.
181. ,Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): It. is now in order
to ask ourselves what are the results of the work
done at the emergency special session of the General
Assembly.
182. In our opinion, there are ample grounds for
saying with confidence that something positive has
been accomplished at this session of the General Assembly, There is reason for satisfaction at the course
taken by the discussion concerning the question of
Israel’s aggression against the Arab States.
183. On behalf of the States they represent, theoverwhelming majority of delegations have in one form or
another condemned the aggressor and his seizure of
territory,
censured the use of force in international
relations and urged the prompt removal of the invaders from the occupied Arab territories.

Operative paragraph 1 was adopted by 62 votes to
27, with 27 abstentions.

184. Although the delegations of some States may not
have been firm enough in voicing their opinions,
casting, as it were, wary glances all about them, they
too condemned Israel’s policy of* aggression and, at
the same time, those who are backing Israel.

179. The PRESIDENT: I now put to the vote the draft
resolution [A/L.529/Rev.l]
as a whole,

185. Let us look at the results of the voting on the
specific proposals considered at this session.

A vote was taken by roll-call.
The, Dempcratic
Republic of the Congo, having been
drawn by lot by the President, was calIedupon to vote
I
first.
In favour: Costa Rica, Czechoslovakia, Dahomey,
Denmark, Ethiopia, Finland, Gabon, Ghana, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy, Svory Coast, Jamaica,
Japan, Laos, Liberia, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Mexico, Mongolia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Romania, Rwanda, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Sweden, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Upper Volta, Uruguay, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia,
Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Central AfricanRepublic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia.
., ,
!,‘:.i‘,(,. Against: Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cuba,
Guinea, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malay: ./
I
sia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Pakistan,, Saudi
A.rabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, United Arab
Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Yemen, Zambia, Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Burundi,

Abstaining:
Cyprus, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, France, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana,
Honduras, Indonesia, Iran, Israel, Kenya, Malta,
Nigeria, Panama, Portugal, Senegal, South Africa,
Spain, Turkey, Uganda, Venezuela, Yugoslavia, Cameroon, Ceylon, Congo (Brazzaville).
The draft resolutfon as a whole was adopted by 63
votes to 26, with 27 abstentions.

186. The USSR draft resolution received the votes of
45 States-certainly an impressive number.
187. The draft resolution of the group of non-aligned
countries, actively supported by the Soviet Union and
other socialist States, received the votes of 53 countries, while 46 voted against it. Thus, this proposal,
which like ours contained a demand for the immediate
withdrawal of Israel forces from the occupied territories, was favoured by the majority of States that
participated in the voting.
188. Moreover,
is not evident on whose side really
stand those twenty or so States whose delegations
abstained in the vote? They held back only because
they lacked the determination to demonstrate clearly
their support for the A.rab States and their disapproval
of the aggressor’s actions, and to dissociate themselves from the imperialist forces which encourage
Israel. These, are the facts, and we are all well aware
of them.
189. I know that, according to the rules governing
voting in the Assembly, these resolutions failed t0
receive the necessary two-thirds
majority.
But,
over and ,above this formal sum total there is a
political sum total, and it shows unequivocally Wat
the aggressor has been branded as such.
190. The discussion and the voting in the Assembly
show that the majority of the States Members of the
United Nations are for the immediate withdrawal of
Israel’s forces from the territories
they occupy for
the time being. The resolutions on Jerusalem [2253
and 2254 (ES-V)] adopted by the General Assembly
amount not only to a condemnation of Israel’s actions
in that city but also to a rejection of all its other
attempts to entrench itself in the occupied Arab
territories.

1558th meeting
191. The USSR delegation expresses
its confidence
that the Security Council will duly take into account
these opinions of the overwhelming
majority of Member States when it resumes its consideration
of questions relating to the situation in the Middle East.
192. What prevented the General Assembly
from
adopting a resolution on the main issue-the
immediate
withdrawal
of, Israel forces from the occupied territories? The stubborn resistance
of the imperialist
forces which are backing Israel. It was the aggressor
and his patrons, primarily
the United States of America, that voted against the adoption of resolutions
based on the principles of the United Nations Charter.
193. The United States Government bears the principal responsibility
for actions dictated by hostility
towards the Arab States, In this it was supported by
most of the members of the NATO military bloc, as
well as by some other countries,
most of which are
situated thousands of miles from the Middle East
area.
194. A few words about this latter group, which is
mainly composed of the countries of Latin America.
The Soviet people have a profound respect for the
peoples of the Latin A.meric*an countries. The Soviet
Union strives to maintain good relations with them. It
was depressing for us, and we are sure for others too,
to witness what was done almost openly-to witness the
pressure crudely brought to bear by the United States
of America on the Governments of the Latin A.merican
countries, with all levers of coercion brought into
play.
195. We told these countries,
and we tell them now,
’ that we understand their position andtheir difficulties.
But we must tell them also that in questions of war
and peace one cannot renounce principles,
disregard
for which is tantamount to the partial or complete
loss of independence, tantamount to making mock of
the principles of the United Nations Charter, to which
their signatures too are affixed,
196. All countries, irrespective
of where they are
situated, which gave in to the pressure
and took up
positions that suited Washington,
cannot but realize
that they may have jeopardieed their own future interests, History does not end today,
197. The States whose representatives
said “NO” to
the proposal .for the immediate withdrawal
of the aggressor’s
forces from the occupied territotiies
may
themselves on more than one occasion need a kind
word and support from the Arab States,
198, Attempts
are now being made to slight the
peoples of the Arab countries
and to whitewash
and
laud the aggressor.
The only possible response is
indignation. The A.rabs gave to, the world great scientists and writers
and made an invaluable contribution
to the development of society and culture. The Arab
Peoples who shook off the yoke of colonialism are now
experiencing a renaissance,
Nothing can stop them
from successfully
defending their right to freedom
and to social and economic progress,
some of the
very things at which the Israel aggression was aimed.
199. Are the countries whose representatives
said
“No” to the proposal for the immediate withdrawal
of Israel forces, the condemnation of the aggressor

- 21 July 1967

17

and compensation for the material losses inflicted on
the Arab States, really sure that they will not themselves be in a position where they will have to look
hopefully,
as they have more than once done in the
past, to the Kremlin in Moscow for support, if not
rescue?
200. Now as to Israel and its policy. The people who
stand at the helm in Israel today are obviously intoxicated with their successes
in the military sphere,
But so were the nazis in the early days of the Second
World War. This comparison
may not seem entirely
appropriate
from the point of view of magnitude and
scale.
However,
no one can deny that there is a
similarity.
201. Would it not be better for the Isrhel leaders,
whose names are highly publicized in the United States
of America,
to live not for today alone but at least to
think about the next day as well? Time will show
whether or not they are capable of doihg that.
202. Everyone knows that Israel wouldnothavedared
to lift a finger if its patrons had not wished it to embark upon aggression.
Consider the behaviour of Israel
today, during the meetings of the General Assembly.
Encouraged by its patrons near and far, andprimarily
by the United States, it haughtily ignores the view af
the majority of States as expressed from the rostrum
of the General ‘Assembly. It does not implement even
the resolutions
on Jerusalem
[2253 (ES-V) and 2254
(ES-V)], which condemn its unilateral actions,
203. We should like to emphasfze that if the United
States wants peace in the Middle East, as its Government sometimes declares, that canbe achievedwithout
difficulty.
What must be done to that end is, first of
all, to secure the withdrawal
of Israel’s forces from
the occupied territories,
eliminate the consequences
of Israel’s
aggression
and compel Israel to respect
the rights of other peoples. T@e future will provide
the answer to the question whether the United States
Government wants peaoe in the Middle East or whether
it is determined to bring about another war.
204. Irrespective
of where the situation inthe Middle
East is considered-in
the General Assembly or in the
Security
Council-the
task confronting
the United
Nations is one and the same: to bring about, as d
first
step, the immediate withdrawal
of the aggressor’s forces from the territories
of the Arab States.
Each Member State must make its contribution to the
solution of this problem.
205. The continued presence of Israel forces in the
territories
of the Arab States is fraught with serious
dhnger to the cause of peace in the Middle East and
to univ++sal peace: The provocatory
conduct of Israel
in the zone of direct confrontation
between its forces
and the forces of the United Arab Republic along the
Suez Canal indicates that the aggressor
is nurturing
further plans of conquest.
206, The continued occupation by Israel of the territory of A.rab countries is and will remain the principal .
obstacle to the solution of a number ofpressing
problems, including such problems
as the resumption of
navigation through the Suez Canal and the rehabilitation
of refugees.

18

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

207. All this goes to emphasize how urgent, is the
need for all peace-loving
States to continue their
struggle for the elimination of the consequences
of
Israel’s
aggression and, first and foremost,
for the
expulsion of the aggressor’s
troops from the territories they have seized.
208. No one can afford to forget how the Second
World War crept up on mankind. Those Governments
which presume to solve questions
of war and peace
with no thought of the past and little care for the
future lose the confidence of their peoples.
209. The USSR delegation takes this opportunity
to
express on behalf of its Government its appreciation
to the Governments of all States which supported both
its initiative to convene this session of the General
Assembly
and its proposals
at the session. We are
also gratified by the adoption of the decision that the
General Assembly should continue in session.
This
means that if circumstances
should require, the meetings of the Assembly can be resumed immediately.
210. The Soviet Union will continue, in its approach
to the dangerous situation prevailing in the Middle East,
to be, fully aware of its responsibilities
in the sphere
of international policy. The Soviet Union, together with
other States which champion international
peace atid
security and the just cause of the Arab countries victims of aggression, will continue to render to those
countries comprehensive help and assistance
in political and economic matters, as well as in strengthening their defence capability,
211. The Soviet Union, like other socialist
States,
pursues a foreign policy based on the principles
of
peaceful coexistence, respect fox the rights of nations
large and small, and opposition to aggressors.
This
was Lenin’s policy, and the Soviet Union is fully determined to continue it.
212. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of A.merica): A.s
every representative
here knows, the Un‘ited States
had its reservations
about the advisability,
in the
circumstances,
of convening the General Assembly
in
this emergency special session.
Nevertheless,
from
the moment the decision was taken, we endeavoured to
the best of oux ability to co-operate
in the hope of
bringing about a constructive
outcome.
213. In the further consideration
of this matter by
the Security Council, 1 pledge the best efforts of the
United States, sharing as we do the conviction voiced
by the Secretary-General
nearly two months ago:
“that with the co-operation
of all parties concerned
the United Nations,
and the Security
Council in
particular,
must continue to seek, and eventually
to find, reasonable, peaceful and just solutions. IlY
Indeed, the proceedings
of this Assembly
during the
past month have clearly shown, above all other things,
that such solutions are needed by the parties and by
all the world.
214.. The United States profoundly believes that such
solutions musf be founded on the cardinal principle
of all international peace-the
principle
of live and
let live, the’ principle which our Charter
expresses
y Official
Supplement

Records
April,

for

of the Security
Council,
‘Ihenty-second
Year,
May and June, 1967, document S/7906, pat-a. 19.

Special Session - Plenary

Meetings

in the simple injunction to Member States and their
peoples “to practise tolerance and live together in
peace.” The necessary
corollary
of that principle is
also found in the Charter,
namely, that all States
must “refrain
in their international
relations
from
the threat or use of’ force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any State”.
215. Prom the outset of these debates, both in the
Security Council and here in the General Assembly,
we of the United States have takenthose Charter principles as our guide. We have held, and we still hold,
to the view that, if the United Nations is to keep faith
with these principles, more must be achieved in the
Middle East than a return to the precarious armistice
of eighteen years; more must be achieved than the
withdrawal of Israel’s forces from territories occupied during the recent conflict, necessary though that
is. What is required is to deal creatively with all the
underlying issues and all departures from basic
Charter principles that have troubled the Middle East
for a generation, and to resolve those issues in a new
spirit of conciliation, In short, the structure of a
stable and just peace must at last be built in the
Middle East.
216. Tlie elements of such a structure were well
summed up by President Johnson in his address on
19 June, in which he said:
“Certainly troops must be withdrawn but there
must also be recognized rights of national life,
progress in solving the refugee problem, freedom
of innocent maritime passage, limitation of the
arms race and respect for political independence
and territorial integrity.”
217. In building this structure of peace, the primary
task falls to the parties themselves with such outside
assistance as they may find desirable and necessary.
But we, the Members of the United Nations, also have
a deep interest in the growth of peace in the area and
an inescapable Charter responsibility to do all in our
power’ to promote it.
218. As this session comes to a close, we must candidly face the fact that the General Assembly has not
resolved the fundamental differences that have plagued
the Middle East for twenty years. It is not surpyising,
nor is it a derogation from the efforts made by
nearly all the Members of the Assembly, that this has
proved to be the case. Evenlbefoxe the recent conflict
the problems were many and complex, the differences
of view were deep and genuine, the commitments to
one course or another on all sides were strong. And
now there has been added the intensely emotional
aftermath of the recent tragic conflict. It would be
contrary to all historical experience to expect that,
in such circumstances, the foundations for peace in
the area could be easily or quickly laid despite this
Assembly’s best efforts. Still less could the Assembly,
through a resolution, attempt to draw a detailed blueprint for peace.
219. My Government fully reoognized, nevertheless,
that there was a strong desire among Members to
reach agreement on some resblutionwhich could serve
a general guide for peace, both for the parties and for
the United N,ations, in the difficult period which lies
ahead, and we did all within our power to help trans-

1558th meeting
form that sentiment into reality. And now the allegation is made by the Foreign Minister
of the Soviet
Union that the United States stood in the way of a
constructive
resolution.
I shall not deign to reply to
that comment. The representative
of the Soviet
Union, more than any other man in this hall, can
bear witness that the United States made every effort, even at the last minute, to arrive at a meeting
of minds with which this A.ssembly could concur. The
United States has been flexible throughout on the language of several dr%ft resolutions
that have been
proposed, We remain flexible to this very last hour.
But we could not be so flexible, nor could any other
Member of this A.ssembly, as to give away fundamental
Charter principles. We could not go so far as to blind
ourselves to the fact that peace in the Middle Ea,st is
indivisible, and that the withdrawal
of troops must be
linked to the acknowledgement
by every Member of the
United Nations in the area that each enjoys the right
to maintain an independent national State of its own
and to live in peace and security, and to a renunciation of all claims and acts inconsistent
therewith,
including claims or acts flowing from an asserted state
of belligerency,
We would have been very glad to
join in a resolution
in this Assembly stating that
principle. Surely those two principles of our Charter
go hand in hand. Both as a practical matter and as a
matter of equity, one side cannot be called upon to
abide by the rules of peace while the other side is
left free to continue to assert the rights of war. That
was the belief which was the foundation of our view
held at the beginning of the Assembly and continuously
held throughout its deliberations,
and that was the belief which underlay the Latin American draft resowhich
the United States
lution [A/L.523/Rev.l],
supported.
220. Reference has been made to the great States of
Latin America by the Foreign Minister of the Soviet
Union, The charge that he levelled that the great
States of Latin America could be pressured
by the
United States scarcely warrants
comment by me. That
is a ludicrous charge, as anybody familiar with Latin
America knows, and its bizarre nature is demonstrated not only by the history of the Latin American
States in their international
relations,
but also by
their votes many times in this Assembly.
Indeed it
has been demonstrated
tonight by the votes of the
Latin American countries
on the resolution which
the A.ssembly just adopted. It was demonstrated
by
their votes on the resolutions
on Jerusalem,
221. I think this A.ssembly has made constructive
contributions,
We should and must realize that there
are times when the refusal to take a wrong step is in
itself an important achievement,
and this can truly
be said of the Assembly’s
refusal to adopt not only
the Soviet draft resolution
but also the_.one-sided
Yugoslav draft resolution
which was submitted. The
basic defect of those proposals was that they urged a
return to the situation as it was on 4 June. Therefore
they were a prescription
not for peace but for renewed
hostilities, and their rejection was a wise decision by
this Assembly.
222. We in the United States look ahead, not backward,
and we owe the Membersdof
this Assembly a statement of our own course in the future as we deal with

- 21 July 1967

19

the situation in the Middle East both in and outside
the Security, Council, We shall persevere
in our efforts
to have good relations
with all States in the
Middle East. Although our efforts toward this end
in the past, as our President
has said, have not always been successful,
we continue to believe that
our differences
with individual States in the area, as
well as the differences
between them, can and must
be worked out peacefully and in accordance with international
practice and the injunctions of the Charter
of the United Nations.
223. Guided by that spirit
and belief, the United
States will do its full share to help find a just and
final solution to the refugee problem,
The United
States will make a full contribution
in support of
regional co-operation
in the Middle East. The United
States will do its share, and more, to see that the
great promise of peaceful nuclear energy is applied
to problems
of critical
importance
to all the countries
of the Near East-the
desalting of water, the
irr@ation
of arid deserts.
224. A’nd this is perhaps most important for our
fiture
deliberations:
while others may be tempted to
engage in vituperation and entirely unfounded charges
and accusations,
we rather
would appeal to all to
exercise
vision. While some may feel malice, we
would
appeal to all to be magnanimous.
And we
shall try, with determination,
to abide by what we
ask of others.
225. In such a spirit, rather than in a spirit of hostility to any nation, large or small, we offer our help
to all the peoples of the Middle East, If others will
do likewise-if
the nations of the area themselves will
seek to make this their spirit in the future-then
we
know that an area of the world known to us all as the
birthplace
of great religions and great teachings can
and will flourish once,again in our time.
226. The United States will
to help make it so.

do all within

its pow&

227. Mr. EBAN (Israel):
Israel leaves the General
Assembly
with strengthened
resolve to work for the
attainment of a just and durable peace, The Assembly
has had many moments of tension and even of vehemence. But there is no reason to regard the result
as one of paralysis.
The rejection of unjust and intemperate
charges against a Member State is not an
act of abdication; it is an actof considered judgement.
228. Despite
the intense and powerful
pressure
brought to bear upon it, the General Assembly
has
declined to violate justice or to betray truth. Thus,
it has refused to misrepresent
Israel’s fight for survival as “aggression ‘1. A majority of its Members have
seen the recent hostilities
in the long and sombre context of the events which preceded them. Nineteen years
of implacable hostility reached a climax in May 1967,
when a small State found itself encircled, besieged,
blockaded and openly menaced with destruction.
229. Nothing in contemporary
history is oomparable
with the intense and virulent bel!igerency which has
beset Israel in the first
two decades of its independence. No other State in our time has been required to live on such a slender margin of security
or in the shadow of such a constant threat. When the

20

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

noose w.as tightened around its neck two months ago,
Israel’s lonely resistance became the only alternative
to a disaster
which would have weighed intolerably
upon the conscience
of mankind, For if the openly
avowed plan of Israel’s
extinction had succeeded,
there would have been nothing practical for the United
Nations dew to discuss, Israel has in fact been denounced here by its adversaries
for having energetically refused
to die, The solid majority
votes,
first in the Security Council and then Yn the General
Assembly,
against the charge of Israeli aggression,
bear witness to the inherent sense of justice and truth
which has swept across world opinion and found its’
echoes in this hall.
230. The central
theme discussed
at this session
has been the relationship
between two problems:
the
withdrawal
of forces and the establishment
of peace.
The Sobiet Union, the Arab States and those closely
associated
with them have sought to establish
a
separation
between these two concepts.
Nearly all
other Members
of the General Assembly declined to
endorse this separation.
They saw the two issues as
integrally
and inseparably
linked. They understood
the dangers of restoring the situation which had given
rise to active hostilities.
For there would have been
no Middle Eastern
crisis had not Israel’s
right to
peace, to security,
to sovereignty,
to economic development and to maritime
freedom been forcibly
denied and aggressively
attacked. It is impossible to
eliminate the symptoms of the Middle Easterntension
while leaving its basic causes intact,
231. That is the central lesson of this Assembly for
Middle Eastern States, The lesson is plain: Member
States which maintain a doctrine and practice of war
against another Member State cannot receive from
the United Nations the help and consideration
which
they could otherwise
expect.
232. The General Assembly
session has ended as
it has for one reason alone: that Arab States and
others refuse to’tolerate any resolution which speaks
seriously
of peace. That is the only reason why no
resolution of a substantive character could be adopted.
If the Arab States -accept the prinoiples of peace, there
can be not only resolutions,
but, what is more important , solutions a
233. There have been many efforts in recent years
to maintain a minimal tranquillity,
even within the
context of Arab belligerency.
We co-operated
with
those efforts
right up to May 196’7. It is now evident
thatl such efforts cannot long succeed. There is no
method of avoiding a constant bsooding tension, with
constant danger of explosion, unless one condition
is fulfilled, The condition is that all Middle Eastern
States render, each to the other, the full rights which
States possess
under the Charter to which we are all
signatories.
234. Under the Charter, Israel’s
neighbours
owe it
the full recognition of its independence and statehood,
.Under the Charter,
all Israel’s neighbours are committed to refrain fromWe use ofthreat or use of force
against that statehood and that independence,
Under
the Charter,
all Arab States are bound to regard
Israel as a State endowed with sovereignty
equal to
their own. Under the Charter, they are pledged to

Special Session - Plenary

Meetings

practise tolerance
and live together with Israel as
good neighbours,
and to harmonize their efforts with
Israel’s
for the maintenance of international peace
and security.
235. These are the principles of the Charter. These
are the acceptedprinciples
of international coexistence
and of regional security.
These are the principles
which govern the American hemispheric system and
other systems of peaceful regional security and cooperation.
236. Can anyone imagine that, if Israel’s neighbours
had guided their relations with Israel by these principles, we should be faced today with a crisis which
still afflicts the Middle East and darkens the world?
The strict application of Charter relationships
between sovereign States is the beginning and the end
of international
wisdom in the Middle East. The replacement of the doctrine and practice of war by the
doctrine and practice of peace is the central issue.
I repeat: the replacement of the doctrine and practice of war by the doctrine and practice of peace is
the central issue. It cannot be evaded. It cannot be
sidetracked,
If it is faced and solved, all other problems fall into place, For if there is peace instead of
belligerency,
such problems as the determination of
agreed frontiers,
the disengagement
of forces abstention from the threat of constant violence, and the
normal use of international
waterways
all find their
solution through the processes
of peaceful settlement which the Charter prescribes.
It is impressive
to notice and to record how great a body of opinion
exists in favour of attempting not a return to insecurity,
nor a temporary
palliative, but a radical
and permanent remedy.
23’7. Once the Arab States acknowledge
to Israel
those rights which all other Member States acknowledge to each other, the foundations of a peaceful
Middle East will become firmly laid. The time has
come-indeed,
it is long overdue-to
adapt the ArabIsraeli
relationship
to the accepted rules of international conduct amongst sovereign States, Many delegations have understood
and affirmed that Israel’s
neighbours cannot at one and the same time deny its
sovereignty,
threaten its existence
and refuse
its
basic rights to peace and security while demanding
that Israel respect their sovereignty, their existence
and their rights, The key to the Middle Eastern future
therefore lies in the principle of reciprocity.
Those
who respect Israel’s
sovereign interests
and rights
will encounter from Israel a reciprocal
respect of
their rights and their interests,
238, It remains for me to discuss the application Of
these principles
to the tasks which lie ahead, The
cease-fire
has been instituted.
It must be meticulously observed, Agreed arrangements
for its supervision are in force. But the cease-fire
is, of course,
an interim situation, It should be replaced as soon
as possible by an agreed and viable peace ensuring
security for all States, Peace should be negotiated
freely between the parties
in accordance with the
procedures
of pacific settlement, prescribed
in our
Charter,
239. Israel stands ready to negotiate a peace settlement with Egypt, with Jordan, with Syria and with

1558th meeting - 21 July 1967
Lebanon. In such negotiations
all parties are free t0
present and examine any prOpOSalS in an effort to
reach mutual agreement.
240, In addition to the issues, which lie within the
responsibility
of Middle Eastern
States, there are
universal religious
interests
which demand satisfaction and respect and which should be settled in
consultation with those directly concerned. It is our
hope and our policy that universal spiritual concerns
in the Holy City will find agreed expression.
241. The: war of 1948 and the subsequent belligerency
have created and perpetuated humanitarian problems
whose solution, as experience shows, can be achieved
only in the context of normal inter-State
relations.
Hundreds of thousands of people-A,rabs
and Jewshave been affected by the population movements
generated by two decades of war, belligerency
and
hostility, The lesson of experience
is clear. The
conditions necessary to transform
homeless refugees
into productive members
of society can reach full
expression
only if there is peace. A situation
in
which States are arrayed
and embattled against
each other; in which the violent destruction
of one
State is the avoiwed policy of others; in which an
armaments
race consumes
scarce
economic resources; in which refugees are envisaged by certain
Governments as a spearhead for the destruction
of a
sovereign State-such
a situation is not one in which
Governments and international
agencies can successfully undertake enterprises
of resettlement.
Indeed,
the clearest lesson of experience after twenty tormented years is that nothing in Arab-Israeli
relations
is soluble without peace, while everything is soluble
with it.
242. While the main responsibility
falls on sovereign
States within our region, States outside the Middle
East, especially the’ most powerful
amongst them,
can do much to affect our destiny for good or for ill.
They can affect it for good by respecting the policy
of non-intervention;
by making an equal distribution
of their friendship;
by avoiding any identification
with hostility; by giving no indulgence to belligerency;
and by concerting their action with the States of our
region for the promotion of peace and welfare,
243. It was, after all, in the Middle East in ancient
times that the idea of a universal human destiny was
expressed with incomparable force, It is there, more
than anywhere else, that the need is compelling for a
new atmosphere of relations on the international plane.
Such new relationships
are urgently needed for the
highest human ends, There should be in the Middle East
no belligerents, no victors ox vanquished, but only the
vision of peoples who have suffered greatly through
the errors and illusions of those who have rejected
peace as though it were an alien and forbidden word,
to be banished from the international
vocabulary.
For
the sake of countless people in the Middle East for
whom there is no answer but peace, the world community should continue to set its face against the
tensions and rancours
of the past two decades, It is
in our region that statesmanship now faces its heaviest
challenge and its brightest
opportunity,
To meet the
challenge and to fulfil the opportunity will require the
Utmost dedication of our hearts and minds.

21

244. ‘The PRESIDENT:
In order to expedite the work
of the Assembly,
I would ask representatives
to be
as brief as possible,
at this stage of explanations of
vote after the voting.
245. Mr. GURINOVICH
(Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic)
(translated
from Russian): The fifth emergency special session of the General Assembly is
temporarily
suspending its meetings and authorizing
the President
to reconvene the session as and when
it becomes
necessary,
In this connexion, my delegation deems it necessary
to make the following
statement.
246. We regret that the General Assembly has not
been able to adopt a resoluticn requiring the immediate
withdrawal
of Israel
forces
from the territories
seized by them in the United Arab Republic, Syria
and Jordan. In this most important question of the
restoration
of peace in the Middle East, the United
Nations has been paralysed as a result of the attitude
taken by the United States of America,
a number of
other imperialist
Powers, and a small group of countries which were blackmailed
and browbeaten by the
instigators
and organizers
of Israel aggression, They
managed to muster just over one-third of the votes and
thus prevent adoption of both the USSR draft resolution
[A/L.5191
and the draft resolution
submitted by the
non-aligned countries ]A/L,522/Rev.3].
24’7. It will be remembered that the USSRdraft resolution proposed a decisive condemnation of Israel aggression,
and contained a demand for the immediate
and unconditional
withdrawal
of Israel forces from
the captured Arab territories
and for full reparation
by Israel for the losses and damage sustained by the
United Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan as a result
of Israel aggression,
The draft resolution of the nonaligned countries called for the immediatewithdrawal
of Israel troops to the positions which they had occupied before 5 June 1967. These fair and legitimate.
demands are in keeping with the spirit and principles
of the United Nations Charter. Those who voted against
those draft resolutions
demonstrated
to the entire
world
their disrespect
for the obligations they had
assumed
under the United Nations Charter,
one of
whose articles reads:
“To maintain international
peace and security,
and to that end: to take effective collective measures
for the prevention
and removal of threats to the
peace, and for the suppression
of acts of aggression
or other breaches of the peace, , *II.
248. Recent events in the Suez Canal zone and the
statement which we have just heard from the Israel
Foreign Minister show that the Israel militarists
are
following
a perilous course. Israel is expanding its
aggressive
activities,
and, being drunk with military
success,
seems to overlook the fact that suoh acts
cannot go unpunished.
The ruling circles of Israel
should clearly understand,
from the General Assembly’s
debates and resolutions,
particularly
the
resolutions
ph Jerusalem
[2263 (ES-V) and 2254
(ES-V)],
that any attempt on Israelis
part to derive
benefit from its aggression
is doomed to failure.
There is but one right course open to Israel, and
that is to withdraw
its forces to the positions which
they occupied before 5 June and to adhere strictly to

22

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

the principles
of the United Nations Charter
in its
dealings with neighbouring States, We must compel
Israel and its supporters,
the United States and certain other imperialist
Powers,
to abandon those imperialist
acquisitive aims which prompted the attack
on the Arab countries.
249. It is heartening to note that the overwhelming
majority of Member States have correctly
appraised
the situation prevailing in the Middle East, and have
reacted accordingly in calling for the removal of the
Israel forces of aggression from the territory
seized
by them in the neighbouring Arab States. These Member States have made it plain that, until the Israel
forces withdraw,
there can be no settlement
of any
of the other problems in the Middle East.
250. , We share the opinion of the majority of Member
States that further consideration of the situation in the
Middle East, both in the Security Council and in the
General Assembly, must be based on the premisethat
Israel’s
aggression and seizure of territory
are in
violation of the United Nations Charter, that the aggressor must withdraw its troops immediately
and unconditionally from the occupied Arab territories,
that
all other problems relating to the Middle East must
be settled in strict compliance with the Charter and
that the rights and interests of the Arab peoples, which
were violated by Israel aggression,
must be restored.
251. The Byelorussian
SSR will continue to support
the friendly Arab nations in their legitimate struggle
to eliminate the consequences of Israel aggression
and, above all, to secure the unconditional withdrawal
of Israel forces from the occupied Arab territories.,
252. Mr, BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Although I come
to this rostrum
for the explanation of my vote on the
resolution that has just been adoptedby this Assembly,
I do sincerely hope, Mr. President, that you will accord me the same courtesy and generosity
that you
have given to others whenever they saw fit to deviate
once in a while, perhaps rightly or wrongly,
from the
subject matter of their speeches. On no other basis
will I agree to speak from this rostrum
again. And I
must remind my colleagues that it is not only Baroody
who is speaking, but the representative
of a sovereign
State. We expect the same courtesy to be accorded to
us as a Member of this Organization.
253. We voted against the draft
following reasons.

resolution

for the

254. Firstly,
we believe it opens the door for a long
drawn-out
discussion of the Israeli aggression
without giving any assurance whatsoever
that the withdrawal of the Israeli forces from the usurped territories will be brought about either by this Assembly
or by the Security Council.
255. Secondly, we voted against the draft resolution
because, judging from past experience, when the two
major Powers, which, I must say, to a large extent
dominate the United Nations, do not take any action
singly or in concert to compel the aggressor
to withdraw his forces, any substantive resolution
or resolutions adopted by the General A.ssembly or the Security
Council would be of only academic value and could in
no way be made effective, I humbly speak from my

Special Session - Plenary
personal experience
last twenty years,

Meetings

in the United Nations

during the

256, Thirdly, we voted against the draft resolution
because we believe that it paves the way for a protracted period of futile deliberation which may very
well render the issue before us not too dissimilar
from that of Korea, which is still on the agenda of
the United Nations.
25’7. Fourthly, we voted against the draft resolution
because we had no assurance
with respect to the
indigenous people of Palestine, who constituted over
90 per cent of the inhabitants of the land during the
first years of the British Mandate, and who have been
sadly ignored since the partition of Palestine in 1947.
258. The persistence of certain Powers-and
I do not
have to name them-to exploit the Palestine question
in order to serve their national interests
was wrong
in the beginning, and it is still wrong today to sacrifice the original natives of Palestine, after they were
robbed of their patrimony and scattered
to the four
winds.
259. Two wrongs cannot constitute a right. The partition of Palestine was wrong from the beginning, as it
flouted the principle of self-determination
enshrined in
the Charter.
The United Nations today has ignored
those principles
on the premise that what has been
done could not easily be undone. AgainImust
say: two
wrongs do not constitute a right.
260. We voted against the resolution just adoptedbecause there are certain Powers that still think peace
can be imposed on defeated Governments on the battlefield, forgetting
that the Arab people, like peoples
everywhere,
can defy any Government that submits,
and can topple it if that people sees its inalienable
rights trampled underfoot.
261. Mr. Eban talks of a solution, and not United
Nations resolutions.
How can there be a solution,
Mr. Eban, except by restituting
the homes and the
land to the indigenous-and
I look you straight in the
eye-to
the indigenous-go
ahead, laugh-to
the indigenous people of Palestine? How can anyone recognize and make peace with another person who has
robbed him of his patrimony?
262. If this is true of a persononan
individual basis,
how does our colleague Mr. Eban expect a whole
people-and
I mean the native people of Palestineto accept being denied their inalienable rights?
263. Mr. Eban spoke of Israel’s
sovereignty
and the
need for respecting it on the part of the Arab States,
But what about the sovereignty
of the native people
of Palestine? Did the people of Palestine
have no
sovereignty,
under the British
Mandate, guaranteed
by the Treaty of Versailles?
Where is the sovereignty
of the Arab people of Palestine? Forget that they are
Arabs. They were the people of Palestine
who had
lived there for centuries. What about their sovereignty?
264, The universal human destiny to which Mr. Eban
referred in explaining his vote should be attained not
by the establishment of a State which has jeopardized
the primordial
rights of the people of Palestine. Forget
that they are Arabs. The universal human destiny referred to by Mr. Eban could have been attained by the

1558th meeting
Jews by living with their Moslem and Christian
brothers-not
under the flag of a movement which has
used a noble religion-and
here I was not making fun
of Judaism, as he said-which
has used a noble religion
as a motivation for a political end. I never make fun
of religions, because I am a religious man. How can I
make fun of a religion, as was reported in The New
York Times-and
this was done surreptitiously,
not
from this, rostrum-when
I am a student of the Bible,
the Old Testament as well as the New? Such slanderous
remarks made against me were intended to confuse
the issue.
265, The universal human destiny to which Mr. Eban
has referred could have been attained by Jews and
Christians
and Moslems living as brothers,
without
allegiance to a foreign flag which has been hoisted
by the incursion of Western Zionists who came from
Europe into Palestine. This question of Palestine is
twenty years old,’ and I am sorry to say that it will
not be resolved by resolutions
of this Assembly
or
of the Security Council. It is only when the Jews of
Palestine realize that they cannot impose peace on
the indigenous people of Palestine, nor, I must say,
on the A.rab Governments that have beenthe spokesmen
of the people of Palestine, only when they forget the
flag of Israel, that they can live there as brothers,
without that foreign flag. Then and only then can
Christian,
Moslem and Jew, and others, live in a
country called Palestine.
266. Mr. BELOISOLOS (Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist
Republic)
(translated
from Russian):
The General
Assembly
has today adopted one more resolution
[ 2256 (ES-V)] on the situation in the Middle East
arising from Israel’s
aggression
against the Arab
States,
267. The delegation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic voted for that resolution.
We feel that the
United Nations would be remiss in its duty if it did
not take the necessary
steps to put an end to Israel
aggression and to eliminate all its consequences.
268. The United Nations Charter,
in strict accordance with which all Member States are bound to act,
duly provides for effective measures to put an end to
aggression; those measures
must be applied in this
particular situation,
269. The General Assembly and the Security Council
are required to deal with a State whichhas committed
acts of aggression against other States; in doing so,
they must strictly
observe and implement the principles of the Charter. There must be no hesitation or
indecision on the part of these principal organs of the
United Nations at a time when peace andsecurity,
and
the national independence and territorial
integrity of
several Arab States have been dealt a severe blow
by Israel. That Israel, on 5 June 1967, launched a
war of aggression against the United Arab Republic,
Syria and Jordan cannot be doubted by anyone who
evaluates the actions of the Israel leaders.in the light
of the clear and unambiguous provisions
of the United
Nations Charter
and of contemporary
international
law.
..\
270: This was conclusively
proved during the debate
on the item plaoed on the agenda of the fifth emergency
Special session of the General Assembly
at the re..

- 21 July 1967

23

quest of the Soviet Union. No one-apart,
of course,
from the Israel representatives
themselves-could
deny that aggression had been committed by the Israel
leaders and military.
271. An overwhelmingly
majorfty of the States which
took part in the debate calledfor anend to the aggression, the elimination of all its consequences,
and the
withdrawal
of the aggressor’s
forces to the positions
they had occupied before 5 June 1967. Thisis the outstanding feature of the present
session, a feature
whose impostance no one can minimize. It is a point
which the gentlemen from Tel Aviv must bear in mind.
272. The peoples of the world follow with deep concern the course of events in the Middle East. The
Israel military,
by a treacherous
armed attack, have
seized sizable territories
in three A.rab,States, The
Israel leaders have openly declared’ their obviously
adventurous
plans to re-draw
the boundaries of the
Arab States; they overlook the fact that they are living
in times when the tide of the people’s struggle for
national liberation is washing away the last foundations of colonialism.
The Israel imperialists
would
like to stem that tide; they will not succeed.
273. The resulting
situation
is one fraught with
serious consequences for all the peoples of the Middle
East, and not for them alone. Therefore, the elimination of Israel aggression
and all its consequences is
the prime condition, at the present time, for the settlement of the current situation in the Middle East,
274. It is essential that the United Nations shouldnot
cease from actively seeking a settlement of the problem, a settlement which would put an end to Israel
aggression
and restore justice,
275. The United Nations cannot pass over in silence
the fact that, instead of gradually returningto normal,
the situation in that part of the world is growing ever
more inflammatory.
276, It is the duty of the United Nations not to allow
events to continue on a perilous course, but to deal
a rebuff to the aggressor and to help his victims.
277. We consider entirely sound and reasonable the
proposal
that the General Assembly
should suspend
its session,
on the understanding
that it may be renewed at the appropriate time.
278. The emergency special session of the General
Assembly
has studied in full detail the inception and
the subsequent
stages of Israel aggression
against
the neighbouring Arab States, and has laid bare before
the whole world the true intentions of the Israel expansionists;
we feel that, by this time, even those
members of the Security Council who at earlier Council meetings expressed
certain doubts in that connexion, must see the actions of the Israel Government
in their true light and call for an immediate end to
aggression and for the withdrawal
of the Israel armed
forces from all the territories
they have occupied.
279. We trust that the Security Council will take aocount of the view expressed
here by the majority of
delegations
and will take a decision worthy of the
United Nations by calling on the Israel leaders to
turn back from their hazardous course of aggression
and expansion,

24

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

280. Finally, the Ukrainian delegation ventures to
hope that the resolution adopted by the General Assembly will bring about the speedy elimination of the
consequences
of Israel aggression against the Arab
States and the establishment of peace in the area.
281. Mr, FAWZI
(United Arab Republic):
It was a
month ago that I tried to express, from this rostrum,
how deeply grateful we all were to the Government of
the Soviet Union for its taking the initiative in proposing that this emergency session of the General Assembly be convened, This gratitude remains and will
ever remain with us, and the course of events and of
our deliberations
during the last few weeks will not
detract from it but will rather addto it. This gratitude
too extends to the many Governments
which, in the
stormy weather we are all aware of, have remained
unshaken and have stayed robustly and steadfastly by
the side of truth.

Special Session - Plenary

Meetings

frightened away from truth, we have pity
miseration, They may wake up some day,

and com-

287. For our part and while fully aware that the Assembly’s work during this emergency special session
has fallen short of some principal objectives, we are
equally aware of several aspects of this work and in
connexion with it which have been particularly constructive and of great significance.
288. In sharp contrast to a jungle of irresolution,
there have been adopted by the Assembly the laudable
resolutions regarding Jerusalem and the humanitarian problems which have stemmed from the recent
developments and from the huge number of Governments which stood by truth and condemned aggression, and which represented the vast majority of the
peoples of the world.
5

289. Even in the defensive aspeot of its work, the
Assembly
has soundly rejected all Israeli, Western282. We are also most grateful to you, Mr. President,
rigged
advances
and attempts to have it accept unto the Secretary-General,
and to all your aides, for
principled proposals which were violently opposed to
your selfless
and devoted contribution
to the Asthe very principles of the United Nations, And when
sembly’s
endeavours. History will be able, far better
,
the A.ssembly considered the draft resolution based
than we are, to see our present work in perspective
on principle which was sponsored by a large number
and to judge it dispassionately,
Yet history is’someof
Asian, African and European countries and which
thing for tomorrow,
and we can readily excelit as the
called
for the unconditional withdrawal by Israel from
,photographers
of today, before objects and light and
Arab
territories
occupied as a result of the recent
colour fade away. May we, therefore,
be allowed to
Israeli
aggression,
the picture that evolved was such
register here some facts.
as to require careful study. It was a dusty emaciated
283. In this connexion, and during this closing meetpicture as if it had come-nay indeed it had comeing of the Assembly,
I shall not comment on certain
through the din and from under the ruins of battle, Yet
travesties
of facts put forward here today by Mr. Eban
it had a great story to tell. It read like a report on a
and one or two others. But I take leave to ask a*quesmedical checkup of the sickly world in which we live,
tion: Why does not lVwordologist” Eban try once, for a
a world quite capable, nevertheless, of regaining its
change, to tell the Assembly the truth?
health by adopting proper means and by living on a
sane diet of sound principles and honest accomplish284. It is clear beyond cavil that Israel, with others
ment,
a world of dignity and of hope. Toward that we
aiding and abetting it, is guilty of aggression
against
must aim, and for it we must pray.
Syria, Jordan and the United Arab Republic, and is
sustaining and intensifying
this aggression
day after
(translated from
290. Mr, SEYDOUX (France)
day. It is avowedly as clear, even from the formal
French): This afternoon a draft resolution (A/L.529)
statements made here by its spokesmen,
that Israel
was placed before us and we were asked to vote on it
is still guilty of retaining territories,
sanctuaries
and
as a matter of urgency.
properties which it has no right to retain, and driving
291. My delegation appreciates the efforts of the
away from their homes and their homelands hundreds
sponsors of this draft resolution, who have endeavoured
of thousands of new refugees,
to improve it from the psychological point of view et
285. This is mainly why we are all convened here.
least, but it was obliged to abstainbothon paragraph 1
Yet what have we done or failed to do when so conand on the resolution as a whole. As soon as the vote
vened? The record is eloquent. Realists,
pessimists,
was taken on the two main draft resolutions-that
of
cynics or whatever we wish to call them may say that
the non-aligned countries (A./L.522/Rev.3 and Corr.1)
this .has been a lame Assembly limping its way to
and that of our colleagues from Latin America (A/
an unheeded though repeated resolution
concerning
L.523/Rev.l)-it
was obvious that no agreement on
Jerusalem and to a few final words accompanying the
substance was possible, since the Assembly was
act of handing the task over to the Security Council,
divided ‘into two almost equal camps, In the cirTo some ears, this may sound like a cry of victory,
cumstances, it became apparent that here in the ASlike another success for their pressures,
intimidasembly there was hardly any hope of finding an aren
tions, cajolings and bribery, Success indeed-if
ever
of agreement on which a majority large enough to
there was success in reverse, if ever anybody could
have any political significance could come together.
wisely and nobly, serve his country by projecting for
That was why my delegation did not participate in
it a personality
of evil and sowing for it widespread
the discussions which took place these last few days
seeds of hate. Then let success assume the name of
on various draft resolutions, either on the substance
failure and let victory call itself defeat.
of the matter or on procedure.
286. Some of those who have erredintheir
judgement
are undoubtedly sincere and we owe thembothrespect
and understanding,
A.s for those others who succumbed
to bribery, who yielded to arm-twisting
and who were

292. Moreover, we were not convinced, Imust admit,
of the necessity of a resolution asking the Security
Council to take up a matter which is already before
it and which it will obviously go on to examine in the

i558th meeting - 21 July 196’7
very near future. Similarly,
my delegation could not
see the need for a resolution
to enable the Assembly
to suspend its work and to meet again at a later stage
if it saw fit.
293. Our views were shared, moreover, by the considerable
number of delegations which abstained in
the vote this evening.
294. We have also noted that among those voting
against the draft resolution
submitted by Austria,
Finland and Sweden were certain States very directly
concerned with the recent,
and unfortunately
still
current, events.
295. In any case, we must not be hypnotized by this
last meeting and its outcome. It will be better to turn
our minds to the future,
and we know already that
much will depend on the constructive
spirit in which
the United Nations resumes
its consideration
of this
problem in a part of the world where the situation is
still ‘fraught with danger.
296. Mr. CERNIK
(Czechoslovakia):
Our deliberations at this emergency
special session have been
completed tonight at their present stage by the adoption of a procedural
resolution.
This resolution was
adopted instead of a resolution
which should have been
and was widely expected to be of a meritorious
character. The aim of this emergency special session which
dealt with the consequences of the Israeli aggression
in the Near East was to take measures directed toward
the immediate withdrawal
of all Israeli forces from
occupied Arab territory.
However,
this aim was not
achieved.
297. Allow me, in this connexion, to express the
position of my delegation. The dangerous development
of this situation in the Near East which took place as a
result of the unleashing of aggressive actions by Israel
against the United Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan has
provoked serious
and deep concern throughout the
whole world.
298. The Government of the Czechoslovak
Socialist
Republic and the Governments
of other socialist countries have taken resolute steps directed toward a SO~Ution of the dangerous situation in that region by peaseful means. However, the militarist
forces of Israel,
which unleashed a premeditated,
treacherous,
andunexpected attack against Israel’s
Arab neighbours, did
not comply with repeated
appeals of the Secasity
Council to stop military operations,
andtheir military
units subsequently
even seized the major part of
presently occupied territories
of the United Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan. The development of those
events has shown that Israeli aggression
could only
have taken place with the help and direct support of
the imperialist
forces of the West, primarily the United
States and some of its allies. Thus, a new and dangerous hotbed has been created in the Near East which
threatens world peace and security.
299, The present emergency
special session of the
United Nations General Assembly
was convened following the failure of the Security Council-caused
by
the stand of the Western imperialist
countries supporting Israel in its aggressive
actions-to
adopt any
decision on an immediate withdrawal
of the Israeli
forces from occupied territories
of the Arab coun-

25

tries. The task of this emergency special session of
the General Assembly could be only a speedy liquidation of the consequences of the Israeli aggression 50
that the aggressor
should not be allowed to profit
from the advantage gained by its aggression,
and
compensation
of the neighbouring Arab countries by
the aggressor. for the damage inflicted upon them.
The attainment of this goal implied an immediate
withdrawal
of the Israeli military
forces behind the
line that existed before 5 June of this year. That was
the fundamental
sense of our deliberations
which
lasted more than a month.
366. Although practically
all delegations which participated
in the debate expressed
their agreement
with this fundamental requirement-that
is, the immediate withdrawal
of all Israeli military foroesit proved impossible to accomplish the adoption ‘of
a resolution
which would contain that requirement,
It is regrettable that, in spite of protracted deliberations, the General A.ssembly has been unable to fulfil
the fundamental tasks for which it was convened,
That is SO because the same imperialist forces supporting Israel that hampered the adoption of a similar
draft resolution in the Security Council obstructedthe
passage of such a draft resolution here,
301. We have seen that the friends of Israel, and
foremost the United States, in the course of the whole
session of the General Assembly-particularly
during
its closing period when the elaboration of a compromise draft resolution was being discussed-exerted
strong pressure so that no relevant draft resolution
should be adopted. This activity can be oharaoterized
only as direct support of the aggressor in an effort to
ensure for it the results of its aggression,
so that
the aggressor
could subsequently dictate conditions
for the settlement of the conflict to the Arab countries
from that position.’ Yet by this procedure the United
States and its allies have created a situation that may
produce grave consequences
in the development of
further
events in the world as well as in the United
Nations itself. If our Organization is not able to adopt
a decision on the immediate withdrawal of all Israeli
military forces from occupied parts of the territories
of the United Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan-either
in the General A.ssembly or in the Security Counciland if the occupation forces of the aggressor are not
withdrawn
soon, then this may encourage other aggressor
forces toward new conquests without ever
fearing punishment.
302. The fact that neither the Security Council nor
the General Assembly has SO far been able to adopt
a resolution
on the withdrawal
of the aggressor’s
military
forces has induced the Israeli ruling circles
to pursue their aggressive
goals still further, to the
point that they have dared illegally to annex Jerusalem
and its environs. That annexation constitutes a gross
violation of the principles of the United Nations Charter
and of the norms of’ international
law. The case of
Jerusalem agcin attests to the far-reaching
and wider
aims of the Israeli ruling circles that are striving to
expand the territory
of Israel. At the same time, we
have witnessed systematic violations of the armiStiCe
line by the Israeli military forces, Inthe course of the
emergency special session of the General Assembly,
some grave violations of the cease-fire took place in

26

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

the Suez Canal area, particularly
from 13 to 15 July.
There the Israeli forces launched large-scale
attacks
against the west bank of the Suez Canal, and tried to
further extend the positions under their occupation.
The Czechoslovak
delegation holds the view thatthese
new grave military provocations by the Israeli armed
forces are pregnant with the danger of a wider military conflict.
303. The case of Jerusalem and the continued armed
attacks of Israeli military units against Arab States, in
violation of the resolutions
of the Security Council on
a cease-fire,
make clear the one goal thatthe aggressive policy of the ruling circles of Israel has: to keep
and enlarge the seized territories
to the detriment of
its Arab neighbours.
304. The Czechoslovakdelegation
is of the opinion that
our Organization
should object that a grave violation
of the fundamental provisions
of the Charter
of the
United Nations has been committed by a Member State
by perpetuating
aggression
against other Member
States, and that it has found its protectors
among the
Members
of our Organization.
We are seriously
concerned at the inability of our Organization
whose
fundamental task is the maintenance of international
peace and security,
The fact that the General Assembly
has been unable to adopt measures to bring about the
immediate withdrawal
of all Israeli forces is xegrettable, but the Czechoslovak
delegation believes that
not all possibilities
that are available to our Oxganization have yet been exhausted.
305. A. great deal of responsibility
continues to lie
with the Security
Council, which hears the main
responsibility,
according
to the Charter,
fox the
maintenance of international
peace and security,
and
which is rightfully
expected to fulfil its duty in
liquidating all the consequences of Israeli aggression
and in helping to bring about the solution of urgent
problems in that region.
306. In our opinion, however, the responsibility
continues to be the General Assembly’s,
but the Assembly
unfortunately
was not permitted to play a positive role
in the elimination
of the consequences of Israeli aggression, We associate ourselves withoperativepara, graph 2 of the resolution which has been adopted that
decides to adjourn the present session temporarily
and
authorizes the President of the General Assembly to
reconvene .the session when necessary.
307. The treacherous
attack of Israel
against its
Arab neighbours
has provoked
great indignation
throughout the world and created sympathy for the
struggle
of the people of Arab countries
against
imperialist
forces
which axe insidiously
trampling
on their freedom
and independence.
The CzechoSlovak people have expressed
their full solidarity
with the struggle
of the Arab people, to whom they
are tied by bonds of sincere
friendship
and cooperation.
The Czechoslovak
Socialist
Republic is
convinced that the people of Arab countries
shall
successfully
defend their rights in their just struggle
against imperialism.
308. The Socialist
countries
reaffirmed
at their
meetings in Moscow and Budapest that they supported
and would continue to support the friendly Arab countries in their just struggle to eliminate the conse-

Special Session - Plenary

Meetings

quences of Israeli aggression and, above all, to bring
about the immediate withdrawal
of all Israeli military
forces from occupied Arab territories.
At the same
time, the Socialist countries
are prepared to grant
the Arab countries maximum .economic assistance to
overcome the difficulties that have arisen as a result
of the Israeli
aggression.
We believe that the just
cause of the Arab people will finally triumph and that
the aggressor will rightfully be punished.
309. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof
Trinidad and Tobago in exercise of his right of reply,
310. Mr. P. V. J. SOLOMON (Trinidad and Tobago):
I had no intention to take part in this debate. In my
view, this emergency special session of the Assembly
has already lasted fax too long and has achieved fax
too little, .
311. But there has been a war in this Assembly, just
as there has been a war in the Middle East, And
somebody has lost this war in the Assembly, As happens in many cases when there has been a defeat in a
war of words, the loser looks around for a scapegoat,
312. Who called this emergency
special session7
The Soviet Union. What did the Soviet Union achieve
as a result of this emergency special session? Certainly not what it set out to achieve, And for this defeat, it has blamed the United States of America and
the Latin A.merican group.
313. I do not care what the Soviet Union says about
the United States of A.merica or whatthe United States
of America says about the Soviet Union. When these
two super-Powers
start hurling rocks at each other, it
is well that the rest of us stand by and watch the
battle and not participate. But it is anentirely different
issue when the great super-Power
of the East-the
Soviet Union-decides
to attack the poor little Latin
American countries in the Caribbean, South America
and Central America, the combined power of which
could not even begin to rival that of one tenth of the
Soviet Union. Whey have we been singled out for this
great honour? Simply because we have differed from
the Soviet Union on a matter of tremendous importance.
A.nd this is what they say about us, I am quoting the
words of the Foreign Minister,
Mr. Gromyko:
“The United States Government beaxs the principal
responsibility
for
actions dictated by hostility
towards the Arab States.t1 [Supra, para. 193.1
If he wants to say that about the United States of
America, that is all right with me; I could not care
less. But he says as well:
“In this it was supported by most of the members
of the NATO military bloc, as wellas by some other
countries,
most of which are situated thousands of
miles from the Middle East area.” [Ibid.]
314. Mr, Gromyko singles out among thelatter group
particularly
the countries of Latin America. Who gives
the Foreign Minister the right to accuse Trinidad and
Tobago, Barbados, Jamaica, Guyana, the countries of
Central America and the countries of South America
of harbouring hostility toward the Arab States? Who
gives him that authority? On what evidence does he
base this ridiculous statement?

1558th meeting
315. We might just as,well say that the Soviet Union
bears a particular
hostility
towards
the people of
South West A.frica, because, when the chips were
down-when
that very important issue was here before the A.ssembly and the Latin A.merican group
introduced a resolution designed to relieve those suffering people from their pain and tribulation
under
the racist r6gime of South A.frica-what
stand did the
Soviet Union take’? Did it support the resolution?
History will give the answer. It opposed it-a simple
resolution
designed at least to take the first steps
towards relieving these suffering people from their
disabilities,
But the Soviet Union, for reasons best
known to itself, opposed the Latin American resolution [A/L.523/Rev.l].
316. We did not accuse them of hostility towards the
people of South West A.frica. But because we do not
agree with them on the Middle East affair, they say
that we have hostility towards the A.rab States.
317. Our friends in the A.rab areas know quite well
that we bear them no hostility, I can speak personally
for my country, Trinidad and Tobago. I can also speak
for my friends in Latin America. In my country, as I
have said before, we have people of all races, all
nationalities,
all creeds, all colours and all classes,
including Arabs
and Jews, Jordanians,
Lebanese,
Syrians: they are all there. And we live in peace and
harmony-all
of’ us, None one accuses the other of
hostility towards himself or his brother.
318. We resent this attack by a major Power against
smaller Powers which could not, even if they triedeven if they wanted to-stand
up to a military barrage
from the Soviet Union, but which can and will and do
now stand up to the verbal barrage from any member
of the Soviet Government,
including the great Mr.
Gromyko.
319. Let us examine further the statements of Foreign
Minister Gromyko. He talks about the draft resolution
of the non-aligned
countries
[A./L.522/Rev.3
and
Corr.11 receiving so much support from the United
Nations General Assembly-the
draft resolution which
was supported by the Soviet Union, That resolution received fifty-three
votes in favour.
It received
a
majority, but not a two-thirds
majority;, And of those
fifty-three
countries which voted in favour, thirteen
were Arab States and ten were Soviet-bloc members,
totalling twenty-three.
That left thirty,
320. The Latin-American-group
draft resolution [A./
L.523/Rev.l]
received fifty-seven
votes in favour,
and forty-three
votes against, Of the forty-three,
there were thirteen Arab States and ten Soviet bloc
countries. This left twenty independent votes against
ours, and fifty-seven
in favour. Israel did not participate in the voting on that resolution.
So there was
no interested party supporting our resolution,
3% But we do not boast that wereceivedmore
votes
than anybody else, because the resolution was not
carried by a two-thirds
majority.
We know that we
failed in our objective-and
it was not for want of
trying. But we did better than the Soviet Union, whose
Personal resolution
[A./L. 5191 was ignominiously
defeated by this Assembly,
I do not know what the
figures are. Refer to them in the records,
But that
resolution
of the Soviet Union, that extreme and

- 21 July 1967

27

ridiculous
resolution,
by this A.ssembly.

was

ignominiously

defeated

322. Let us examine the situation a bit further.
In
spite of this attack on small, defenceless but independent sovereign
States, Fqreign Minister Gromyko
says:
“The Soviet people have a profound respect for
the peoples of the Latin American countries.” [Supra,
para. 194.1
323. How do you show that respect? How do you strive
to maintain these good relations you talk about? By
insulting us? By casting aspersions upon our integrity,
our honesty, our independence? If I wanted to make
friends with someone, I would not insult him first and
try to shake his hand afterwards,
And Mr. Gromyko
goes on to say that we were subjected to rude pressure brought to bear upon us by the United States.
The Soviet Government and the Soviet Foreign Minister know perfectly well that our draft resolution was
vastly
different
from that presented by, the United
States of America.
They know further that after our
draft was defeated, we negotiated with practically
every
group at the United Nations, including the
Soviet representatives,
If they thought that we were
merely the pawns of the United States, why did they
bother to negotiate with us? We had more meetings
with them than with any other delegation on this
issue, If they thought that we were being subjected to
this rude pressure,
why did they bother to talk with
us?
324. I might suggest, of course, that they, too, were
subjected to other pressures,
but I do not propose to
swap insults with anyone, large or small, great or
insignificant.
325.

Mr. Gromyko

goes on to say:

“We told these countries,
and we tell them now,
that we understand their position and their difficulties-thank
you very much, Mr. Gromyko-but
we must tell them also that in questions of war
and peace one cannot renounce principles, disregard
for which is tantamount to the partial or complete
loss of independence, tantamount to making mock
of the principles
of the United Nations Charter, to
which their signatures
too are affixed”.
[Supra,
para. 195.1
326. Did the Soviet Union sigil the Charter of the
United Nations? .Did the Soviet Union support South
West Africa in its plea and its cry for independence?
A.re these two things compatible or incompatible?
327. In the Latin American draft resolution we asked
for two things: first, withdrawal
of the Israeli forces,
on the understanding
that the permanent occupation of
territory
by force is inadmissible
under the Charter;
and secondly,
a cessation
of belligerency.
Are we
wrong in asking that there should be peace in the
Middle East? Are we wrong in saying that war should
cease? Is that inadmissible
under the Charter? Is that
a renunciation
of the principles ‘of the Charter? There
are people who disagree with our point of view and we
disagree
with theirs, But we do not by that token accuse them of violating the Charter. They have their
own reasons for acting as they do, and we accept in
good faith that they mean well. Although we are told

28

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

Special Session - Plenary Meetings

that the road to tell is paved with good intentions, we
believe that they mean well. We disagree because
we have firm convictions of our own and we act as
independent, sovereign States.

334. So I advise the representatives
of the United
States and Israel not to be too happy too soon, They
have not heard the end of the discussions
in this
Assembly.

328. We do not yield to pressures
from the Soviet
Union or from the United States or from anybody else,
We yield to pressures
from our own Governments,
our own foreign ministries,
we here at the United
Nations, we Ambassadors
to the United Nations, We
yield to pressures
only from our Governments,
not
from anybody else.

335. The representative
of Trinidad and Tobago took
exception a little while ago to some of the remarks of
the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union regarding
the draft resolution which his group presented to this
Assembly and the leading part which that groupplayed
in the deliberations which led to the impasse in which
we find ourselves
today. The Latin American group
has done us grievous harm-1
do not care what anybody says. That is the truth and you have to face
it. You yourselves
said that you were in favour of
withdrawal,
that it was inadmissible
for territory
to be occupied through war. Yet you insisted that
such withdrawal
of foreign troops from occupiedterritories should be contingent either upon the solution of
certain problems or the acceptance beforehand by the
Arab States of a certain type of relationship
between
them and Israel.

329. The States of Latin America are small. Many
of them are desperately poor. But there is one thing
we all have in common, Throughout our long history
colonialism,
oppression
and suppresof conquest,
sion, we have never lost sight of the need for courtesy
in our dealings with other people. We cannot of course
give the Soviet delegation a lesson in politics. I hope
it will be possible for us to give it from this forum a
lesson in good manners.
330. Mr. PACHACHI
(Iraq): I have asked to make a
statement
in order to reply to certain remarks
we
heard from the representatives
of the United States
a:ld Israel. They seem to be under the wrong impression that the fifth emergency special session has
ended. It has not, Both of them have said: “Now that
this session has ended, we are going to do this and
that”. The session has not ended. The resolution
adopted by the Assmbly was to the effect that the
session
shall be adjourned temporarily
and that it
shall be reconvened by you. Mr. President,
whenever
the need arises, A.nd the need will arise.
331. Two resolutions
have already been adopted on
Israelis
attempt to annex Jerusalem,
and those two
resolutions
were adopted by overwhelming
majorities
without a dissenting voice, Members of the Assembly
will not abdicate their responsibility
by ignoring those
two resolutions.
We shall hold them and their supporters
accountable before this A.ssembly,
and not
before the Security Council, for any infringement,
for
any violation and for any disregarding
of those resolutions,
The Assembly is in session because the
aggression
of Israel continues and the occupation of
Arab territories
continues.
332, The representative
of Israel stated to us very
clearly,
I think, but very ominously that this occupation-although
he did not say it inso many words, the
meaning was very clear-shall
continue until peace
is concluded and until all the problems
outstanding
between Israel and the Arab States are finally settled.
333. That is a view that has been categorically
rejected by the General Assembly. Speaker after speaker
in this debate has stated that it was inadmissible
for
any State to occupy the territory
of other Member
States through acts of war and to use that occupation
in order to achieve political and territorial
objectives.
So this General Assembly shall remain in sessionand not only In theory. It shall remain in session, it
shall debate, it shall speak and it shall state its
opinions on this continued, flagrant violation of the
principles
of the Charter, on this continued occupation of our territory,

336, They could not have been so blind as to expect
the Arab States to renounce belligerency towards Israel
while their own territories
were under occupation.
They could not have been so blind as to expect the
Arab States to accept the implicit prolongation of
occupation until all problems were solved. Therefore,
I do not think very much of the statement, to tell you
very frankly, that the draft resolution
presented by
the Latin American group [A/L,523/Rev.l]
was animated by the best of intentions
towards
the Arab
people, that the group was, in the words of the representative of Trinidad and Tobago, even-handed in its
treatment and unbiased in the way in which it looked
upon the Arab-Israeli
conflict. I am sorry,
but that
is not the case and they know it as well as I do, It is
not the case because they equated a juridical
relationship with that of military occupation andof the subjection of hundreds of thousands of people to military
rule.
337. But who will be the one to suffer from all this?
It will be the United Nations, and it will be the small
Powers, precisely those Powers of Latin America.
There will come a time, I think, when every single
small Power will regret that this Assembly has not
taken a forthright and clear decision against the admissibility of occupation of territories
by foreign
troops. They will regret the fact that the Assembly
has not taken a forthright and clear decision on the
inadmissibility of using occupation through military
means in order to obtain political
and territorial
objectives. We all know that Latin America, like
other continents in the world, has its own territorial
problems, its own disputes, its own claims and
counter-claims. But what have you done? You have
allowed the occupation to be prolonged, and it is continuing today, You heard Mr, Eban this evening state
very clearly that nothing ,is going to be done, but
nothing, until and unless peace through direct negotiations with the Arab States is finally completely concluded, along with the settlement of all problems, which
really means an indefinite prolongation of occupation.
You cannot wash your hands of that responsibility,%%
shall hold you accountable for the failure of this Assembly to take a forthright decision. I think the time

I

1558th meeting - 21 July 1967
has come to speak frankly and clearly. You have done
yourselves
and this Organization a great disservice.
But the struggle will continue and the efforts will
continue.
338. This madness, which has prevented the Assembly from taking a sane decision on matters of
such direct importance to the Charter, will end one
day, and the membership
of the United Nations will
be able to look at this problem in a sensible and dispassionate way in which the only consideration
to be
taken into account will be upholding the principles of
the Charter, the principle that there shall be no territorial acquisition
through the use of force, that a
country that plans and perpetrates
a military attack
against other members of the U.nited Nations shall
not go unchastized and unpunished. When that is done,
then the faith of humanity in this Organization will be
restored.
339. The PRESIDENT:
There are no more speakers
on my list. I realize that the hour is very late, However, I should like, with your permission,
to make a
brief statement.
340. I cannot sump up the A.ssembly’s work because
the Assembly has not concluded its work and it remains in session,
I merely want to recall certain
facts as I have seen and understood them personally,
particularly
for the information of those who are not
well acquainted with all the details of the very complicated work of the Assembly.
341. When this emergency
special session of the
General Assembly
was convened on 17 June, the
world was faced with a major crisis in the situation
in the Middle East. It still is. The very large majority
of the Members that concurred
in the proposal to
convene this session represented
a recognition of the
seriousness
of the situation and the necessity to have
a discussion
in a wider forum where the views of the
entire membership
could be expressed.
Those who
did not concur also participated,
I feel, to the best of
their ability, in the work of the Assembly in the prevailing circumstances.
This is significant
as far as
the United Nations is concerned.
342. No one, I am sure, at the outset of these proceedings expected that the session would resolve all
of the very difficult problems of which the Organization has been seized for nearly two decades. Indeed,
at this stage of our deliberations,
there will no doubt
be some observers who will ponder over the results,
343. For my part, I feel-and
this is certainly not
my feeling alone-that there have been a number’of
achievements.
The guide-lines
and principles
which
have been touched upon during the discussions
in this
session can, if they are properly pursued, be of considerable assistance in achievingthe purpose’for which
the emergency special session was convened-through
the Security Council. and the General Assembly.
344. There has been a wide recognition that the situation in the Middle East must be further considered and
that the solutions must be found within the framework
and through the machinery of the United Nations,
345. I would recall, in particular,
the resolution
12252 (ES-V)] which this Assembly
has adopted by
an Overwhelming majority, on the humanitarian prob-

29

lems of the area, and the concern which has been expressed for the victims of the recent fighting. I am
sure that I speak for every one of us here when I
express
the hope that the concern embodied in this
re~solution will shortly
find practical manifestation
in deeds,
346. I would also recall the two resolutions
[2253
(ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V)] on the status of Jerusalem
which the Assembly
has adopted. Those resolutions
are important
expressions
of the most widely held
Views, PartiOUlarly
among the Members of the United
Nations,
347. During this emergency
special session there
have been signal witnesses
to the importance which
the Members have attached to the solution of this critical problem.
It is renewed evidence-if
such additional evidence were necessary-that
the problem of
the Middle East is not merely regional, but is of universal
concern. The catastrophe
which has engulfed
the area in recent weeks has, in one way or another,
been a source of deep concern for every Member
Government
represented here. Thus, it was desirable
to provide the opportunity, through these meetings of
the emergency
special session, for all Members to
define their policies and place upon record their views
as to the ways and means by which solutions might be
reached.
348. By the adoption at this meeting of the resolution
12256 (ES-V)] which provides for keepingthe A.ssembly
in session,
the desirability
of such deliberations has
been reaffirmed,
The problems of the Middle East will
continue to be discussed, not only in the Security Council, but also in the General Assembly, whennecessary
and appropriate,
349. As I have saidpreviously:
“The question before
the Assembly
has, with all its ramifications,
never
been a Council case or an Assembly case, but the
problem of the United Nations as a whole. The deliberations, therefore,
cannot be divorced from the larger
United Nations picture in which this problem has been
framed for the past nineteen years.” [1549th meeting,
para. 2.1
350. I am sure that thefuture discussions,
regardless
of the United Nations forum in which they may take
place, will benefit from the deliberations
and consultations held during the past month.
351. The long and continuous consultations
have
demonstrated
a unique interest
on the part of the
entire membership
in seeking a solution to the problem facing the General Assembly, and in searchingfor
an agreement, Such efforts are possible only in an organization like the United Nations, and can be achieved
only in the General Assembly, where all Members have
an equal opportunity and a direct voice through which
each Member can make a contribution to the sOlUtiOn
of international
problems for the cause of peace, This
has been done with a general feeling of continued
concern on the part of the Members of the Assembly
up to the present stage of its deliberations.
352. It is the general feeling that between now and
the time when the matter may be discussed
again,
the Members should continue their search for a sobtion of the problems connected with the situation, and
that the Security Council should also, with an utmost

.

/
I

30

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

sense -of urgency, continue its efforts by giving full
and t.irgent consideration
to all aspects of the question, with a view to finding ways and means for a
peaceful solution, through appropriate channels, guided
by the discussions
in the General Assembly,
andbearing in mind the principles
of the United Nations
Charter.
353. To conclude, I wish to thank every one of you
for the co-operation you have always extended to me.

Litho

in UN.

,

Special Session - Plenary

,

Meetings

Since, by the resolution
adopted today, you have
placed a greater responsibility
on me, I maintain
complete confidence that you will also extend your
full co-operation to me in future.
354. The fifth emergency
porarily adjourned.

special

session

is tem-

The meeting rose at 10.40 p.m.

17868~September

1970-2.400
