S/2006/466

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 June 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 26 June 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 1675 (2006) of
28 April 2006, as well as previous Security Council resolutions on Western Sahara.
In my report to the Security Council dated 19 April 2006 (S/2006/249,
paras. 39 and 40), reference was made to certain factors that could constitute a
powerful temptation to acquiesce in the continuation of the impasse about Western
Sahara for several more years. The fear was expressed that in the circumstances
many countries might find the status quo to be more tolerable than any of the
possible solutions. Although I subscribed to my Personal Envoy’s view that the
Security Council could not afford to adopt such an attitude, resolution 1675 (2006)
did not refer to my recommendations, except the one concerning the extension of
the mandate of United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) for a further period of six months.
The resolution was adopted unanimously, but most of the members of the
Council who made a statement after the vote expressed the hope that the next six
months would be used to make progress beyond the current impasse, so that at the
next mandate renewal in October the Council would not need to content itself again
with a purely technical rollover.
I am aware that in April, the interval of time between the circulation of my
report and the adoption of the resolution may have been too short for my warning
about the danger of a prolongation of the impasse to take effect.
Nevertheless, I feel that all of us should do what we can to move the process
forward. My Personal Envoy is making preparations for another visit to the region,
during which he intends to explore how the parties and the neighbouring States
could help make it possible for the Security Council to go beyond the extension of
the mandate of MINURSO in its October resolution. I will be following his progress
with keen attention, in order to see how we can avoid losing this opportunity.
I would also like to suggest that the members of the Security Council use the
next four months to prepare for a more substantial resolution on the situation
concerning Western Sahara.
I should be grateful if you could bring this information to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-41458 (E) 300606

*0641458*
