S/2018/882

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 October 2018
Original: English

United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 59 of Security Council
resolution 2409 (2018). It covers major developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for the period from 29 June to 28 September 2018. The report describes
progress in the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO);
provides an overview of political developments since my previous update on progress
in the electoral process and implementation of the political agreement of 31 December
2016 (S/2018/786); outlines progress in adjustments to the Mission’s priorities,
posture and presence, as well as the pursuit of its comprehensive approach to the
protection of civilians; and provides information on the performance of MONUSCO
uniformed personnel.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
2.
The political situation was marked by political and judicial activities
surrounding the registration process of candidates for the presidential and national
and provincial legislative elections. On 3 September, the Constitutional Court ruled
on the appeals of four of the six presidential candidates who had been declared
ineligible by the Independent National Electoral Commission on 24 August. The
Court upheld the ineligibility of Jean-Pierre Bemba, the leader of the Mouvement de
libération du Congo (MLC), ruling that the International Criminal Court had
convicted him for witness tampering through corruption, which was an aggravating
factor. The Constitutional Court rejected the appeal of former Prime Minister Adolphe
Muzito, who had been declared ineligible for conflict of interest, noting that his claim
to be reinstated as a presidential candidate was unsubstantiated. The Court, however,
upheld the appeals of former Prime Minister Samy Badibanga and opposition leader
Marie-Josée Ifoku and ordered the Commission to reinstate them as presidential
candidates, as they had provided evidence that they held Congolese citizenship.

18-15957 (E)

031018

*1815957*

S/2018/882

3.
The Secretary-General of MLC, Eve Bazaïba, stated that the ruling of the
Constitutional Court was a political decision intended to disqualify a serious
contender and, in so doing, tarnished the image of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. On 4 September, Mr. Bemba declared to the press that the judiciary was being
manipulated to disqualify any heavyweight candidate who posed a serious challenge
to the presidential candidate of the ruling majority. He added that the Government
was setting the stage for a sham election on 23 December. Several other opposition
leaders voiced similar concerns and criticisms. The Minister of Information and
spokesperson of the Government, Lambert Mende, rejected the allegations of
Mr. Bemba and urged him to respect the decision of the Court, the Constitution and
the rule of law. In addition, on 4 September, the Court upheld the decision of the
Independent National Electoral Commission to declare ineligible presidential
candidates Antoine Gizenga, a former Prime Minister, and opposition leader Jean Paul Moka for procedural errors during the registration process and lack of proof of
payment of registration fees, respectively.
4.
On 12 September, opposition leaders Adolphe Muzito, Antipas Mbusa
Nyamwisi, Félix Tshisekedi, Jean-Pierre Bemba, Moïse Katumbi and Vital Kamerhe
met in Brussels and issued a joint communiqué in which they stressed the need for
holding free, democratic, transparent and inclusive elections on 23 December, in line
with the political agreement of 31 December 2016 and the electoral calendar. Among
other things, they rejected the decision of the Independent National Electoral
Commission to use voting machines, requested the removal of alleged fraudulent
voters from the electoral roll, called for the swift implementation of confidence building measures, urged the Southern African Development Community to deploy a
regional force to ensure security during the electoral period and demanded that
candidates declared ineligible “on political grounds” be allowed to take part in the
elections. On the same day, the Minister of Information stated in a radio interview
that the meeting had discredited those Congolese, who had no sense of national
dignity after 58 years of independence.
5.
From 10 to 12 September, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium, Didier
Reynders, visited South Africa, Angola and the Republic of the Congo, where he
exchanged views with senior government officials on a wide range of issues,
including the situation in the Great Lakes region and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. On 11 September, in Luanda, Minister Reynders and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Angola, Manuel Domingos Augusto, issued a joint communiqué in which
they noted, among other things, the importance of a truly inclusive process leading to
credible, free and transparent elections on 23 December. On 12 September, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo issued a
communiqué in which he stressed the rejection by the Government of any interference
by neighbouring countries and bilateral partners in the electoral process and called
for the strict respect of the sovereignty of his country.
6.
The Independent National Electoral Commission continued preparations for the
holding of elections on 23 December and published the provisional voter register,
which included 40,287,385 voters, on 3 September. The Commission noted that
5,381,763 duplicates and multiple registrations and 902,290 minors had been
removed from the register.
7.
On 19 September, the Commission published the final list of presidential
candidates, which included 21 candidates. On the same day, it published the final list
of candidates for national legislative elections, with 15,355 candidates competing for
500 National Assembly seats. As for the final list of candidates for provincial
legislative elections, 19,640 candidates, comprising 17,284 men (88 per cent) and
2,356 women (12 per cent), are contesting 715 seats.

2/17

18-15957

S/2018/882

8.
The Commission, in line with the Government’s decision to assume full
financial and logistical responsibility for the elections, carried on with the technical
and logistical preparations for the elections. MONUSCO continue d to engage the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo on the need to give landing
clearance to the air assets prepositioned in Entebbe, Uganda.
9.
The second and last ordinary parliamentary session of the year opened on
15 September. The Speaker of the National Assembly, Aubin Minaku, and the
President of the Senate, Léon Kengo wa Dondo, noted that emphasis should be put
on the electoral process and the swift adoption of the 2019 budget.
10. The Government and the National Follow-up Committee continued to make
efforts towards the implementation of the national commitments under the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Region. The Government also continued to call upon the other signatories t o the
Framework to honour their commitments.

B.

Economic developments
11. The macroeconomic framework of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
showed signs of stabilization, as inflation continued to decelerate slightly. The
Congolese franc also remained relatively stable, largely owing to a year-long increase
in key commodity prices on international markets. Those commodities (cobalt, copper
and oil) had, however, begun to experience a serious downturn during the reporting
period. On 10 July, the Banque centrale du Congo announced that its foreign exchange
reserves had risen to $1.2 billion in the first half of 2018, maintaining their upward
trend.

C.

Security situation
12. The security situation remained fragile in some parts of eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in particular in Beni, Lubero and Masisi territories i n North
Kivu, and on the high plateaux of Uvira, the border areas of Maniema and Tanganyika
provinces, and in Shabunda territory in South Kivu, where armed groups continued
to carry out destabilizing activities. The situation deteriorated in parts of Haut -Uélé
province, as a result of cross-border movements of South Sudanese armed elements,
while in Ituri province, violence between Hema and Lendu communities continued to
decrease. However, clashes occurred in mid-September between Lendu militia and
the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (FARDC). In the western
part of the country, some areas of the Kasai region continued to grapple with the
illegal activities of Kamuina Nsapu and Bana Mura militias, and there were reports
of human rights violations by some national security forces.

1.

Ituri province
13. In Ituri, the Force de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri (FRPI) continued to commit
exactions on civilians and to carry out attacks against FARDC. Violence against
civilians, including raids and looting of villages, was perpetrated by FRPI, which
carried out seven raids in Aveba and Gety on 14 and 15 July. Five other raids took
place in the same area between 21 and 23 July. In addition, on 11 and 12 August, FRPI
looted villages in the general area of Bavi and Bogoro, to the north of Aveba and Gety.
14. Elsewhere in Ituri, in Djugu territory, intercommunal violence has decreased
significantly since April 2018. However, some isolated incidents between Hema and
Lendu communities occurred in August, and there was a spike of clashes between

18-15957

3/17

S/2018/882

FARDC and Lendu militias in September. On 3 August, suspected Hema young
people injured a Lendu woman in Djokwa (65 km north-east of Bunia). On the same
day, individuals allegedly from the Lendu group burned houses belonging to Hema
people in Tsu village, in the Tchomia area. On 26 August, two FARDC soldiers were
killed in Wassa village, allegedly by Lendu assailants. In an apparent retaliation
operation, FARDC reportedly looted civilians in the Lendu village s of Djailo and
Loko. On 15 September, in Djugu territory, militia members allegedly from the Lendu
community attacked FARDC position in Muvaramu (80 km north-east of Bunia),
stealing weapons and ammunition and killing nine FARDC soldiers and six civilians .
Further attacks by suspected Lendu militia members took place on 18 September
against four FARDC positions in Gobi, Jiro, Nyoro and Ziro, reportedly killing three
soldiers. FARDC captured three assailants. In response, FARDC launched operations
that resulted in the killing of eight militia members and two FARDC soldiers and in
the recovery of weapons.
2.

North Kivu and South Kivu
15. In North Kivu, after a lull, the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) resumed in July
attacks against FARDC, MONUSCO and civilians in Beni territory. Most attacks
targeting FARDC took place along the Eringeti-Oicha and Mbau-Kamango axes. On
12 July, a clash between ADF and FARDC in the PK13 neighbourhood in the Mbau
area resulted in one FARDC soldier missing in action. On 14 July, ADF attacked
FARDC in Mapiki and Masulukwede in the Oicha and Mavivi areas, respectively,
resulting in the killing of three civilians and one FARDC soldier. On 24 August, an
attack by suspected ADF elements on an FARDC position in Ngadi (on the Beni Mavivi road) resulted in the killing of 17 FARDC elements and the theft of weapons
and ammunitions. Suspected ADF elements and MONUSCO troops clashed on
several occasions. On 6 July, suspected ADF elements ambushed MONUSCO troops
in Boikene and injured two peacekeepers. On 29 July, a group of suspected ADF
elements opened fire on the MONUSCO company operating base in Semuliki,
triggering an exchange of fire. On 3 September, two MONUSCO peacekeepers were
injured in an ambush by suspected ADF elements in the Ngadi area. Civilians
continued to be the target of attacks by suspected ADF elements, resulting in the
killing of at least 120 civilians since January. On 22 and 23 July, the bodies of six
civilians reportedly killed by ADF were discovered in the Mavivi -Masulukwede area.
On 2 August, ADF abducted 14 civilians, whose bodies were found in the jungle
surrounding Boikene on 7 August. On the same day, suspected ADF abducted
15 civilians in Ngere-Mwalika (30 km south of Beni). On 9 September, simultaneous
attacks by alleged ADF elements on villages on the Beni-Mavivi road resulted in the
death of a civilian and triggered a displacement of population towards the city of
Beni.
16. Further south, Mai-Mai Mazembe groups, Nduma défense du Congo-Rénové
(NDC-R) and Mai-Mai Charles continued to destabilize the Butembo-Lubero area.
NDC-R ran a parallel administration in the Kasugho area (45 km west of Lubero)
until mid-August. On 20 July, NDC-R temporarily detained 45 civilians in Kasugho
for failing to pay the armed group’s illegal taxes. On 3 August, up to 150 people were
detained for the same reason. Twenty-five people remained in detention as at
5 August. The exactions continued until 14 August, when FARDC launched an
operation against NDC-R elements and captured their strongholds in Kagheri and
Kasugho. However, NDC-R reinforced its positions and clashed with other Mai-Mai
groups on 31 August. On 14 September, NDC-R occupied the Pitakongo village
(55 km west of Kirumba).
17. Mai-Mai Charles demonstrated resilience after sustaining several FARDC
attacks. On 11 July, its members attacked an FARDC position in Chondo (40 km

4/17

18-15957

S/2018/882

north-west of Nyamilima). The situation in areas along Lake Edward remained tense
owing to a combination of the group’s presence, disputes over border demarcation
with Uganda and illegal fishing activities. Tension started to rise following the arrest
of 46 Congolese fishermen by Ugandan naval forces on 4 May. On 5 July, at least
seven Ugandan nationals (four members of the Uganda People ’s Defence Forces and
three civilians) and three Congolese (two members of FARDC and one civilian) were
killed during a clash on Lake Edward, near Kyavinyonge.
18. In Masisi territory, there was internal fighting between two rival factions of the
Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain (APCLS) in the general area
of Nyabiondo. Clashes between APCLS “Colonel” Janvier (supported by some
Nyatura groups) and APCLS-Mapenzi started in early 2018 and intensified until July,
resulting in a massive population displacement towards Nyabiondo and Pinga, as well
as sexual violence and killings. The situation returned to normal when “Colonel”
Janvier withdrew from his stronghold in Lukweti and reportedly fled to Kalungu on
the border of Masisi and Walikale territories.
19. In South Kivu, the security situation was marred by violence between the
Banyamulenge and other communities, notably the Bembe, and their respective armed
groups on the high plateaux of Uvira. On 7 July, 10 civilians died in a clash between
those groups in the Balala-Nord groupement, at the border of Fizi and Uvira
territories. On 8 July, Ngomino (a Banyamulenge armed group) clashed with Mai -Mai
groups in Kangwe (80 km north-west of Minembwe), resulting in the deaths of two
civilians, the burning down of 20 houses and the displacement of civilian populations.
Intercommunal violence in the area led to the displacement of around 76,000 people.
The border area of Burundi and Uvira territory remained a zone of tension, with
elements allegedly belonging to the Forces nationales de libération (FNL) of Burundi
regrouping in the Ruzizi Plain. The movement of those elements in areas of Fizi and
Uvira territories has increased since the beginning of September. An attack by FNL
elements on a Burundian border post on 14 September resulted in the killing of two
FNL elements and one Burundian soldier.
20. After a lull of a few months, fighting resumed in mid -September between
FARDC and Mai-Mai Yakutumba on the Kilembwe axis (in the border areas of South
Kivu and Maniema provinces and close to Tanganyika). Clashes occurred between
FARDC and a coalition of Mai-Mai Malaika and Mai-Mai Yakutumba in areas
surrounding Minembwe. On 18 September, FARDC elements were allegedly
ambushed by a group of Mai-Mai elements in Mutombo (15 km north of Minembwe),
reportedly resulting in the killing of 15 FARDC soldiers.
21. Civilians in Shabunda territory remained affected by exactions perpetrated by
Mai-Mai Raia Mutomboki groups during the reporting period. The upsurge of
violence that began in early 2018 continued during the reporting period. Among other
incidents, on 19 July, Mai-Mai Raia Mutomboki (Kazimoto factions) abducted
15 civilians in Nyambembe. On 23 July, Kazimoto factions attacked and looted the
village of Mulimbwa (90 km north-east of Shabunda).
3.

Tanganyika province
22. The activities of Mai-Mai Apa Na Pale, Bafuliro and Twa militias posed the
main threats to civilians and security challenges to FARDC in northern Tanganyika,
notably in the Bendera area, in Kalemie territory. In early July, Mai-Mai groups
established a parallel administration in the Lambo-Katenga groupement (west of
Bendera) and committed multiple exactions against civilians, including looting,
extortion and ambushes. On 10 July, they abducted 30 civilians, including 16 women,
in Mutupeke (36 km north-west of Bendera). Towards the end of July, FARDC
redeployed troops from Pweto and Kasomeno (160 km north-east of Lubumbashi) to

18-15957

5/17

S/2018/882

Bendera and Nyunzu, with a view to launching operations against Mai -Mai groups
operating around mining sites. In response, Mai-Mai Apa Na Pale elements reinforced
their presence around Lambo-Katenga.
4.

Haut-Uélé
23. In Haut-Uélé, the security situation along the border of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and South Sudan has deteriorated over the past two months owing to
increasing cross-border movements of South Sudanese armed elements, notably the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-Army in Opposition (SPLM/A-IO). The
presence of that group was reported in the Nabiapay area (32 km north-west of Duru).
On 12 July, there were clashes between security forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and SPLM/A-IO elements in Limbamu (4 km south of Duru), Mogoroko
(24 km north-west of Duru) and Nambia (7 km south-east of Duru). On 30 July,
further clashes took place in Bangalu, Kpanangbala and Masombo, in the Dungu area.
In addition, around 90,000 South Sudanese civilians have sought refuge in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

5.

Kasai region
24. The security situation in some parts of the Kasai region remained fragile owing
to the renewed activities of Kamuina Nsapu and forced recruitment in Kamonia
territory, Kasai province, in reaction to continued harassment of ethnic Luba
communities by the Bana Mura militia. To the north-east, on the Mweka-Demba axis
in Kasai Central, Kamuina Nsapu militia members led by Beya Tshombe consolidated
their control over the local population, forcing some civilians to disavow State
authority. There were also reports of isolated elements of national security forces
committing human rights violations, including rape, killing and looting.

D.

Humanitarian situation
25. The humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains
worrying. According to the latest humanitarian needs assessment, conducted in
October 2017, 13.1 million people need protection and humanitarian assistance,
7.7 million face food insecurity and 4.5 million are internally displaced. The country
is home to more than 535,000 refugees from neighbouring countries, while more than
781,000 nationals of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have sought refuge in
other countries in the region. To date, the 2018 humanitarian response plan has
received $398.4 million, representing 24 per cent of its funding require ments, while
the regional refugee response plan for refugees of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has only received 11 per cent of the $368.7 million required.
26. On 11 and 12 July, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
organized a workshop, with the participation of the relevant national authorities, to
validate the process and methodologies for defining humanitarian needs in 2019. The
objective was to present a shared analysis of the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by October. To that end, joint teams of government
representatives and humanitarian actors commenced assessing the humanitarian
situation in priority provinces.
27. On 1 August, the Ministry of Health of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
declared the outbreak of the Ebola virus disease in Mangina, 30 km north -west of
Beni, North Kivu province, affecting also neighbouring Ituri. On 1 August, the
Ministry notified the World Health Organization (WHO) of a new outbreak in the
eastern part of the country. As at 29 September, a total of 159 confirmed and probable
Ebola virus disease cases, including 104 deaths, had been reported. The outbreak

6/17

18-15957

S/2018/882

centred on the Mangina health zone, but the Beni and Butembo health zones were
also significantly affected. The response to the epidemic has proved to be quite
effective, owing in part to the close cooperation of the national health authorities with
the United Nations and non-governmental organizations, as well as to the application
of lessons learned from the recent Ebola virus disease outbreak in Équateur province.
Functional coordination structures are in place and adequate capacities were deployed
into the area within the first few days of the declaration of the outbreak. The United
Nations system has provided extensive technical, logistical and security support to
the response to the outbreak. The MONUSCO force has also played an instrumental
role in Ebola response efforts, including by conducting operations to address the
persistent threat of armed groups and to protect humanitarian space.
28. A comprehensive response plan covering the period from August to October is
being implemented under the leadership of the Minister of Health, with support from
WHO.
29. The cholera epidemic continued to spread, with 17,822 cases and 573 deaths
reported across 13 of the 26 provinces as of late August. As part of the support of the
humanitarian community for the health authorities of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to address the epidemic, the Humanitarian Coordinato r allocated $3 million
from the common humanitarian fund.

E.

Human rights situation, justice and corrections
30. MONUSCO documented 1,135 human rights violations in July and August
2018, which represents a significant increase compared with the same p eriod in 2017
(840 violations), but a decrease compared with April and May 2018
(1,183 violations), illustrating the worrying human rights situation in the country.
More than 81 per cent of those violations occurred in conflict-affected provinces, with
North Kivu being most affected, notably because of the activities of armed groups.
31. Throughout the country, 59 per cent of the violations were perpetrated by State
agents, a decrease in comparison with the previous period, while armed groups and
militias were responsible for the remaining violations. In July and August,
163 persons, including at least 36 women, were victims of extrajudicial killings or
summary executions (with 33 victims attributed to State agents and 120 to armed
groups), and more than 1,091 victims, including 97 women and 12 children, were
illegally deprived of their freedom by either State agents or armed groups.
32. While some demonstrations and gatherings were held without incident,
restrictions on democratic space continued to impede the establishment of an
environment conducive to credible, peaceful and transparent elections. At least
134 violations of human rights linked to restrictions on fundamental freedoms and
political rights, especially targeting civil society activists and members of political
parties, were documented. Most violations occurred in Haut-Katanga, followed by
North Kivu, where nine were perpetrated by armed groups, targeting notably
journalists and community radios for having denounced the abuses perpetrated by
those groups.
33. Some progress was made towards the implementation of the confidence building measures provided for in the political agreement of 31 December 2016, but
some challenges remain. On 13 July, 25 people were released from the National
Intelligence Agency detention facility. However, prolonged detentions by the Agency
without judicial review remained a matter of great concern. On 5 September, the
Supreme Court upheld the sentencing to five years in prison of Franck Diongo, the
leader of the opposition party Mouvement lumumbiste progressiste. He had been
convicted on 28 December 2016 in a flagrante delicto procedure for illegally

18-15957

7/17

S/2018/882

detaining three soldiers of the Republican Guard. The Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention of the United Nations and national human rights organizations have called
for his release, and the political agreement provides for his release as part of the
confidence-building measures to be taken by the Government.
34. MONUSCO continued to provide technical and logistical support to military
and civilian justice institutions in addressing cases of international crimes and other
serious human rights violations and abuses in the eastern provinces and the Kasai
region. On 26 July, the High Military Court, sitting in mobile court he arings in
Bukavu (South Kivu), concluded appeal hearings on five priority cases identified by
national courts. The Court confirmed the convictions and sentences rendered by the
military court of South Kivu against senior FARDC officers and a member of the
South Kivu provincial parliament for crimes against humanity in the “Colonel 106”,
“Kavumu” and “Marocain” cases. In the other two cases, the Court reduced to a two year prison term the sentence of FARDC Colonel Becker, who had been convicted to
10 years in prison for crimes against humanity committed in Musenyi, Kalehe
territory, on 21 September 2015, and it acquitted for lack of evidence an FARDC
major and a civilian of violation of orders and illegal possession of weapons during
the massacre of civilians that had occurred on 6 and 7 June 2016 in Mutarule, Uvira
territory.
35. In North Kivu, in another priority case supported by MONUSCO, on 14 July,
the military garrison tribunal of Goma convicted Dominique Buyenge of war crimes
for the recruitment and use of children as combatants, rape and murder, and sentenced
him to life imprisonment. In July, with MONUSCO logistical support, the military
garrison tribunal of Bunia launched the trial of 72 persons charged with crimes against
humanity, including one FARDC element and one Congolese National Police agent
charged with rape during the mass atrocities perpetrated in Djugu, in March 2018.
36. In July, with the technical support of the MONUSCO Prosecution Support Cell
in Beni, national security forces arrested three members of the Union des patriotes
pour la libération du Congo. They were arrested in the context of investigations into
the attack launched by the armed group on Butembo city on 19 December 2016, which
had resulted in the death of a MONUSCO peacekeeper.
37. On 26 July, MONUSCO identified 31 cases of prolonged detention in the Uvira
district prison. Subsequent discussions with the prosecutor ’s office led to the release
of seven detainees, the processing of 10 cases by the Uvira tribunal and the closi ng
of the investigation into the other 14 detainees. Prisons nationwide continued to suffer
from the irregular, delayed and inadequate provision of adequate nutrition and
medical care to prisoners. MONUSCO recorded 28 deaths from malnutrition in the
Bunia, Goma and Mbuji-Mayi prisons. MONUSCO continued to encourage national
and provincial authorities to address the situation.

F.

Sexual violence
38. In July and August 2018, MONUSCO documented the rape of and other acts of
conflict-related sexual violence against at least 129 women, two men, and 39 children,
indicating a worrying increasing trend. Most of the rapes occurred in South Kivu. On
25 July, MONUSCO informed the government authorities of the findings of a human
rights investigation into rapes, mass rapes and other acts of sexual violence
perpetrated by a coalition of Mai-Mai Raia Mutomboki combatants in the villages of
Bimpanga, Kamungini, Keba and Wameli, in Shabunda territory, in April 2018.
Although some survivors received medical care, the holistic response was
insufficient. Consequently, from 5 to 11 September, MONUSCO supported the Panzi
Foundation in the provision of medical, psychosocial and legal assistance to

8/17

18-15957

S/2018/882

207 persons, including 62 survivors of sexual violence. Meanwhile, MONUSCO
continued its advocacy efforts for the opening of a judicial investigation.
39. MONUSCO continued to collaborate with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on the implementation of the FARDC action plan against
sexual violence, including by engaging with the Office of the Special Adviser to the
Head of State on the Prevention of Sexual Violence and Child Recruitment. In the
Kasai region, MONUSCO provided trainings to FARDC commanders on the fight
against sexual violence, which included the signing of a declaration of commitment
by 66 FARDC commanders to combating sexual violence in their ranks. Additional
trainings for FARDC commanders were conducted in Goma, Kinshasa and
Lubumbashi. The action plan against sexual violence of the Congolese National
Police was finalized and submitted for signature to the Vice -Prime Minister and
Minister of the Interior.

G.

Child protection
40. MONUSCO verified 176 grave violations against children through the
monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave violations against children in situations
of armed conflict. At least 158 children (14 girls and 144 boys) escaped or were
separated from armed groups, including the Forces combattantes abacunguzi, FRPI,
Mai-Mai Mazembe and Nyatura, mainly in North Kivu. Three girls survived rape and
other forms of sexual violence. Five children (two girls and three boys) were maimed
and nine boys were abducted. One case of denial of humanitarian access was reported,
in South Kivu.
41. On 11 July in Hombo, Walikale territory, North Kivu, Delphin Mbaenda,
commander of Mai-Mai Kifuafua, signed a road map to end and prevent child
recruitment and other grave violations of the rights of the child. A mechanism was set
up for implementing the road map. On 18 July, in Ziralo, Kalehe territory, South Kivu,
Raymond Kabihula, Commander of Mai-Mai Raia Mutomboki (Ngubito faction),
released 38 children to MONUSCO and signed a road map for the prevention of child
recruitment and other grave violations of the rights of the child. MONUSCO
continued to engage 17 commanders of different armed groups in Ituri, North Kivu
and South Kivu for the release of children and the implementation of road maps to
end child recruitment.

III. Deployment of MONUSCO and implementation of
its mandate
A.

Strategic dialogue and exit strategy
42. There was no progress in the strategic dialogue between the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO.

B.

Preparations to address risks linked to the electoral process
43. MONUSCO took measures to address risks linked to the electoral process,
including by conducting a series of table-top exercises with field offices to strengthen
crisis management capacities in the event of electoral violence, with a view to
updating local protection contingency plans and ensuring linkages with humanitarian
contingency planning. In addition, an exercise was carried out with the Security
Management Team to strengthen capacities for crisis management, mainly in

18-15957

9/17

S/2018/882

Kinshasa, with a focus on enhancing communications facilities within the wider
United Nations country team.
44. The concept of operations of the Mission’s police component includes
provisions to address electoral risks, with a focus on collaboration with the Congolese
National Police, notably through the training and awareness-raising of its intervention
units, to enhance crowd-control capacities and respect for human rights. The
MONUSCO police developed training and advocacy programmes for
4,600 Congolese National Police officers in intervention units to reduce the risk of
the excessive use of force during demonstrations or public gatherings in the electoral
period.
45. The concept of operations of the Mission’s force is geared towards the
protection of civilians in vulnerable areas during the electoral period, supporting
election security and ensuring the security of United Nations personnel and premises.
The MONUSCO force, in coordination with other relevant Mission components, will
support national security forces, where appropriate, to promote a protective
environment for civilians and provide early warning of electoral violence through
monitoring and reporting. Areas of responsibility have been reassig ned and the
force’s sector boundaries redrawn with a view to achieving a swift pre -electoral
deployment by the end of November.
46. Further steps have been taken by MONUSCO to strengthen its mobile
monitoring and response teams as an initial response to threats of violence or to gather
information on incidents. This mechanism enables analysis and enhances the
understanding of events in certain areas through early warning networks, in particular
in the western part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where MONUSCO has
a limited presence. The mechanism will also support and provide a surge capacity, as
necessary, for smaller field offices to address emerging political or security issues,
especially in the lead-up to the elections.

C.

Comprehensive approach to the protection of civilians

1.

Mission-wide strategies
47. MONUSCO made progress in implementing the comprehensive approach to the
protection of civilians. Two new Mission-wide strategies to address armed-group
activities were developed for areas stretching from Ituri to Goma and covering South
Kivu down to Haut-Katanga. The strategies entail such initiatives as local dialogue,
stabilization, protective patrolling and the boosting of early warning capacities and
rapid response to alerts, as well as support to justice and human rights activities.
Progress was also made in developing targeted strategies to address the threat posed
by armed groups, including ADF.
48. MONUSCO continues to implement the “protection through projection”
concept. During the reporting period, MONUSCO deployed 59 standing combat
deployments, mainly in response to threats posed to civilians by ADF, and to prevent
and deter violence by other armed elements. The Intervention Brigade of the force
around Beni thus deployed 34 deployments (58 per cent), three rapidly deployable
battalions in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo deployed 10 (17 per cent),
while the remaining 15 (25 per cent) were deployed by framework battalions and
other MONUSCO force assets. Furthermore, MONUSCO continued to expand its
Community Alert Network systems. The Network transmitted an average of 492 early
warning alerts per month, mainly from North Kivu, South Kivu and Tanganyika. The
Government, MONUSCO or both actors responded to 87 per cent of those alerts. The
alerts not responded to were in areas with limited presence of national security forces
and areas of difficult access.

10/17

18-15957

S/2018/882

2.

Field-level responses
49. On 31 July, in Beni territory, North Kivu, MONUSCO and FARDC launched a
joint offensive operation against three Mai-Mai camps that were established close to
the town of Beni and presented an imminent threat to civilians. The operation resulted
in the destruction of the camps, the capture of a number of armed group elements and
the seizure of weapons by FARDC. In addition, throughout August and September,
MONUSCO increased the number of standing combat deployments and patrols in the
Beni area, with the aim of increasing presence, situational awareness and engagement
with communities. Still in the Beni area, MONUSCO also engaged customary chiefs,
who signed a deed of commitment to addressing grievances and promoting peaceful
cohabitation. Furthermore, MONUSCO supported a consultative committee for the
resolution of customary conflicts in Beni. In Lubero territory, following the FARDC
operation against NDC-R in August, MONUSCO deployed a Joint Protection Team
to assess protection needs and risks, with a focus on reducing the risks of retaliatory
acts by NDC-R against civilians.
50. In Djugu territory, Ituri province, MONUSCO continued to support the ongoing
peace process following the outbreak of violence at the beginning of the year.
MONUSCO maintained three deployments in key flashpoints, which assisted in
creating a protective environment and enabled MONUSCO to respond to potential
violence. The presence of MONUSCO also led to the return of internally displaced
persons and contributed to the provincial government’s efforts to address the
underlying causes of violence between Hema and Lendu communities. MONUSCO
continued to support the Government’s peace-awareness campaign launched in June,
with dialogues held among Djugu customary chiefs, young people and female leaders.
51. Starting on 9 July, in South Kivu, in response to the alarming si tuation in the
Bijombo area of the high plateaux, MONUSCO deployed a series of standing combat
deployments to stabilize the area and provide a protective environment for the
provincial government to launch mediation efforts. The MONUSCO deployments had
an immediate positive impact, with an end to large-scale attacks. MONUSCO civilian
personnel deployed along with the standing combat deployments conducted
investigations into human rights abuses, gathered further information on the situation
and engaged in conflict-resolution efforts at the local level. Elsewhere in South Kivu,
in Kalehe and Shabunda territories, in response to the violence affecting civilians, in
particular women, MONUSCO conducted multiple long -range patrols to increase its
presence in the area and encouraged the authorities to strengthen the presence of
national security forces.
52. In Tanganyika province, MONUSCO continued to reinforce local protection
committees in Kalemie and Nyunzu to address increasing insecurity. In August, in
Haut-Katanga, in particular in Pweto territory, MONUSCO supported the provincial
government’s awareness-raising campaign on peaceful cohabitation between the Twa
and Luba communities, which contributed to an improvement in the security situation
and the return of internally displaced persons and of refugees from Zambia.
53. In July, in the Kasai region, MONUSCO deployed a standing combat
deployment to Kamako, an important urban centre on the border between Angola and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to stabilize the area and support the
deployment of two Joint Protection Team missions. During those missions,
MONUSCO engaged with local authorities and civil society to promote peaceful
cohabitation between the Luba, Pende and Chokwe communities.
54. The Mine Action Service of the United Nations continued to contribute to the
protection of civilians and the freedom of movement for MONUSCO and
humanitarian personnel through explosive ordnance disposal activities before and

18-15957

11/17

S/2018/882

after operations against armed groups. The Service also provided support for the
destruction of obsolete, surplus and unserviceable munitions and stockpiles of small
arms ammunition held by troop-contributing countries.

D.

Support for the sanctions regime imposed on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
55. The Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, whose mandate
was extended by the Security Council in its resolution 2424 (2018), undertook, with
the support of MONUSCO, its first visit to Kinshasa and eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo in early September, in line with its mandate. MONUSCO provided
security-related advice and continued to monitor the implementation of the arm s
embargo in collaboration with the Group.

E.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration
56. From July to mid-August, MONUSCO registered the surrender of 28 children
associated with armed groups and 33 adult combatants of armed groups of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, operating chiefly in North Kivu. An additional
27 foreign combatants and dependants were registered, as well as two children
associated with armed groups who were separated from ADF in Beni. MONUSCO
also supported the awareness-raising visits of representatives of the regional followup mechanism on the repatriation of disarmed combatants and their dependants to
camps of the ex-Mouvement du 23 mars (ex-M23) in Uganda, from 19 to 25 July, and
to the voluntary disarmament process camps of the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR) in Kanyobagonga, Kisangani and Walungu, from 23 to
27 August. Those visits resulted in the repatriation of 13 ex-M23 members to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and five FDLR members to Rwanda.
57. MONUSCO is implementing 26 community violence reduction projects in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. These projects contribute to improving
the security situation by involving young people at risk, ex-combatants and
community members in income-generating activities, such as building community
infrastructure, psychosocial support and vocational training. A number of labour intensive infrastructure projects were completed, providing initial employment to
ex-combatants and at-risk community members. Those projects included the
rehabilitation of essential road segments, with the aim of improving access to remote
areas, markets and commerce and facilitating the movement of national security
forces and MONUSCO.

F.

Stabilization
58. In July, the Prime Minister signed a decree creating 15 courts of appeal in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the new provinces created through the province
restructuring, raising the total number of those courts to 27. Subsequently, 215 judges
and prosecutors were appointed to the Supreme Court, the Council of State, the courts
of appeal and public prosecutor’s departments. In the absence of administrative
courts, the courts of appeal will play a key role with respect to electoral disputes at
the provincial level.

12/17

18-15957

S/2018/882

G.

Progress in adjusting MONUSCO priorities, posture and presence
59. MONUSCO continued to streamline its civilian efforts, focusing primarily on
the protection of civilians and support for the political process, including electoral
support.
60. During the reporting period, MONUSCO initiated the implementation of the
deployment of the Mission for 2018–2019, through the elections period. Following
the adoption of the Mission’s budget for the financial period 2018–2019, the Mission
is adjusting its footprint further. As part of the restructuring of the force, MONUSCO
had repatriated 1,528 troops by the end of August to make room for the two incoming
rapidly deployable battalions, numbering 1,700 personnel. MONUSCO plans to base
its fourth rapidly deployable battalion (Indonesia) in Tanganyika to address protection
concerns in that area, and its fifth rapidly deployable battalion (Morocco) in the Kasai
region. Once deployed, the force sector boundaries will be redrawn to ensure ease of
command and control and align force sectors with field office areas of responsibility.
MONUSCO continued to engage the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on the need to facilitate the expeditious entry into its territory of the weapons
and equipment of the rapidly deployable battalions in order for MONUSCO to fulfil
its task of protecting civilians, as mandated by the Security Council.
61. Meanwhile, the reconfiguration of the Intervention Brigade continued, with a
view to making it more flexible, agile and able to both conduct offensive operations
and protect civilians across North Kivu, while battalions from the central sector of
the MONUSCO force, formerly deployed in Boikene, Butembo and Mavivi, were
consolidated further south in North Kivu.
62. Plans were developed to make some adjustments to the deployment of the
Mission’s formed police units, which are to provide protection to civilians and United
Nations staff and premises, in key urban hotspots. One such unit was expected to
relocate from Bukavu to Lubumbashi by the end of September, and another from
Bunia to Kisangani. By the end of October, one unit will relocate from Goma to
Kisangani and another from Beni to Lubumbashi.

H.

Assessment of the performance of MONUSCO uniformed
personnel to protect civilians
63. In June 2017, MONUSCO started the systematic use of the measurement of
force effectiveness process to assess the performance of its troops. The process
combines operational readiness and contingent-owned equipment inspections with
aspects of command and control. It also assesses the resolve of the units to implement
assigned tasks related to the protection of civilians, the neutralization of armed groups
and support for the Government’s armed forces, in line with the campaign plan of the
force. Critical assessment criteria include discipline, notably with respect to sexual
exploitation and abuse and road traffic accidents. At the end of the inspection cycle,
a force commander’s assessment is issued. In the context of the implementation of
the action plan to improve the safety of peacekeepers, this tool has become a ke y
reference for reporting on the force performance and has influenced decisions about
future force generation.
64. MONUSCO has populated the tool on a quarterly basis and a total of
44 assessments had been carried out by September, as required in resolution 2409
(2018). Of the 44 units evaluated, 75 per cent (33 units) were found to be above
average, while the performance of 4.5 per cent (two units) was deemed to be
substandard. Of the units found to be performing below average, key areas for
improvement included training, equipment, conduct and discipline, and health.

18-15957

13/17

S/2018/882

65. The police component has also implemented a performance evaluati on system
based on objective criteria for both individual police officers and formed police units,
with a view to assessing their capacity to implement mandated tasks, including the
protection of civilians in urban areas through the integrated operational strategy for
the fight against insecurity. Individual police officers were evaluated on a quarterly
basis, with no performance issues identified thus far. Formed police units are
evaluated through monthly operational inspections, and one unit was identifie d
through this process as requiring reinforced capacity.
66. Both the force and police component used the assessment to address
shortcomings and implement corrective measures. Those included training, targeted
inspections and spot checks to confirm the serviceability of equipment, and specific
training on how to prepare a robust response in case of patrols coming under attack
by armed elements or an angry mob. Command and control field visits by the force
and the police, as well as the MONUSCO civilian leadership, continue to be carried
out on a regular basis to identify areas for improvement and ensure follow -up. The
results of the evaluations carried out in the context of the measurement of force
effectiveness process have also been taken into account in the planning and
implementation of the ongoing reconfiguration of the MONUSCO force.

I.

Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
67. MONUSCO continued to enforce the United Nations zero -tolerance policy on
sexual exploitation and abuse. In addition to the internal preventive measures
currently implemented, the Mission has engaged with the communities exposed to
sexual exploitation and abuse with the aim of building their capacity to identify and
process complaints of sexual exploitation and abuse, implemented community-based
compliance mechanisms and intensified its outreach programme.
68. As far as the local population is concerned, this novel approach includes
community awareness-raising, open-forum discussions and sharing the outcome of
investigations and actions taken. As regards MONUSCO personnel, efforts focused
on direct interaction with and support for troop-contributing countries, close
monitoring of the behaviour of personnel, deterrent activities by military police
patrols and the distribution of pocket cards on the prevention of sexual exploitation
and abuse. A risk management framework was also developed and implemented
through an action plan. Accountability is implemented through a comprehensive
coordination mechanism and the direct involvement of field-level managers and unit
commanders.
69. MONUSCO also conducted mass awareness-raising campaigns in communities
located in areas at risk, with a view to providing vulnerable and affected populations
with safe and efficient reporting mechanisms and making them aware of the United
Nations policy prohibiting sexual exploitation and abuse.

J.

Gender considerations in mandate implementation
70. MONUSCO continues to make progress in improving and monitoring its gender
responsiveness, using the gender markers accountability framework. Three quarters
of the Mission’s offices included in their priority functions concrete elements to
measure how peace and security initiatives took into account the needs of women and
men. For example, after analysing its sex-disaggregated data, the United Nations Joint
Human Rights Office increased the proportion of women among the beneficiaries of
its capacity-building programme, from a fifth in 2017 to a third by the end of July
2018.

14/17

18-15957

S/2018/882

71. MONUSCO also supported young urban women in actively spreading the
principles of peaceful communication among young people in vulnerable
neighbourhoods in Kinshasa and in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
prevent possible violent clashes with the police and the army before, during or after
the elections. More than 1,000 young people (694 women and 330 men) were trained
on how to voice their opinions while adopting a peacefu l communication approach.
72. MONUSCO hosted weekly meetings with 22 female politicians affiliated with
different political parties and civil society, to exchange views on the opportunities for
and the challenges of being candidates and on how to help to mobilize voters and win
seats.

K.

Safety and security of United Nations personnel
73. From 29 June to 16 August, a total of 131 security- and safety-related incidents
affecting United Nations staff, uniformed personnel, assets and operations were
recorded throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Those included 62 crime related incidents, 51 hazard-related accidents, 11 incidents of civil unrest and
7 incidents attributed to armed conflict. Fifty-four national staff members and
27 international staff members were affected by those incidents.
74. In North Kivu, access to some areas within Beni territory remained a challenge,
owing to continued sporadic clashes between ADF, Mai-Mai militias, FARDC and
MONUSCO. As a result, movements of staff members to areas of operation of ADF
were occasionally restricted or suspended.

IV. Observations
75. I am encouraged by continued progress in the preparations for the holding of
elections on 23 December. I commend the leadership demonstrated by President
Joseph Kabila and the efforts of the Independent National Electoral Commission to
ensure that key milestones in the electoral process are met. The publication of the
final list of candidates for the presidential, national and provincial legislative
elections are encouraging steps. I regret, however, the low number of female
candidates, despite commitments by political stakeholders to promoting actively the
participation of women in the political and electoral process.
76. As the date of the elections draws nearer, I encourage key political actors to
reach a consensus on outstanding contentious issues, including the use of voting
machines and the voter register. I urge them to pursue dialogue and seek compromise
in order to generate confidence in the electoral process and ensure a level electoral
playing field for all. To this end, I reiterate my call to the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue to fully implement the confidence building measures contained in the political agreement of 31 December 2016.
77. I remain concerned about the arbitrary arrests and lengthy detentions of
opposition members and civil society activists by the intelligence services, as well as
instances of repression of public demonstrations, all of which work again st the
creation of an environment conducive to holding credible, transparent and inclusive
elections. I call upon the authorities to ensure that all citizens of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo enjoy their civil and political rights.
78. I welcome the Government’s decision to fully fund the elections and encourage
it to ensure regular disbursements to the Independent National Electoral Commission
in order to guarantee that key milestones in the electoral calendar are met. I reiterate

18-15957

15/17

S/2018/882

the readiness of the United Nations to provide technical and logistical support to the
Commission, as mandated by the Security Council.
79. I remain deeply concerned by the security situation and the increase in the
activities of armed groups in different provinces, especially renewed activities by
ADF in North Kivu, as well as attacks on the civilian population, FARDC and
MONUSCO, leading to the displacement of thousands of people, the destruction of
livelihoods and the interruption of schooling. I am equally worried by the escalation
of intercommunal violence in the Kasai region, South Kivu and Tanganyika. I urge
the authorities to take the steps necessary to protect civilians, with the support of
MONUSCO, and I call upon all stakeholders to act responsibly to promote social
cohesion, especially during the electoral period. I am concerned about the continued
activities of foreign armed elements on Congolese soil and recent clashes at the
border.
80. Renewed intercommunal violence and armed group activities continue to have
a negative impact on the humanitarian situation. Only 24 per cent of funding
requirements for 2018 have been met so far, which undermines the ability of the
United Nations to support the most vulnerable. It is therefore crucial that
commitments made by donors be met, in order to close the financing gap quickly. I
welcome the joint efforts of the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the humanitarian community to work in a concerted manner to assess
humanitarian needs in order to ensure the targeted and seamless delivery of
humanitarian assistance in 2019.
81. The recurring outbreak of the Ebola virus disease in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo requires continued vigilance. I commend the Government for its swift
response and leadership. The United Nations system, including WHO and its partners,
remains committed to supporting the Government in its efforts to treat the victims of
the disease and prevent it from spreading further.
82. Finally, I thank my Special Representative, Leila Zerrougui, for her leadership
and dedication, and all personnel of MONUSCO and the United Nations country
team, as well as the troop- and police-contributing countries, for their commitment to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also commend the efforts of regional
organizations, bilateral and multilateral partners and non-governmental organizations
for their continued support to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

16/17

18-15957

S/2018/882

18-15957

17/17
