A /71/PV.68

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

68th plenary meeting

Friday, 23 December 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/71/L.52)
The Acting President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered agenda item 13 at its 39th plenary
meeting, on 2 November. Members will also recall that
the Assembly considered, in a joint debate, agenda
items 13, 117, 123 and 124, and adopted resolution 71/8
at its 46th plenary meeting, on 16 November.
It gives me great pleasure to introduce this draft
resolution. I do so in accordance with resolution 70/294,
entitled “Political Declaration of the Comprehensive
High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation
of the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2011-2020”,
through which the General Assembly is mandated to
adopt the charter of the Technology Bank before the
end of 2016.
A mandate of the Istanbul Programme of Action
for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 20112020, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development

and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
establishment of the Technology Bank is particularly
important for least developed countries (LDCs) where
fewer than 7 per cent of households have access to
the Internet and many still lack affordable access to
information and communications technology.
At this juncture, I would like to thank all Member
States for their input into the preparation of the draft
resolution, particularly the Mission of Bangladesh and
our colleagues in the United Nations Office of the High
Representative for the Least Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island
Developing States, who have been working diligently
to ensure that the charter of the Technology Bank
is agreeable to all. I would also like to thank the
Government of Turkey for hosting the Technology
Bank and for supporting its establishment through
seed funding.
In line with the 9 December letter from the
Secretary-General, I encourage other Member States,
in particular partners of LDCs, to support the trust
fund of the Technology Bank. Indeed, it is through
mechanisms like this that the concept of leaving no one
behind comes to life.
Over the past four months, representatives will have
no doubt heard the President of the General Assembly
refer repeatedly to the fundamental need to strengthen
momentum around Sustainable Development Goal
(SDG) implementation during the seventy-first session.
When adopted, the draft resolution before us will
directly contribute to such momentum, helping us to

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-46222 (E)

*1646222*

A/71/PV.68

close in on the first successful implementation of an
SDG target, namely SDG target 17.8. We will of course
face many, many challenges in meeting the other 168
targets, but it is both reassuring and encouraging that
real progress has already been made.
As we close in on the end of the main session, on the
end of year one of the SDGs, I look forward to working
with all representatives to deliver the momentum that
will ensure that the SDGs gain traction to bring about
the transformation that we, future generations and our
planet so desperately need.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/71/L.52, entitled “Establishment of the
Technology Bank for the Least Developed Countries”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/71/L.52?
Draft resolution A/71/L.52 was adopted (resolution
71/251).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote after the voting, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mrs. Chartsuwan (Thailand): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
The Group wishes to extend to the Assembly, and
through the Assembly to the Secretary-General, the
United Nations Office of the High Representative for
the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States, Member
States and other relevant stakeholders our appreciation
for the extensive work leading up to the adoption of
resolution 71/251 on the establishment of the Technology
Bank for the Least Developed Countries.
The Group wishes to also express its appreciation
to the Government of Turkey for hosting the Technology
Bank and the pledge made to the trust fund for its
operationalization. We further encourage developed
partners and developing countries that are in aposition to
do so, as well as international organizations, foundations,
the private sector and philanthropic organizations, to
provide voluntary financial and technical assistance to
the Technology Bank to ensure its timely operation.
It is also our firm view that strengthened international
development cooperation, with North-South cooperation
2/31

23/12/2016

as a central element, will go a long way towards releasing
the requisite financial resources that remain critical to
the economic and social uplifting of least developed
countries (LDCs). This support is crucial if LDCs are to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and to build
upon the achievements of the Millennium Development
Goals and address their unfinished business.
We are delighted that the adoption of this resolution
on the last day of our work in 2016 will allow the
Technology Bank for the LDCs to be operationalized
by early 2017, as set out in target 8 of Sustainable
Development Goal 17. This could serve as another
driving force in the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, in line with the
Group’s underpinning theme for the year 2016: “From
vision to action: Inclusive partnership for sustainable
development”. Indeed, the adoption of this resolution
today demonstrates once again the inclusive partnership
in full.
With 47 out of 48 countries officially listed as LDCs
being members of the Group of 77, we would like to take
this opportunity to express our strong and unequivocal
commitment to the LDCs. We are confident that with the
support of the international community and coordinated
actions, LDCs will be able to overcome their structural
weaknesses. In this light, we are hopeful that half of the
LDCs will meet the graduation criteria by 2020, as was
envisioned in the Istanbul Programme of Action.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the 48 least
developed countries (LDCs). We sincerely thank the
President and his Office for their efficient stewardship
in submitting resolution 71/251, on the establishment of
the Technology Bank for the Least Developed Countries,
and forging consensus on it. The Group of Least
Developed Countries expresses its sincere appreciation
to the members of the Assembly for the adoption of this
resolution by consensus.
With the adoption of the resolution, a new organ of
the General Assembly has emerged. For the first time in
the history of the United Nations, the General Assembly
has established an entity to foster technological
leapfrogging for the LDCs. The new entity will facilitate
the development of indigenous science, technology
and innovation knowledge base and capacity and the
acquisition and application of appropriate modern
technologies. This is therefore a major breakthrough and
a historic moment for the United Nations.
16-46222

23/12/2016

The adoption of the charter symbolizes the strong
commitment and political will of the international
community to realize the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. It not only leads us to the realization of
Sustainable Development Goal 17.8, but also paves the
way for implementing the other Goals and targets, many
of which are deeply contingent on leveraging modern
and clean technologies. It also fortifies our confidence
that the least developed countries are not alone in
their efforts to overcome the enormous development
challenges they have been facing.
This is an age of unprecedented advancement in
science, technology and innovation. However, it is
almost entirely in the hands of large companies located
in developed countries and some emerging developing
countries. The availability of technology can help the
LDCs in building resilience against their multifaceted
vulnerabilities. We are confident that the Technology
Bank will greatly contribute to reverse the growing
digital divide and foster the implementation of the 2030
Agenda, as well as the implementation of the Istanbul
Programme of Action.
During the past six years, unprecedented efforts
have gone into the operationalization of the Technology
Bank. We pay tribute to all individuals who have
provided significant intellectual contributions to this
initiative. We would especially thank the Government
of Turkey for hosting the Bank and also for the financial
contribution towards its operationalization. I would also
like to express my sincere gratitude to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and the Secretariat for pursuing this
matter relentlessly. Allow me to recall with appreciation
the contributions of the members of the Governing
Council of the Bank, whose expertise and hard work
have produced this charter.
The Technology Bank is a reflection of our solidarity
with and empathy for the cause of LDCs. However, this
is just the beginning. We will have to go a long way.
This will be an organization whose survival will depend
on voluntary contributions. We have to make sure that it
sustains and keeps serving a large section of humankind,
who are the most vulnerable among us. In this regard, I
urge all to make efforts to mobilize resources for the
sustenance of this Bank. We are confident that our
development partners will come forward with their
generous contributions in the same spirit that they have
shown today.

A/71/PV.68

Mr. Begeç (Turkey): As the host country, Turkey
expresses its appreciation for the adoption of resolution
71/251, which established the Technology Bank for the
Least Developed Countries. We thank the President of
the General Assembly and his Office for his leadership
in submitting this resolution and building consensus on
it. We would also like to thank all Member States for
their constructive engagement in this endeavour, which
has lasted for more than five years, and commend the
continued support and assistance of the Secretariat
as well.
The establishment of the Technology Bank is a
significant accomplishment in the implementation of the
Istanbul Programme of Action and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. It is also a manifestation of
our solidarity with the least developed countries (LDCs)
in supporting their economic growth and sustainable
development.
Science and technology and innovation are
fundamental drivers of growth and development,
yet it is a matter of continued concern for the LDCs.
Addressing the structural concerns of the LDCs remains
distant without rapidly building up their national
capacities in science, technology and innovation. In this
context, the Technology Bank seeks to contribute to
the transformation of the LDCs by building up science,
technology and innovation capacities, coupled with a
transfer of such needed technologies. The Bank will help
acquire new technologies and build up domestic capacity
to fully utilize them. Moreover, the Bank will work
towards bridging the digital divide and the technology
gap in the LDCs. The Bank is also expected to channel
increased official development assistance to the LDCs in
the area of science, technology and innovation.
Turkey has always been supportive of the idea
of establishing a new entity, under the auspices of the
United Nations, in order to reinforce the technological
leapfrogging of the LDCs and to spare no effort to make
the science, technology and innovation availabable. The
Government of Turkey delivered funds to the Secretariat
for a feasibility study and convened the Governing
Council of the Technology Bank. Our Government will
provide the premises, as well as the office equipment,
general services and utilities to the Technology Bank.
In addition to this contribution in kind, the Turkish
Government has pledged at this stage a voluntary
financial contribution of $1 million to the trust fund
of the Technology Bank for the start-up year of 2017.
We will consider an upward division of our financial

16-462223/31

A/71/PV.68

contribution once the work programme and the budget of
the Bank for the year 2017 are considered and approved
by the Governing Council.
We underline that the sustainable mobilization of
financial resources is a must for the effective functioning
of the Bank. Turkey stands ready to do its part in this
regard. However, it is our joint responsibility. Therefore,
all donor countries, traditional donors in particular,
should contribute to the Bank in a timely fashion. On
the other hand, the Secretariat must duly take concrete
steps to increase funds through a resource mobilization
strategy and outreach activities towards all stakeholders,
including the private sectors and foundations. Likewise,
the United Nations system should support the Bank and
its activities in a coordinated manner by building the
necessary capacities and mobilizing human resources.
Before I conclude, let me say that Turkey is
fully committed to the realization of the Sustainable
Development Goals. The Bank that we established
today is a concrete achievement in this direction. We
will continue our efforts in the period ahead towards
the effective and efficient functioning of the Bank, but
in doing so we will need partners and friends. In this
regard, we and the LDCs are counting on the support
of the President of the General Assembly, as well as the
Secretary-General.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 13.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/71/L.47)
The Acting President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered agenda item 14 at its 63rd plenary
meeting, on 15 December. Members will also recall that
under the same item, the Assembly adopted resolution
71/249 at its 67th plenary meeting, on 22 December.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Bangladesh to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.47.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): It is an honour
for me to introduce today, on behalf of all sponsoring
Member States, the draft resolution entitled “Followup to the Declaration and Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace”, contained in document A/70/L.47.
4/31

23/12/2016

Following this year’s adoption, it will be 20 years
since the Assembly began adopting this resolution
annually in 1997. We are pleased that this resolution
has been receiving overwhelming support by Member
States and that it is adopted every year by consensus.
Intolerance, racism, xenophobia and other
manifestations of hate drive many of today’s conflicts,
including violent extremism and acts of terrorism. It
is, therefore, our onerous responsibility to consciously
nurture and cultivate a culture of peace nationally and
internationally. A culture of peace is an aspiration of
all humankind, the essence of the Charter of the United
Nations and an imperative in the current global context.
Bangladesh is committed to promoting the
culture of peace and non-violence. Over four decades
ago, the father of our nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman, in his maiden speech at the General
Assembly, envisioned “the building of a world order in
which the aspiration of all men for peace and justice
will be realized” (A/PV.2243, para. 2) and freedom
from poverty, hunger, exploitation and aggression.
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina is equally committed to
promoting peace not only at the national level, but also
at the regional and international level by maintaining a
zero-tolerance policy on all forms of terrorism, violent
extremism and radicalization.
We thank Member States and their delegations for
their active participation in the negotiation process this
year. This year’s draft resolution elaborates different
elements for promoting a culture of peace. I want to
highlight very briefly some of the additional elements
and changes over resolution 70/20 adopted last year.
We have added two United Nations-proclaimed days.
In addition to the International Day of Non-Violence,
we have added a reference to vulnerable children in the
context of the activities of UNICEF’s Early Childhood
Peace Consortium, understanding global citizenship in
the context of providing education to children and the
observance of the International Day of Non-Violence in
the text of this year’s draft resolution.
We have also added in the text the increased
interest, particularly of Member States, to make
country statements in the plenary segment of the
General Assembly High-level Forum on the Culture of
Peace, recognition of the President’s summary issued
for the first time in the Forum series and a request to the
Secretariat to support the effective organization of the
High-Level Forum. In this regard, I urge the Secretariat,
16-46222

23/12/2016

A/71/PV.68

in particular the Department of Public Information,
to support in every way the wider dissemination of
the outcome of the Forum through press releases and
media alerts. The community of non-governmental
organizations should also spread the information on the
Forum to wider circles of civil society.
I wish to commend the work that is being undertaken
by United Nations agencies, particularly UNESCO, to
promote a culture of peace and non-violence. We wish
the President of the General Assembly every success
in his endeavours in arranging the high-level informal
dialogue on 24 January 2017 at the United Nations on
“Building Sustainable Peace for All: Synergies between
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
Sustaining Peace”. The Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) are premised on the fundamental recognition of
the importance of peace as an outcome in itself, through
SDG 16 and its target 4.7, which has specifically
recognized the importance of learning a culture of
peace and non-violence for sustainable development.
This resolution every year receives the support
of many Member States. I am pleased to mention that
this year more than 100 countries have sponsored it.
We express our sincere gratitude to all the sponsoring
countries for their support and commitment. I hope
that, asin past years, we will be able to adopt the draft
resolution by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.47.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of A/71/L.47: Afghanistan, Armenia, Bahrain,
Benin, Brazil, Burundi, Chile, the Comoros, Cyprus,
Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Georgia,
Greece, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Kenya, Lesotho,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Mozambique, the
Netherlands, Nigeria, Oman, Poland, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Timor
Leste, Togo, Tonga, Turkmenistan and the United
Republic of Tanzania.

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/71/L.47?
Draft resolution A/71/L.47 was adopted (resolution
71/252).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 14.
Agenda item 72 (continued)
Report of the International Criminal Court
Draft resolution (A/71/L.49)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly considered agenda item 72 at its 37th and
38th plenary meetings, on 31 October.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Netherlands to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.49.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I have the honour
to introduce, under agenda item 72, draft resolution
A/71/L.49, entitled “Report of the International
Criminal Court”. In addition to the 66 countries listed
in the document, another 12 countries have indicated
their wish to be included as sponsors of the draft
resolution. That brings the total number of sponsors to
78. We thank those countries for their strong support
and their commitment.
The resolution is a technical rollover of previous
consensus resolution 70/264. It underlines the
importance of the relationship between the International
Criminal Court and the United Nations, on the basis of
the Relationship Agreement.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands thanks the
President of the International Criminal Court, Judge
Silvia Alejandra Fernández de Gurmendi, for presenting
the twelfth annual report of the International Criminal
Court (see A/71/342) to this organ on 31 October
(see A/71/PV.37). The briefing was followed by a
constructive debate in the Assembly on the challenges
of the Court.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is deeply
committed to the fight against impunity for genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. That is a
cornerstone of the system of international criminal
justice. The imperative to domestically investigate and
prosecute those crimes is a key principle of all States’

16-462225/31

A/71/PV.68

international legal obligations. The International
Criminal Court is the international community’s court
of last resort in this common fight against impunity.
The Court is therefore doing an extremely important
job, and together, all of us, we must make sure that
the International Criminal Court remains the strong
institution in the fight against impunity that victims of
atrocities worldwide need it to be. In that regard, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands reiterates the importance
of the universal ratification of the Rome Statute by all
United Nations Member States.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands continues to
take pride in being the host State of the International
Criminal Court. As Mr. Albert Koenders, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
said earlier this year, in the opening ceremony of the
Court’s new premises in the Hague, the Court owes its
existence to two basic human instincts: empathy and
a collective resolve — empathy for victims and their
loved ones and the collective resolve to work together
and shape our common future.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
presents this draft resolution to the Assembly today with
the desire that it once again be adopted by consensus.
Let us all continue to work together for peace and
justice, and let me wish a happy and peaceful holiday to
all representatives and their loved ones.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/71/L.49.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of position before action is taken on the draft resolution,
I would like to remind delegations that explanations of
position are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Rahamtalla (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The
Sudan reiterates its rejection of the precedent set by
the decisions of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) to initiate legal proceedings against citizens of
Member States that are not parties to the Rome Statute
and that do not accept the jurisdiction of article 12 of
the Statute. Worse still, jus cogens and international
law are undermined by the immunity of Presidents
and the twisting of facts in order to achieve political
interests and to erroneously interpret Security Council
resolutions, thereby steering away from justice and law.
The ICC is the first tribunal to disregard and violate
international law, as well as customary and written laws.
6/31

23/12/2016

It behoves it only to respect the principle relating to the
right of States, in line with article 11 of part 2 of the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, of 23 May
1969. We underscore the importance of the statement
made by the representative of the International Court
of Justice that the Security Council, the master of its
own procedures, cannot take a decision contrary to
international law. We recall that the nexus between
the United Nations and the ICC should take into
consideration their independent and separate natures
and the absence of organic or structural ties between
them. We note the attempts of some State parties to
the ICC to make the General Assembly an assembly of
States parties to the Rome Statute, by which the Court
was established.
We continue to express our clear-cut position
in rejection of the trend that is evident in the
annual periodic draft resolution on the report of the
International Criminal Court, which contains extensive
interpretations that do not reflect the letter and spirit
of the Relationship Agreement between the United
Nations and the International Criminal Court, and
should not be used in the United Nations to benefit
a Court that is supposed to be independent and of a
particular nature, pursuant to a treaty which expresses
its legal framework and has a residual mechanism. We
will continue to express our relationship to the system
and call for the adherence to the scope and framework
of that relationship.
The Sudan disassociates itself from draft resolution
A/71/L.49 and will attach no significance to it, as it
imposes no obligations on my country.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.49, entitled
“Report of the International Criminal Court”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of A/71/L.49: Bolivia, Brazil, the Central
African Republic, Fiji, Greece, Honduras, Lesotho,
Panama, Samoa, San Marino, Timor-Leste and Vanuatu.
16-46222

23/12/2016

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/71/L.49?
Draft resolution A/71/L.49 was adopted (resolution
71/253).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
those wishing to speak in explanation of position on
the resolution just adopted, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations of position are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Shi Xiaobin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China appreciates the adoption of resolution 71/253,
entitled “Report of the International Criminal Court”.
This technical rollover text is a product of compromise
among the parties. Although the text fails to capture
the Court’s developments over the past year, China
had no major difficulty in accepting the resolution and
therefore joined in the consensus.
This has been an unusual year for the development
of the ICC. The Court’s has made much progress in
its work, but some States parties have announced
their decision to withdraw from the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court, which reflects some
grave concerns over the actual functioning of the
Court. The causes behind these concerns warrant our
serious reflection in order to identify the causes of
those concerns. I would like to take this opportunity to
make three points.
First, China has always valued the role of
international criminal-justice organs in the promotion
of the international rule of law and the prosecution of
serious international crimes, and has closely followed
the work of the ICC. China hopes that the Court will
heed the concerns of various parties and address them
responsibly, fulfil its mandate prudently and earn
the trust and respect of all through its objective and
impartial work.
Secondly, the ICC and the United Nations are two
organizations that are independent yet interconnected.
They should cooperate and respect each other’s mandate
within applicable legal frameworks, such as the Charter
of the United Nations and the Relationship Agreement
between the United Nations and the International
Criminal Court.
Thirdly, China expresses its concern over the
practice of the Assembly of States Parties to the

A/71/PV.68

Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court of
excluding observer States from participation in certain
consultations is concerning to China. In our view, such
an practice is inappropriate and violates the rules of
procedure and the principle of transparency, and should
be corrected. In particular, consultations regarding the
amendments to the definition of the crime of aggression
affect the Security Council’s mandate to maintain
peace and security and the interests of the international
community as a whole. Such consultations should not
be open exclusively to States parties.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Our delegation is disappointed that in
considering resolution 71/253 today, the approaches of
States that are not parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) were not taken into
account. The need to correct the resolution in order
to align it with today’s realities is long overdue. Its
complimentary and self-congratulatory formulations
have very little in common with the actual situation as
it relates to the Court. The call for the rapid ratification
of the Rome Statute is completely inappropriate against
the backdrop of a number of States withdrawing from
it, a fact that is not at all reflected in the resolution
but clearly illustrates the justified nature of criticisms
levelled against the legal institution.
Our views on regarding the ICC’s activities
werespelled out in detail during the discussion in May
of resolution 70/264, with similar contents (see A/70/
PV.95). Unfortunately, the past six months have given
us no reason to review our assessment. In the light of
the lamentable situation regarding the Court’s discharge
of its functions and the lack of prospects for any
improvements, our country relayed to the depository
of the Rome Statute the fact that we do not intend to
become a party to the treaty.
Today’s resolution is an artificially preserved
collection of the hopes and desires that the international
community placed in the judicial body during its first
years of existence. The extent to which those came true
is clear from its first 15 years of existence. Over all
this time, it has delivered only four guilty verdicts, at
a cost of $1 billion, and some cases simply collapsed
as a result of insufficient evidence. Exemplary speed
is demonstrated by the Court only when the political
situation lends itself to it. In 2011, for example, the
International Criminal Court issued a very rapid legal
accompaniment to the bombardment of Libya, initiating
proceedings against Muammar Al-Qadhafi and his

16-462227/31

A/71/PV.68

supporters in the course of just a few days. After that,
any interest in the issue apparently quickly evaporated.
There have been no new cases over the past five years.
When it comes to investigating civilian deaths
resulting from NATO air strikes in Libya, the ICC
prefers to distance itself. Nothing has been done
to investigate the crimes of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant. In its activity, the Court ignores the
norms and standards of international law regarding the
immunity of public officials of States that are not party
to the Rome Statute. In that respect, we understand the
concerns of a number of African States and the African
Union. The political and legal grounds given for
withdrawing from the Court are quite understandable
to us. We are not going to list them all, but the main
problem is that one cannot think of a single situation
where the International Criminal Court genuinely
promoted the stabilization of a situation, contributed to
an end to violence and helped the civilian population.
Especially telling in that respect are the results of its
protracted activities in Libya and Darfur.

23/12/2016

I will now give the floor to the representative of
Burkina Faso to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.50.
Ms. Fofana (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
On behalf of the Group of African States, I have
the honour to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.50,
entitled “Framework for a Renewed United NationsAfrican Union Partnership on Africa’s Integration and
Development Agenda 2017-2027”.

Mindful of all the aforementioned considerations,
our delegation cannot back a technical rollover of the
text and disassociates itself from the consensus on
the resolution.

The adoption of the partnership framework between
the United Nations and the African Union on Africa’s
integration and development agenda from 2017 to
2027 in June 2015 in Johannesburg, South Africa, was
an important step in the implementation of the 2063
Agenda for Africa. That partnership framework enables
not only us to provide follow-up and accelerate the
implementation of the 2063 Agenda for Africa, but also
to pool our efforts in implementing the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. It seeks to promote an
ever-closer and more effective partnership between the
United Nations, the African Union and its subregional
organizations in order to meet new challenges that
pose a threat to peace, security and development
and fuel terrorism and violent extremism, as well as
an increase in the number of migrant, refugees and
displaced persons.

Mr. Ammar (Pakistan): I have requested the floor
to put Pakistan’s position on record. Pakistan has had a
consistent position on this and other issues, and as other
States have mentioned, it is not bound by the provisions
of the instrument to which it is not party. We would like
to put that position on record.

That is why the today’s draft resolution should be
welcomed, as it calls on all States to show commitment
and determination as bilateral and multilateral partners,
as well as all other relevant partners. The cooperation
framework between the United Nations and the African
Union should therefore be supported.

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 72?

Before concluding my statement, on behalf of
the Group of African States I should like thank all
delegations that played an active role in the negotiations
on the draft text for the spirit of cooperation and
considerable efforts that led to today’s draft resolution.
I would also like to thank all countries that have already
sponsored this draft resolution for Africa and invite
those countries that have not yet done so to sponsor
it now.

It was so decided.
Agenda item 126 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(a) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union
Draft resolution (A/71/L.50)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly considered sub-items (a) to (z) of agenda
item 126 at its 48th plenary meeting, on 21 November.
8/31

The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.50,
entitled “Framework for a Renewed United NationsAfrican Union Partnership on Africa’s Integration and
Development Agenda 2017-2027”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
16-46222

23/12/2016

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed on
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of A/71/L.50: Australia, Finland and Georgia.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.50?
Draft resolution A/71/L.50 was adopted (resolution
71/254).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 126?
It was so decided.
(r) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Draft resolution (A/71/L.44/Rev.1)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly considered sub-items (a) to (z) of agenda
item 126 at its 48th plenary meeting, on 21 November.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic to introduce draft
resolution A/71/L.44/Rev.1.
Mr. Thammavongsa (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
States members of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) — Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines,
Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam and my own country,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic — to introduce
the draft resolution contained in document A/71/L.44/
Rev.1, entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations”, under
agenda item 126 (r).
ASEAN, founded in 1967 and based on the same
principles that guides the United Nations, has become a
dynamic and outward-looking regional organization that
has a long history of forging friendly ties with various
countries near and far, as well as with other regional and
international organizations. ASEAN believes that the
United Nations and regional organizations have unique
and complementary capacities, with great potential
to help its member States address issues of common
interest and strive for peace, security and sustainable
development at the regional and global levels.

A/71/PV.68

Both ASEAN and the United Nations have had a
long history of engagement based on the common desire
to promote cooperation in political, security, economic
and socioeconomic pillars, and with many other
regional and international organizations to promote
mutually beneficial cooperation through ASEAN-led
mechanisms such as ASEAN+1, ASEAN+3, East Asia
Summit and the ASEAN Regional Forum, to name but
a few.
ASEAN has established dialogue partner
relations with the United Nations since 2006, and a
memorandum of understanding on ASEAN-United
Nations cooperation was signed in New York on
27 September 2007 to forge a partnership between the
two organizations. Following the adoption of the Joint
Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership between
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the
United Nations in 2011, relations between the two
organizations have progressed significantly, with new
achievements in all key areas of cooperation.
We are pleased to note that the frequent convening
of ASEAN-United Nations summits, regular ASEANUnited Nations ministerial meetings and Secretariatto-secretariat coordination have further advanced
ASEAN-United Nations interactions and cooperation.
ASEAN also welcomed the presence of a United
Nations liaison officer in Jakarta to strengthen joint
activities and to implement the ASEAN-United Nations
Comprehensive Partnership.
At the eighth ASEAN-United Nations Summit, held
in Vientiane on 7 September, the leaders of ASEAN
and the Secretary-General of the United Nations
expressed their commitment to further deepening and
broadening cooperation between the two organizations
and welcomed the new plan of action 2016-2020 to
implement the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive
Partnership between ASEAN and the United Nations.
The new plan of action covers a broad area of cooperation,
including political security, economic, sociocultural
and Secretariat-to-secretariat cooperation.
The resolution entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations” was first introduced by ASEAN at the General
Assembly in 2002. Resolution 57/35 welcomed the
cooperation of the two organizations and encouraged
both organizations to increase contacts and to further
identify areas of cooperation as appropriate. Since
then, ASEAN has submitted this resolution to the

16-462229/31

A/71/PV.68

General Assembly biennially, with the broad support
of States Members of the United Nations, to underscore
and encourage the broad range of activities being
undertaken by ASEAN and the United Nations.
The draft resolution being introduced today is
based on resolution 69/110, of 10 December 2014, with
updates reflecting some of the important developments
that have taken place in ASEAN, as well as in the
ASEAN-United Nations cooperation over the past two
years. The draft resolution once again welcomes the
progress made in the ongoing activities of cooperation
between the two organizations and encourages the
United Nations to work together with ASEAN to further
intensify the level of their cooperation.
In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity to
express, on behalf of the States members of ASEAN, our
sincerest thanks to all the sponsors of the draft resolution
and to all Member States for their continued support for
the text, which has enjoyed wide sponsorship and has
been adopted by consensus at the General Assembly
since 2002. In view of this, I would like to request all
Member States to lend their continued support to this
year’s draft resolution by adopting it by consensus as in
the previous years.
I take this opportunity to wish all delegations a
merry Christmas and a happy new year.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.44/Rev.1,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/71/L.44/Rev.1, the following countries
have also become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Algeria, Austria, Belarus, Bhutan, Brazil, the Central
African Republic, Croatia, Cuba, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, the Dominican
Republic, France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Italy, Kazakhstan,
Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Mexico,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, Portugal, Samoa, Sweden, Tajikistan,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor10/31

23/12/2016

Leste, Togo, Turkmenistan, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/71/L.44/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/71/L.44/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 71/255).
The Acting President: May I take it that is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of sub-item (r) of agenda item 126?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 128
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslav since 1991
Draft decision (A/71/L.53)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft decision A/71/L.53, entitled
“International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft decision A/71/L.53?
Draft decision A/71/L.53 was adopted (decision
71/416).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 128.
We shall now suspend the meeting in view of the
fact that the Fifth Committee has not yet completed
its work. The plenary will resume following the
adjournment of the Fifth Committee in order to take
up the pending items before the Assembly. This
will include the following draft resolutions whose
consideration was postponed owing to budgetary
implications: draft resolution A/71/L.23, under agenda
item 20, entitled “Implementation of the outcomes of
the United Nations Conferences on Human Settlements
and on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development
and strengthening of the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)”; draft resolution
16-46222

23/12/2016

A/71/PV.68

A/71/L.26, under sub-item (a) of agenda item 73,
entitled “Oceans and Law of the Sea”; draft resolutions
XXVI and XLI I recommended by the First Committee
in its report (A/71/450), under agenda item 98, entitled
“General and complete disarmament”; and finally draft
resolution A/71/L.25, under agenda item 130, entitled
“Investigation into the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld and
of the members of the party accompanying him”.

A/71/L.23 is contained in document A/71/713. The
text of the report, for the time being, is contained in
document A/C.5/71/L.16, section D.

This meeting will be suspended and resumed
under the chairmanship of my colleague, another
Vice-President. I therefore take this opportunity on my
own behalf to also extend to delegations my very best
wishes for the holiday season and wish them a merry
Christmas and a peaceful and prosperous new year.

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
for explanations of position, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations of vote or position are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.

The meeting was suspended at 4.10 p.m. and
resumed at 8.15 p.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2016, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item
20 to the Second Committee. To enable the General
Assembly to take action expeditiously on the document,
may I take it that the Assembly wishes to consider
agenda item 20 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 20 (continued)
Implementation of the outcomes of the
United Nations Conferences on Human
Settlements and on Housing and Sustainable
Urban Development and strengthening of the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme
(UN-Habitat)
Draft resolution (A/71/L.23)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/713)
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now take action on a draft resolution entitled “New
Urban Agenda”, issued as document A/71/L.23.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/71/23. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/256).

I now give the floor to delegations who wish to
speak in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
The Group would like to express its appreciation to
the President of the General Assembly for the adoption
of resolution 71/256, which expresses profound
gratitude to the Government and the people of Ecuador
for hosting the United Nations Conference on Housing
and Sustainable Urban Development, Habitat III, and
endorses the New Urban Agenda.
Habitat III was the first intergovernmental
conference to take place after the historic year of the
adoption of the outcomes of four major conferences
related to sustainable development. The Conference
contributed significantly to our efforts towards the
effective management of the challenges of rapid
urbanization and to provide an opportunity to promote
a positive, mutually reinforcing relationship between
cities and their surroundings, across the human
settlements continuum.
The Group participated very actively in the
Habitat III process, particularly in negotiations for the
New Urban Agenda. We thank development partners
for working with us in order to reach a meaningful
outcome that will guide us towards sustainable urban
development and human settlements in the next 20
years.
The Group firmly believes that sustainable urban
development and human settlements can be a key
driver of sustainable development in national and
subnational development plans. We are guided by a

16-4622211/31

A/71/PV.68

23/12/2016

vision of cities and human settlements characterized by
quality of life, equity, a sustainable environment and
an inclusive economy, thereby ensuring that cities and
human settlements are a positive force for achieving
sustainable development.

joins consensus in the express understanding that the
new urban agenda does not imply that States must
implement obligations under human rights instruments
to which they are not a party, and the United States is
not a party to the International Covenant.

In conclusion, the Group of 77 and China reiterates
its unwavering commitment to the implementation,
follow-up and review of the New Urban Agenda.
We look forward to the recommendations of the
independent assessment and the two-day high-level
meeting of the General Assembly during the seventyfirst session, during which issues regarding the
effective implementation of the New Urban Agenda and
the positioning of UN-Habitat will be discussed.

We note that the term “equitable” is used in multiple
contexts in the agenda. Although the United States fully
endorses the importance of universal access to safe
drinking water and sanitation, for example, we must
collectively avoid any unintended interpretation of the
term that implies a subjective assessment of fairness
that, among other things, may lead to discriminatory
practices. As we have said many times, the United
States remains as committed as ever to assisting the
most vulnerable on a path to the achievement of that
agenda.

Mrs. Norman Chalet (United States of America):
The United States is pleased that Member States were
able to reach consensus on the New Urban Agenda.
We are pleased that the New Urban Agenda is an
action-oriented document that sets global standards
of achievement and sustainable urban development,
rethinking the way we build, manage and live in cities
by drawing together cooperation with committed
partners, relevant stakeholders and urban actors at
all levels of Government and the private sector. We
encourage all stakeholders from all sectors to work to
make that new urban agenda a reality in the coming
years. In supporting that document, we reaffirm our
long-standing commitment to both sustainable urban
development and the promotion of human rights.
The United States takes its human rights obligations
and commitments seriously in cities, just as it does
everywhere within its territories. We do not recognize
any right to the city, nor do we have any obligations or
commitments with respect to it.
We also reiterate the concerns of the United States
regarding the topic of a right to development, which
are long-standing and well-known. It does not have
an agreed international meaning, and any related
discussion needs to focus on aspects of development
related to human rights, which are universally held
rights — enjoyed by all individuals — which all people
may demand from their own Governments.
Further, the United States supports the right to an
adequate standard of living, including adequate housing,
and we support the States parties to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights as
they undertake steps to progressively achieve the full
realization of that right. However, the United States
12/31

We note that throughout the document, the phrase
“persons in vulnerable situations” is included. We
understand that term to include all groups that find
themselves vulnerable due to various characteristics
such as gender, race, religion, sexual orientation and
gender identity. At the same time, we collectively
recognize that this is a universal agenda that calls for
action by all. We underscore here that, by its terms,
paragraph 18 reaffirms the principle of common but
differentiated responsibilities only as it was originally
set out in principle 7 of the Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development, where it was explicitly
limited to certain types of global environmental
degradation.
The reaffirmation of principle 7, in that limited
context, does not apply, and the United States does not
accept the relevance or application of that principle
to the broad range of issues addressed in the agenda
or to sustainable development as a whole. Economic
sanctions, whether unilateral or multilateral, can
be a successful means of achieving foreign-policy
objectives. In cases where United States has applied
sanctions, they have been used with specific objectives
in mind, including as a means to promote a return to
the rule of law or democratic systems, to respect human
rights and fundamental freedoms or to prevent threats
to international security. We believe that economic
sanctions can be an appropriate, effective and legitimate
alternative to the use of force, and that United States
sanctions are fully compliant with international law
and the Charter of the United Nations.
16-46222

23/12/2016

A/71/PV.68

Regarding the reference to foreign occupation in
paragraph 19, we reaffirm our abiding commitment to
a comprehensive and lasting peace, based on a twoState solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We
remain committed to supporting the Palestinian people
in practical and effective ways, including through
sustainable development. We will continue to work
with the Palestinian Authority, Israel and international
partners to improve the lives of ordinary people that
seek a more sustainable future.

like to announce that, since the submission of draft
resolution A/71/L.26, in addition to those delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Barbados,
Belgium, Cameroon, Canada, Croatia, Cuba, the Czech
Republic, Greece, Indonesia, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Maldives, Malta,
Monaco, Morocco, Nauru, Norway, Panama, Poland,
Portugal, Togo, Ukraine and the United States of
America.

Finally, the new urban agenda is not legally binding
and does not affect existing obligations under applicable
international and domestic law, particularly where
commitments and other instruments are characterized
as having been agreed, nor does it change the current
state of conventional or customary international law.
The United States will pursue the commitments,
including those aspiring to change circumstances,
in the agenda, consistent with United States law and
policy and our limited authority at the federal level.
We will pursue the agenda’s commitments within and
subject to our appropriations process.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.26, entitled
“Oceans and the law of the sea”. A recorded vote has
been requested.

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 20.
Agenda item 73 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft resolution (A/71/L.26)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/714)
The Acting President: The report of the Fifth
Committee on the programme budget implications of
draft resolution A/71/L.26 is contained in document
A/71/714. The text of the report, for the time being, is
contained in document A/C.5/71/L.16, section E.
Members will recall that the Assembly held a
debate on agenda item 73 and its sub-items (a) and (b)
at its 54th and 55th plenary meetings, on 7 December
2016. We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/71/L.26.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former

16-4622213/31

A/71/PV.68

Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Turkey, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
Abstaining:
Colombia, El Salvador
Draft resolution A/71/L.26 was adopted by 158
votes to 2, with 2 abstentions (resolution 71/257).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to abstain; the delegation of
Botswana had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: I shall now give the floor to
those delegations that wish to speak in explanation of
vote after the voting.
Mrs. Salas Pellicer (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would
like to speak in explanation of vote on resolution
71/257, on oceans and the law of the sea, just adopted
by the Assembly.
We would like to take this opportunity to warmly
thank the facilitator of the negotiation process on the
resolution, Mr. Thembile Joyini of South Africa, as
well as Ms. Gabriele Goettsche-Wanli, Director of the
Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea,
and her team, and Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares, UnderSecretary-General for Legal Affairs of the Office of
Legal Affairs, for the support they have given on legal
matters.
As we have always stated, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela is not a part to the 1982 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) or to the
Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks, since their standards do not
apply to us in terms of treaty or international customary
law, except those that Venezuela may recognize
in future by incorporating them into our national
legislation. As we have said before, the international
14/31

23/12/2016

instrument under discussion was adopted on 30 April
1982 in New York, after nine years of negotiations, at
the third United Nations Conference on the Law of the
Sea. The Convention was adopted by 130 votes to 4,
with 17 abstentions. The countries that voted against it
were the United States, Israel, Turkey and Venezuela.
UNCLOS was opened for signature on 10 December
1982 in Montego Bay, Jamaica, and entered into force
on 16 November 1994, which, it is worth noting,
occurred one year after its sixtieth ratification, by the
Cooperative Republic of Guyana.
As I have said, the Republic of Venezuela voted
against UNCLOS during the third United Nations
Conference on the Law of the Sea, in accordance with
the declaration made by the head of the Venezuelan
delegation at the Conference’s 158th plenary meeting,
held on 30 March 1982. Venezuela did not consider the
wording of articles 15, 74 and 83, on the delimitation
of maritime and maritime areas between States with
adjacent or opposite coasts, in exclusive economic zones
and on the continental shelf. Previously, Venezuela had
expressed a specific reservation with regard to article
12 and paragraph 3 of article 24 of the Convention
on the Territorial Sea and the Contiguous Zone, and
article 6 of the Convention on the Continental Shelf. I
should underscore the fact that article 15 of UNCLOS
virtually reproduces article 12 of the Convention on the
Territorial Sea and the Contiguous Zone.
With regard to the question of settling this dispute
at the time, the head of the Venezuelan delegation stated
that Venezuela had some issues with articles 9 and 8. It
was also felt that the wording of paragraph 3 of article
121, on the regime of islands, was discriminatory with
regard to national territory when it stated that
“rocks that cannot sustain human habitation or
economic life of their own shall have no exclusive
economic zone or continental shelf.”
In that regard, taking into account the principle of
unity and indivisibility of national territory and the
sovereignty of States, it was considered inadmissible
that some areas of national territory should have rights
while others did not.
Lastly, since according to article 309 of UNCLOS no
reservations may be made to the Convention, Venezuela
was unable to vote for its adoption. We still maintain the
same reservations, and in various international forums
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has continued
to maintain the position that UNCLOS should not be
16-46222

23/12/2016

A/71/PV.68

seen as the only legal framework governing activities
related to the oceans and seas, since there are other
international instruments in force that, at the same
level, and together with UNCLOS, constitute a legal
framework for the law of the sea, such as the four
Geneva conventions. The Republic of Venezuela has
supported various instruments and maintained that
position in various forums. UNCLOS, with 173 States
party to it, does not have universal participation, while
other multilateral conventions, such as the Convention
on Biodiversity, have 193 States parties.

vote on it. Turkey is not a party to UNCLOS and is
of the opinion that it has neither a unified character
nor universality. We also believe that it is not the
only legal framework for regulating activities in the
oceans and seas. We hope that in future negotiations
the parties involved will take a more constructive and
flexible approach aimed at getting all the non-parties
on board, and that we will be able to reach a consensus
on this important resolution. Until then, the UNCLOS
language that I mentioned should not set a precedent for
other United Nations resolutions.

While resolution 71/257 has positive aspects, in our
view it includes elements that at the time led Venezuela
to express reservations about the final document of
the 2012 United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development regarding the topic of marine biodiversity.
For the same reasons, we expressed our reservations
about the Sustainable Development Goals as expressed
in resolution 70/1, “Transforming our world: the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”. We believe that
in future we should consider updating the terms of the
Convention on the Law of the Sea, because there are now
new situations that are not sufficiently covered and that
in some cases are counterproductive and an obstacle to
its universalization. What is needed is a regime that can
ensure that the most important current issues related to
the oceans and seas should be dealt with in a balanced,
constructive, equitable and inclusive way.

Nevertheless, we would also like to recall the
reasons that prevented Turkey from becoming party
to UNCLOS remain valid. We support international
efforts to establish a regime for the seas based on the
principle of equity and acceptable to all States. In our
opinion, however, the Convention does not provide
enough safeguards for specific geographic situations
and, as a consequence, does not take into consideration
conflicting interests and sensitivities that are the result
of special circumstances. Furthermore, the Convention
does not allow States to register reservations to its
articles. Although we agree with the general intent
and most of the provisions of the Convention, those
prominent shortcomings prevent us from becoming
party to it. Because of that, we cannot support a
resolution that makes a strong reference to UNCLOS
and calls on States to harmonize their national
legislation with its provisions.

My country therefore voted against the adoption of
resolution 71/257, and those are the reasons for which
we cannot be party to it.
Mr. Erciyes (Turkey): Turkey voted against
resolution 71/257, entitled “Oceans and the law of the
sea”, under sub-item (a) of agenda item 73. In principle,
we agree with the resolution’s general content, and we
believe it is particularly important since it recognizes
the important contribution that the sustainable
development and management of the resources and uses
of the oceans and seas have to make to the achievement
of our international development goals, as outlined
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Turkey therefore appreciates the efforts made by the
resolution’s coordinator, the Division for Ocean Affairs
and the Law of the Sea and Member States to finalize
the resolution.
However, owing to the resolution’s strong references
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS), Turkey felt obliged to call for a recorded

Mr. Morales López (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia takes the floor to explain its abstention in the
voting on resolution 71/257. The Colombian delegation
would like to respectfully and sincerely thank
Mr. Thembile Joyini of South Africa for his tireless
efforts as coordinator of this year’s resolution on oceans
and the law of the sea, to guide the discussions with
positivity and transparency and in a constructive spirit
that acknowledged the diversity of opinions among all
the States that participated in the consultations.
Colombia would like to recall its comments at
the 54th plenary meeting with regard to resolutions
pertaining to oceans and the law of the sea and on
sustainable fisheries. As a very diverse country,
Colombia is committed to the conservation, protection
and sustainable development of oceans, through the
implementation of policies, plans and programmes that
highlight the importance of the subject at the national,
regional and global levels. In addition, our country has
strong institutions to address marine and coastal issues,

16-4622215/31

A/71/PV.68

which are guided by a comprehensive vision in which
the sea, its coasts and resources have become key areas
of action for the country.
That is why Colombia recognizes the valuable
contribution made by the resolution on oceans and
law of the sea. Nonetheless, the 1982 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea makes a similar
contribution. It is a legal instrument that Colombia
has not ratified, and its provisions are therefore not
enforceable and cannot be imposed upon the country,
with the exception of those that have been expressly
accepted by my country.
Similarly, Colombia does not believe that the
Convention is the sole normative framework governing
ocean activities. My delegation would like to recall
that Colombia carries out its marine activities in strict
compliance with international commitments that it has
expressly adopted or accepted.
Finally, as we have said repeatedly, the Republic of
Colombia would like to state that resolution 71/257 and
participation in the process of its adoption cannot be
considered or interpreted in any way that would imply
the express or tacit acceptance by the Colombian State
of the provisions contained in the Convention on the
Law of the Sea. In the constructive spirit that guides
our country on issues relating to oceans and the law
of the sea, we firmly believe that all nations must
be committed to protecting the sea and its resources
because the world’s sustainable future depends upon it.
Colombia stands ready to work with other nations to
address challenges in order to keep our oceans healthy.
We would like this statement to be included in the
records of today’s meeting.
Mr. Celarie Landaverde (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): It is an honour for me and for my delegation
to address the plenary of the General Assembly on
resolution 71/257, on oceans and the law of the sea. We
welcome the positive outcome.
The Republic of El Salvador is aware of the
importance of oceans, in particular the use of the oceans
within the framework of sustainable development. Such
use is essential in order to ensure food security for all
human beings on the planet. We also understand that,
to date, there are gaps in areas such as sustainable
fisheries, transportation, conservation and the
sustainable use of marine biodiversity. Considerable
positive developments that redound to the benefit of the
international community have been reached in those
16/31

23/12/2016

areas. But much remains to be done, and so our efforts
must continue.
As the Republic of El Salvador is not a State party
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea, it believes that the provisions, agreements or
resolutions reached by States parties or by the General
Assembly should be informed by the norms of general
international law, with the understanding that those
provisions, agreements or resolutions do not create
obligations on States that are not parties, without the
consent of those States, with the exception of those
which are expressly recognized by the States.
El Salvador invites all States to continue their
efforts on the use, conservation and protection of the
oceans and seas, in order to ensure quality life for
future generations. That can be achieved with the
cooperation of all countries, be it bilaterally, regionally
or internationally. That will assist us in strengthening
international peace and security and improve friendly
relations among all nations, in accordance with the
principles of justice and equality of rights and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
We should also consider the issue of the oceans
and seas to be a matter of great importance for the
international community. There are living and non-living
resources on the seabed, and they are humankind’s
common heritage. The use of those resources should be
equally shared and genuinely benefit all countries, in
particular developing countries.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 73.
Agenda item 98 (continued)
General and complete disarmament
Report of the First Committee (A/71/450)
Reports of the Fifth Committee (A/71/710
and A/71/711)
The Acting President: The Assembly shall
now take action on draft resolutions XXVI and XLI,
recommended by the First Committee in paragraph
112 of its report. The report of the Fifth Committee on
the programme budget implications of draft resolution
XXVI is contained in document A/71/710. For the time
being, the text of the report is contained in document
16-46222

23/12/2016

A/71/PV.68

A/C.5/71/L.16, section (a). The report of the Fifth
Committee on the programme budget implications of
draft resolution XLI is contained in document A/71/711.
For the time being, the text of the report is contained in
document A/C.5/71/L.16, section (b).

Monaco, Montenegro, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions XXVI and XLI, one by one.

Abstaining:
Armenia, Belarus, China, Finland, India, Mali,
Morocco, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan,
Sudan, Switzerland, Uzbekistan

We shall take first take a decision on draft resolution
XXVI, entitled “Taking forward multilateral nuclear
disarmament negotiations”. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala, Guyana,
Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, New
Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Andorra, Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Micronesia (Federated States of),

Draft resolution XXVI was adopted by 113 votes to
35, with 13 abstentions (resolution 71/258).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Albania, Estonia
and Italy informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote against; the delegation of the
Comoros had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution XLI, entitled
“Treaty banning the production of fissile material for
nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,

16-4622217/31

A/71/PV.68

Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Italy, Pakistan
Abstaining:
Burundi, China, Cuba, Egypt, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Israel, Nicaragua, Russian Federation,
Syrian Arab Republic

23/12/2016

Members will recall that the Assembly held a debate
on agenda item 130 at its 52nd plenary meeting, on
6 December 2016.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/71/L.25, entitled “Investigation into the
conditions and circumstances resulting in the tragic
death of Dag Hammarskjöld and of the members of the
party accompanying him”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of
A/71/L.25: Andorra, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Costa
Rica, Eritrea, Georgia, Lesotho, Monaco, Mozambique,
Pakistan, Palao, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, the
Republic of Korea, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
South Africa, the Sudan, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Tunisia, Ukraine and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.

Draft resolution XLI was adopted by 158 votes to 2,
with 9 abstentions (resolution 71/259).

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/71/L.25?

[Subsequently, the delegation of Italy informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]

Draft resolution A/71/L.25 was adopted (resolution
71/260).

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 98?

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
130.

It was so decided.
Agenda item 130 (continued)
Investigation into the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld
and of the members of the party accompanying him
Draft resolution (A/71/L.25)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/712)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now take action on the draft resolution issued as
document A/71/L.25. The report of the Fifth Committee
on the programme budget implications of the draft
resolution is contained in document A/71/712. For
the time being, the text of the report is contained in
document A/C.5/71/L.16, section (c).
18/31

Agenda item 115 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contributions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/590/Add.1)
The Acting President: In paragraph 3 of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint Mr. Baudelaire Ndong Ella of Gabon
as a member of the Committee on Contributions for a
three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2017.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
appoint Mr. Baudelaire Ndong Ella as a member of the
Committee on Contributions for a three-year term of
office beginning on 1 January 2017?
16-46222

23/12/2016

It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 115.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 132, 133, 134, 137, 139, 141, 143 to 149 and 152.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Ms. Diana Lee of Singapore, to introduce in one
intervention the reports of the Fifth Committee before
the Assembly.
Ms. Lee (Singapore), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee: I have the honour today to introduce to the
General Assembly the reports of the Fifth Committee.
The Fifth Committee met from 29 September to
23 December and held 23 plenary meetings and numerous
rounds of informal consultations.
I would like to draw the Assembly’s attention to the
fact that several Fifth Committee reports have already
been considered by the General Assembly, at its 23rd,
35th, 45th, 48th and 51st plenary meetings, held on the
following agenda items: agenda item 138, “Scale of
assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the
United Nations”, specifically on Article 19; agenda item
135, “Programme planning”; agenda item 144, “Report
on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services”; agenda item 133, “Review of the efficiency
of the administrative and financial functioning of the
United Nations”; agenda item 115, “Appointments to fill
vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments”;
and agenda item 139, “Human resources management”,
in particular on the implementation of the new common
system compensation package in the United Nations
Secretariat.
I shall now present additional reports of the Fifth
Committee on the following items.
On sub-item (b) of agenda item 115, entitled
“Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contributions”, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly, in paragraph 3 of its report contained
in document A/71/590/Add.1, the appointment of
Mr. Baudelaire Ndong Ella of Gabon as a member of
the Committee on Contributions for a three-year term of
office beginning on 1 January 2017.

A/71/PV.68

On agenda 132, entitled “Financial reports and
audited financial statements, and reports of the Board
of Auditors”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 7 of its report contained in
document A/71/702, the adoption of a draft resolution
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
On agenda 137, entitled “Pattern of conferences”,
the Committee recommends to the General Assembly,
in paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/71/706, the adoption of a draft resolution adopted by
the Committee without a vote.
On agenda 139, entitled “Human resources
management”, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained
in document A/71/638/Add.1, the adoption of a draft
resolution adopted by the Committee without a vote.
On agenda item 141, entitled “United Nations
common system”, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained
in document A/71/709, the adoption of one draft
resolution that was adopted by the Committee without
a vote.
On agenda item 142, entitled “United Nations pension
system”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/71/701, the adoption of one draft resolution
that was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
On agenda item 145, entitled “Administration
of justice at the United Nations”, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly, in paragraph
6 of its report contained in document A/71/707, the
adoption of one draft resolution that was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
On agenda item 146, entitled “Financing of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994”;
agenda item 147, entitled “Financing of the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991”; and agenda item 148, entitled “Financing
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal

16-4622219/31

A/71/PV.68

Tribunals”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of the respective reports
contained in documents A/71/703 to A/71/705, the
adoption of the related draft resolution that was adopted
by the Committee without a vote.
On agenda item 149, entitled “Administrative and
budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations”, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report
contained in document A/71/708, the adoption of one
draft resolution that was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
On agenda item 152, entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire”, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly, in paragraph
6 of its report contained in document A/71/715, the
adoption of one draft resolution that was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
On agenda item 134, entitled “Proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017”, in
document A/71/716, the Committee considered two
draft resolutions in paragraph 65 of its report. In draft
resolution I, entitled “Special subjects relating to the
programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017”, oral
amendments were introduced as follows.
On section XV, the representative of Burkina Faso,
on behalf of the Group of African States, introduced a
first amendment. A recorded vote on the amendment
was requested by the representative of Argentina, in
which the Committee voted not to include the proposed
amendment. A second amendment was introduced by
the representative of Israel, followed by a request for a
recorded vote on the amendment by the representative
of Thailand on behalf of the Group of 77 and China,
in which the Committee voted not to include the
proposed amendment.
On section XIX, the representative of Cuba
introduced an oral amendment. A recorded vote on
the amendment was requested by the representative of
Slovakia on behalf of the States members of the European
Union, in which the Committee voted not to include the
oral amendment. The Committee subsequently adopted
the draft resolution as a whole without a vote.
The Committee, in paragraph 65 of document
A/C.5/71/L.20, recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of the draft resolution contained in document
A/C.5/71/L.19. In the same paragraph, the Committee
20/31

23/12/2016

also recommends to the Assembly the adoption of the
revised budget appropriations for the biennium 20162017, the revised income estimates for the biennium
2016-2017 and the financing of the appropriations
for the year 2017. Under the same agenda item, the
Committee provides advice to the General Assembly on
the programme budget implications should it adopt five
draft resolutions. The reports of the Fifth Committee on
those statements are issued in documents A/71/710 to
A/71/714.
Finally, under agenda item 133, entitled “Review
of the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, in paragraph 8 of its
report contained in document A/71/717, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of
a draft resolution on the proposed programme budget
outline for the biennium 2018-2019. Also, in paragraph
9 of the same report, the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of a draft decision
relating to questions deferred for future consideration,
which the Committee adopted without a vote.
I thank delegations for their cooperation and assure
them that changes made during the 23rd formal meeting
of the Fifth Committee will be reflected in the draft
resolutions and reports, which will be issued shortly.
Before I conclude, please allow me to thank the Chair
of the Fifth Committee, Ambassador Inga Rhonda King,
for the dedicated way by which she guided us through
our difficult work, as well as my fellow colleagues in the
Bureau, with whom we have always had robust, frank
and amusing exchanges.
The Acting President: I thank the Rapporteur of
the Fifth Committee.
Before proceeding further, I would like to emphasize
to representatives that, as the Fifth Committee has just
finished its work, the reports are available in English
only. It is my understanding that they will be issued in
all languages as soon as possible. I thank the Assembly
for its understanding.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth Committee,
which are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Fifth
16-46222

23/12/2016

A/71/PV.68

Committee have been made clear in the Committee
and are reflected in the relevant official records. May
I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of decision
34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote
only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in plenary
meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in plenary
meeting is different from its vote in the Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, also in accordance
with decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance. This means that where
recorded votes were taken, we will do the same. I should
also hope that we will proceed to adopt without a vote
those recommendations that were adopted without a vote
in the Committee.
Agenda item 132
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/702)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/71/L.7.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution
(resolution 71/261).

A/C.5/71/L.7

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 132.

Agenda item 137
Pattern of conferences
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/706)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/71/L.12.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution A/C.5/71/L.12
(resolution 71/262).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 137.
Agenda item 139 (continued)
Human resources management
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/638/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/71/L.11.
We will now take action on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution A/C.5/71/L.11
(resolution 71/263).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 139.
Agenda item 141
United Nations common system
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/709)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/71/L.15.

16-4622221/31

A/71/PV.68

23/12/2016

We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution A/C.5/71/L.15
(resolution 71/264).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 141.

United Nations pension system
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/701)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended in paragraph 6 of
the report. The text of the draft resolution, for the time
being, is contained in document A/C.5/71/L.6.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 142.
Agenda 145
Administration of justice at the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/707)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/71/L.13.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution A/C.5/71/L.13
(resolution 71/266).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 145.
22/31

Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/705)

Agenda item 142

Draft resolution A/C.5/71/L.6
(resolution 71/265).

Agenda item 146

The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/71/L.10.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution A/C.5/71/L.10
(resolution 71/267).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 146.
Agenda item 147
Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/703)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/71/L.8.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution A/C.5/71/L.8
(resolution 71/268).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 147.
16-46222

23/12/2016

A/71/PV.68

Agenda item 148

Agenda item 152

Financing of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals

Financing of the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/704)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/71/L.9.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution A/C.5/71/L.9
(resolution 71/269).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 148.

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/715)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/71/L.18.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
Draft resolution A/C.5/71/L.18
(resolution 71/271).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 152.
Agenda item 134
Programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017

Agenda item 149

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/716)

Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/708)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/71/L.14.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Review of the United Nations Office to the
African Union”. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

The Acting President: In connection with agenda
item 134, the report of the Fifth Committee, for the time
being, is contained in document A/C.5/71/L.20.
The Assembly has before it two draft resolutions
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 65
of its report, and a draft decision recommended by the
Committee in paragraph 66 of the same report.
The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
resolution I, entitled “Special subjects relating to the
programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017”.
I now give the floor to the representative of Burkina
Faso to introduce a draft amendment.

adopted

Ms. Fofana (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
take the floor on behalf of the Group of African States
to propose a draft amendment as paragraph 2 bis of
section XV of draft resolution I. It reads as follows:

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 149.

“Decides not to allocate budgetary resources for
the implementation of resolution 32/2 of the Human
Rights Council, on protection against violence and
discrimination based on sexual orientation and
gender identity”.

Draft resolution A/C.5/71/L.14
(resolution 71/270).

was

16-4622223/31

A/71/PV.68

The Acting President: The representative of
Burkina Faso has proposed an oral amendment to
section XV of draft resolution I. In accordance with
rule 90 of the rules of procedure, the Assembly shall
first take a decision on the draft amendment submitted
by the representative of Burkina Faso on behalf of the
Group of African States.
I now call on the representative of Argentina, who
wishes to speak in explanation of vote before the voting.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I do
not wish to prolong our deliberations at this very late
hour. However, in the light of the draft amendment just
presented by the delegation of Burkina Faso, I should
like to speak on behalf of Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, El Salvador, Mexico, Uruguay and my own
country, Argentina.
The representative of Burkina Faso has just put
forward a draft amendment to reopen an issue that was
duly decided upon by the Human Rights Council, the
Third Committee, the Fifth Committee and the General
Assembly itself. Our countries would like to reiterate
their serious concern about the draft amendment — the
purpose of which is not to approve additional resources
related to resolution 32/2 of the Human Rights
Council — given the precedent set by this type of
amendment with regard to the traditional approach
of the Organization to budget-related questions. An
identical draft amendment was rejected by the Fifth
Committee a few hours ago by the vast majority of
Member States, including representatives from the
five regional groups. That rejection is a recognition of
the integrity and independence of the Human Rights
Council to adopt and implement resolution 32/2. The
language proposed would seriously affect the the work
of the independent expert established by the Human
Rights Council, who has already been appointed
and has taken up his functions. That mandate was
established through a resolution adopted legitimately
by the Human Rights Council within the framework of
its prerogatives.
For those reasons, as the primary sponsors of
resolution 32/2 in Geneva, our eight countries request a
recorded vote on the draft amendment.
Before concluding, let me reiterate our concern
about the implications that the draft proposal introduced
by the delegation of Burkina Faso, should it be adopted,
might have on the integrity and independence of the
budget process and on the United Nations system for
24/31

23/12/2016

the protection and promotion of human rights. Our
eight countries will therefore vote against the draft
amendment. We respectfully invite other delegations to
vote along the same lines.
The Acting President: I should like to remind
members that, in accordance with Article 18 of the
Charter of the United Nations and rule 83 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly, decisions of the
General Assembly on amendments to proposals relating
to important questions, and on parts of such proposals
put to the vote separately, shall be made by a two-thirds
majority of the members present and voting. We will
therefore proceed on that basis.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea,
Guyana, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho,
Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Namibia, Nauru,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Togo, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
16-46222

23/12/2016

A/71/PV.68

Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Viet Nam

made by the representative of Cuba with respect to the
voting on the draft amendment.

Abstaining:
Barbados, Bhutan, Guatemala, Honduras, India,
Jamaica, Liberia, Myanmar, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Philippines, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Singapore, Trinidad and
Tobago

In favour:
Australia, Canada, Guatemala, Israel, Marshall
Islands, Palau, United States of America

The draft amendment to draft resolution I was
rejected by 81 votes to 65, with 15 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Estonia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote against.]
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel to introduce a draft amendment.
Mr. Amer (Israel): Israel proposes a draft
amendment to be included as an operative paragraph
in section XV of draft resolution I. The text, which is
the same as presented in the draft resolution during the
informal consultations, reads as follows:
“Decides not to approve any resources
stemming from the adoption of resolution 31/36 by
the Human Rights Council”.
The Acting President: The representative of Israel
has submitted an oral amendment to section XV of draft
resolution I. In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of
procedure, the Assembly will now take a decision on the
amendment submitted by the representative of Israel.
I shall first give the floor to members who wish to
speak in explanation of vote before the voting.
Mr. González Sánchez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation does not believe it is appropriate to
undermine the funding for draft resolution I. It is crucial
to have a database of all companies taking part in the
activities detailed in the report. We are waiting for
that database to be updated and submitted to us in the
report to the Human Rights Council at its thirty-fourth
session. We do not support the draft oral amendment
put forward by Israel and will therefore vote against it.
Mr. Adam (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the Group of Arab States, we support the statement

The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

Against:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina,
Brazil,
Brunei
Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Germany, Greece, Guinea, Guyana,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe

16-4622225/31

A/71/PV.68

23/12/2016

Abstaining:
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire,
Georgia, Ghana, Honduras
The draft amendment to draft resolution I was
rejected by 148 votes to 7, with 6 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Colombia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote against.]
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba to introduce a draft amendment.
Mr. González Sánchez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I refer to draft resolution I, section XIX, “Estimates
in respect of special political missions, good offices
and other political initiatives authorized by the General
Assembly and/or the Security Council”.
My delegation would like to reiterate its principled
position over the past 10 years. My delegation believes
there is no intergovernmental agreement negotiated
by Member States with regard to the definition of the
concept of the responsibilility to protect. We also repeat
what we said in the Committee during the question-andanswer segment with the Secretariat, namely, that it
point us to a General Assembly resolution endorsing
the principle of the responsibility to protect. No such
resolution was proffered.
Resources related to the Special Adviser on the
Responsibility to Protect seem to be conflated with those
requested for the Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, the role of which has the full support of my
delegation as part of our consistent principled position
against genocide. The proposed amendment does not
seek to undermine either the functions or resources for
the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.
Cuba would like to introduce the following draft
amendments to section XIX of draft resolution I.
The first preambular paragraph should read
as follows:
“Recalling that the General Assembly has
not decided on the concept of responsibility to
protect, its scope, implications and possible ways
of implementation”.
The second
readas follows:

preambular

paragraph

should

“Noting that the estimates of thematic
cluster I comprise narratives, functions, expected
accomplishments, indicators of achievements,
26/31

outputs and other information related to the
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the
Responsibility to Protect”.
Operative paragraph 1 should read as follows:
“Decides to delete the narratives, functions,
expected
accomplishments,
indicators
of
achievement, outputs and other information related
to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on the Responsibility to Protect as
contained in the strategic framework and the
related narratives of the Office of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide”.
Operative paragraph 2 should read as follows:
“Requests the Secretary-General to issue a
corrigendum to his report contained in document
A/71/365/Add.1”.
In conclusion, we ask that delegations vote in
favour of the draft amendments I have just introduced.
The Acting President: The representative of Cuba
has submitted an oral amendment to section XIX of
draft resolution I.
In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure,
the Assembly will now take a decision on the amendment
submitted by the representative of Cuba.
I shall first give the floor to members who wish to
speak in explanation of vote before the voting.
Mr. Yazdani (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation asked for the floor to explain its vote on the
draft amendment to section XIX of draft resolution I.
Iran has always supported the activities of the
United Nations in all its areas of work, provided that
they are in accordance with the rules and regulations
of the Organization and remain within the purview of
international law and the United Nations. Although
Iran supports the function of the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, in
the view of my delegation, the issue of the responsibility
to protect, including its definition, is still under the
consideration of the General Assembly. My delegation
therefore finds it unacceptable that the limited financial
resources of the Organization be allocated to the funding
of posts for which there is no mandated definition. For
those reasons, my delegation will vote in favour of the
draft amendment proposed by the Cuban delegation.
16-46222

23/12/2016

Mr. Escoto (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation requested the floor to explain its vote with
regard to the draft amendment put forward by the
representative of Cuba in connection with section XIX
of draft resolution I, regarding estimates in respect
of special political missions, good offices and other
political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly
and/or the Security Council.
Any definition of the responsibility to protect must
be based on a clear recognition of the principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference
in the internal affairs of States. Since 2012, resources
for the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect
have been completely combined with the resources of
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide. The budgetary estimates and
the narratives related to the Special Adviser on the
Responsibility to Protect should be eliminated and put
up for consideration, and the General Assembly should
take a decision on its concept and implementation, the
scope of its application and other related matters.

A/71/PV.68

Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay

For that reason, my delegation will support the
draft amendment proposed by Cuba, and we urge other
members to do the same.

Abstaining:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad,
China, Colombia, Congo, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ethiopia, Guyana, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lesotho, Libya, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Myanmar, Oman, Philippines, Qatar,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania

The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested on the draft amendment to section XIX of
draft resolution I.

The draft amendment to section XIX of draft
resolution I was rejected by 26 votes to 84, with
45 abstentions.

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Angola, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Burundi, Comoros, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Guinea, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Mauritius,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Benin,
Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,

The Acting President: The Assembly will next
take a decision on draft resolution I, entitled “Special
subjects relating to the programme budget for the
biennium 2016-2017”. The Fifth Committee adopted
draft resolution I without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 71/272).
The Acting President: I shall now give the floor
to members who wish to speak in explanation of vote
after the voting.
Ms. Fofana (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Group of African States, I would like to
thank the 65 delegations that voted in favour of the draft
amendment proposed by the African Group to section
XV of draft resolution I, concerning the budgetary
implications for the implementation of resolution 32/2
of the Human Rights Council, on protection against
violence and discrimination based on sexual orientation
or gender identity. By doing so, they have affirmed the

16-4622227/31

A/71/PV.68

principles that guide the work of the Organization and
affirmed respect for international law.
While we respect the results of the voting,
we nonetheless regret the adoption of budgetary
implications that allow the designated independent
expert to coordinate actions around the ideas of sexual
orientation and gender identity, which do not have a
legal basis in international law. That implementation
may further polarize Member States.
The African Group therefore expresses its grave
concern with regard to the activities stipulated by
the independent expert and the established budget.
We reiterate the position expressed in this Hall
of disassociating ourselves from the independent
expert’s mandate, as set out in resolution 32/2 of
the Human Rights Council, and we reserve the right
to take the necessary steps to ensure respect for our
national legislation.
Mr. Ry Tuy (Cambodia): My delegation wishes
to deliver a brief statement under agenda item 134
following the adoption of resolution 71/272, section II,
on the request for a subvention to the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC) for the
period from 1 January to 31 December 2017.
On behalf of the Royal Government of Cambodia,
I express my appreciation for the good work advocated
by the Secretary-General and his team. I thank the
Principal Donor Group of Countries for their voluntary
contributions towards the financial needs of the Courts
since the commencement of operations in the Chambers
in 2006.
The year 2016 marks 10 years since the
establishment of the Extraordinary Chambers put to
trial the top Khmer Rouge leaders most responsible for
the crimes committed from 1975 to 1979. In case 001,
convict Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch, and in case 002/01,
convicts Nuon Chea, former Deputy Secretary of the
Communist Party of Kampuchea, and Khieu Samphan,
former Head of State of Democratic Kampuchea, were
sentenced to life imprisonment on 3 February 2012 and
7 August 2014, respectively.
On 23 November 2016, the Supreme Court Chamber
of the ECCC pronounced judgments on the appeals
submitted by the convicts of case 002/01, Nuon Chea
and Khieu Samphan, for murderous crimes committed
against humanity, persecutions of the people of
Cambodia and for forced evacuation on 17 April 1975.
28/31

23/12/2016

The work of the Courts is still continuing with
regard to case 002/02 and case 003, as well as case
004, in order to try the senior leaders and those most
responsible for the crimes committed against the
Cambodian people wherein 1.7 million people were
executed, starved to death, tortured or put to death by
forced labour between 17 April 1975 to 6 January 1979.
By resolution 69/274, of 24 April 2015, the SecretaryGeneral had been authorized to enter into commitments
on an amount not to exceed $12.1 million to supplement
the voluntary financial resources of the international
component from 1 January to 31 December 2015 by
broadening the donor base for funding future activities
of the ECCC, while all member States have appealed
to provide voluntary support for both the international
component and national component of the ECCC.
It should be well noted that the ECCC had its
share of adverse cash positions, which resulted in the
worsening of the financial situation. It should be taken
into account that the ECCC is accomplishing its work
most appropriately, compared to other international and
hybrid courts.
Consistent with the agreement, the Government of
Cambodia is continuing with the work in the Courts in
order to avoid disruption of the judicial proceedings. I
wish to welcome the adoption of the resolution that was
submitted to the Assembly today.
Since 2013, the ECCC has been experiencing
a shortfall of funds both for the international
component and the national component. It has been
estimated that the total funds required for 2017 for the
international component and the national component
will be $30.13 million, that is $23.76 million for the
international component and $6.47 million for the
national component. The Government of Cambodia
will contribute $4.15 million toward the ECCC as in
previous years, that is $1.65 million for operational
costs and $2.5 million to meet the salaries of the
national staff for six months of 2017.
Hence, in order to pay the salaries of the national
staff for the next six months, we request that the
United Nations raise funds from major donors and new
potential donors. I also take this opportunity to ask
for the support of our principal donors and group of
interested States. We ask that they come forward to fill
in for the payment of salaries of the national staff for
the remaining six months of 2017.
16-46222

23/12/2016

In conclusion, I wish to add that my Government
wishes to maintain the Court’s current pace and is
committed to working closely with the United Nations
and all stakeholders to ensure that the ECCC will
complete the remaining work by the target date, as the
defendants are all ageing.
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017”,
the text of which, for the time being, is contained in
document A/C.5/71/L.20. The Fifth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 71/273).
The Acting President: We now turn to the draft
decision recommended in paragraph 66 of the report.
The draft decision is entitled “United Nations
Office for Partnerships”. The Fifth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 71/544).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, who wishes
to speak in explanation of vote.

A/71/PV.68

Beirut for over eight years. The Lebanese Embassy in
Damascus has been open for the same period. Mr. RødLarsen showed bias towards Israel in his report by
deliberately overlooking the fact that Israel failed to
implement any of the obligations set forth in resolution
1559 (2004), in particular as it relates to withdrawal
from the occupied territories.
My delegation joined the consensus on draft
resolution II, on the programme budget for 2016-2017.
However, in relation to section XV of the draft resolution,
regarding the revised estimates on the resolutions and
decisions of the Human Rights Council, my delegation
has reservations concerning the allocation of financial
resources for Human Rights Council resolutions 31/17
and 33/23, on the situation of human rights in Syria.
Our position regarding such a politicized resolution is
well known.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 134.
Agenda item 133 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations

Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic):
My delegation voted in favour of the draft amendment
to section XIX of draft resolution I, in respect of
special political missions. However, my delegation has
reservations about the allocation of financial resources
for the special representative to implement Security
Council resolution 1559 (2004).

The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report and a draft decision
recommended in paragraph 9 of the same report.

In that respect, we would like to state that Mr. Terje
Rød-Larsen, United Nations Special Representative for
the implementation of Security Council Resolution 1559
(2004), has been acting outside the mandate entrusted
to him by the Security Council. Mr. Brahimi, the United
Nations Special Envoy to Syria, does not posses the
qualities stated in paragraph 12 of resolution 63/261.
Until he resigned on 31 May 2015, he overstepped
his mandate pursuant to resolution 1559 (2004), as
he has been involved in bilateral relations between
the two sovereign countries of Syria and Lebanon.
That was stated in his report regarding establishing
diplomatic relations between Syria and Lebanon and
the demarcation of borders.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/274).

Mr. Rød-Larsen continues to stress that matter and
did not notice that a Syrian Embassy had been open in

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/717)

The Assembly will take action on the draft
resolution, entitled “Proposed programme budget
outline for the biennium 2018-2019”, the text of
which, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/71/L.17. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on the draft decision entitled “Questions
deferred for future consideration”, the text of which, for
the time being, is contained in document A/C.5/71/L.21.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 71/545).

16-4622229/31

A/71/PV.68

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 133.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
(l) Appointment of the judges of the United Nations
Dispute Tribunal
The Acting President: Members will recall that the
Secretary-General, in his report circulated in document
A/71/163, recommended that the General Assembly
approve the extension of the three ad litem judge
positions for a period of 12 months, from 1 January
to 31 December 2017, in order to allow the Tribunal to
keep abreast of its caseload.
Members will also recall that, by its resolution
71/266, of 23 December 2016, the General Assembly
decided, inter alia, to extend the three ad litem judge
positions and the current incumbent judges for one year,
from 1 January to 31 December 2017, whose current
terms of office are about to expire. The three ad litem
judges whose terms expire on 31 December 2016 are
Judge Rowan Downing of Australia, Judge Alessandra
Greceanu of Romania and Judge Nkemdilim Amelia
Izuako of Nigeria.
Pursuant to resolution 71/266, the General
Assembly will now proceed to the extension of the
terms of the three ad litem judges for the period of
1 January to 31 December 2017.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to extend
the terms of office of the three ad litem judges — Judge
Rowan Downing of Australia, Judge Alessandra
Greceanu of Romania and Judge Nkemdilim
Amelia Izuako of Nigeria — from 1 January to
31 December 2017?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (l) of agenda item 115?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The Acting President: With regard to the
programme of work of the General Assembly, apart
from organizational matters and items that may have to
be considered by operation of the rules of procedure of
the Assembly, and bearing in mind that consideration
30/31

23/12/2016

and action have already been taken by the Assembly
on a majority of items thus far, I should like to inform
members that the following items on the agenda remain
open for consideration during the seventy-first session
of the General Assembly: agenda items 9 to 15, 19, 19
(h), 20, 28 to 35, 37, 38, 40 to 46, 51, 61, 62, 62 (a) and
(b), 65, 65 (a), 66, 68, 68 (b), 69, 69 (a) to (d), 73, 73 (a),
87, 110 to 112, 114, 114 (a), 115, 115 (b), (g), (h), (i), (j)
and (k), 116 to 125, 126, 126 (b), (c), (e) to (h), (j), (k),
(m), (p), (q), (s), (t) and (z) and 127 to 164.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to take note
of those agenda items that remain open for consideration
during the seventy-first session of the Assembly?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Before concluding, I wish
to announce that this is the last meeting of the General
Assembly for Ms. Antonina Poliakova, Meeting
Services Assistant in the General Assembly Affairs
Branch of the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management. Ms. Poliakova has worked at
the United Nations for more than 17 years. In the past few
years, she has been responsible for the list of speakers
in the plenary of the General Assembly. Her ability to
manage that maddening task and her contribution to the
smooth conduct of Assembly meetings has been truly
significant. I ask the Assembly to give her a round of
applause in appreciation of her service. We wish her all
the best.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand): I have the honour to take
the floor on behalf of the Group of 77 and China for
one last time this year. As Chair and proud member of
this dynamic family of developing countries, I do so
with gratitude in my heart and confidence in the future
ahead. To say that this past year has been eventful and
demanding would be an understatement.
Throughout the seventy-first session, our resolve to
address the interests and needs of developing countries
has been repeatedly tested. Time and again, we have
been challenged by the sheer difficulty of building global
consensus on the critical issues we believe must move
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development forward.
For its part, Thailand was intent on fulfilling the
promise of the theme chosen for our chairmanship. We
aim to realize the 2030 Agenda by taking it from vision
to action. Negotiations this year — particularly in the
Second, Fifth and Third Committees — have been
taxing and complicated, but that was to be expected.
16-46222

23/12/2016

A/71/PV.68

We were transitioning this year into implementing the
2030 Agenda. At times, that meant redefining our path
in the context of a new agenda.

ensure a strong multilateral system that is responsive to
the critical needs of our people on the ground.

In the Second Committee, our notable collective
achievements include an agreement on the followup and review of the 2030 Agenda at the global level,
the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development of the United
Nations system, which successfully set the stage for
Member States to provide strategy guidance to the
United Nations development system, and a new urban
agenda — negotiated only once every 20 years. It was
also notable that the Group submitted its first resolution
on the promotion of international cooperation to combat
illicit financial flows to foster sustainable development.

The Group of 77 and China welcomes the successful
outcome of the long and difficult negotiations carried
out throughout the year by all of our competent experts,
who have devoted many, if not all, of their days and
nights to that effort. We also thank our partners for their
constructive commitment and goodwill throughout the
negotiations. We also express our appreciation to the
Committee Chairs for their exemplary leadership.

In the Fifth Committee, we successfully worked to
ensure adequate resources for the 2030 Agenda and the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the third International
Conference on Financing for Development. Difficult
and complex negotiations on issues related to human
rights management, construction and renovation
of United Nations property, revised estimates and,
finally, the budget outline for the biennium 2018-2019,
concluded an agreement just hours ago.
In the Third and other Committees, the Group of 77
and China have much to be hopeful for, and we express
our confidence in partners to continue to engage
constructively in the year to come. Where there is a
will to find compromise, there is always a way.
The United Nations is our United Nations. That
means that for developing and developed countries
alike, we only have ourselves to blame. We are
responsible for enabling the Organization to deliver to
our people on the interrelated pillars of development,
human rights and peace and security. The Group of 77
and China takes that to heart and relies on everyone to

(spoke in French)

Despite the differences of opinion and challenges
we encountered on the path to consensus this year, we
demonstrated yet again that we could succeed. That
success our confidence in our shared future — a future
that we hope for, as a community of nations, and that
we bequeath generations to come.
Finally, on my own behalf and on behalf of the
members of my team, I convey my deepest gratitude
and appreciation to the members of the Group of 77
and China. We thank them for their continued support
throughout our presidency. It has been a true honour for
the Kingdom of Thailand to promote the interests of the
countries of the South.
In conclusion, I wish to thank the President and
his team for their leadership and support throughout
the process. I also wish everyone happy holidays and a
happy new year. May we all return next year recharged
and revitalized, after a well-deserved rest, to resume
our work under the wise guidance of Ecuador. I wish
Mr. Horacio Sevilla Borja, Permanent Representative
of Ecuador, and his team success and courage in taking
over the functions as President of the Group of 77 and
China in 2017. With our firm commitment to support his
presidency next year, I wish Ecuador the best of luck.
The meeting rose at 11.55 p.m.

16-4622231/31
