5

ResolutiOl18 adopted on reporta of the Fint Committee

the Declaration of St. Petersburg of 1868, the Declaration of the Brussels Conference of 1874, the Conventions of The Hague Peace Conferences of 1899 and
1907, and the Geneva Protocol of 1925, to which the
majority of nations are still parties,
Considering that the use of nuclear and thermonuclear weapons would bring about indiscriminate
suffering and destruction to mankind and civilization
to an even greater extent than the use of those weapons
declared by the aforementioned international declarations and agreements to be contrary to the laws ·of
humanity and a crime _under international law,
Believing that the use of weapons of mass destruction, such as nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons, is
a direct negation of the high ideals and objectives which
the United Nations has been established to achieve
through the protection of succeeding generations from
the scourge of war: and through the preservation and
promotion of their cultures,
l. Declares that:
(a) The use of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons
is contrary to the spirit, letter and aims of the United
Nations and, as such, a direct violation of the Charter
of the United Nations;
( b) The use of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons
would exceed even the scope of war and cause indiscriminate suffering and destruction to mankind and
civilization and, as such, is contrary to the rules of
international law and to the laws of humanity ;
(e) The use of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons
is a war directed not against an enemy or enemies alone
but also against mankind in general, since the peoples
of the world not involved in such a war will be subjected to all the evils generated by the use of such weapons;
( d) Any State using nuclear and thermo-nuclear
weapons is to be considered as violating the Charter
of the United Nations, as acting contrary to the laws
of humanity and as committing a crime against mankind and civilization ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to consult the
Governments of Member States to ascertain their views
on the possibility of convening ·a special conference for
signing a colivention on the prohibition of the use of
nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons for war purposes
and to report on the results of such consultation to the
General Assembly at its--...seventeenth session.
1063rd plenary meeting,
24 November 1961.

1660 (XVI). Question of disarmament
The General Assnnbly,
W elcoming the agreement between the Govemments
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the
United States of America, as a result of negotiations
between them, that general and complete disarmament
should be accomplished, and their agreement on the
principles which should guide disarmament negotiations,
N oting that the two Govemments are desirous of
resuming disarmament negotiations in an appropriate
body, whose composition is yet to be agreed upon,
Considering it essential that these two principal
parties should agree to and accept a negotiating body,

Having regard to the success of negotiations between
these two parties resulting in the emergence of an
agreement on principles,
l. Urges the Governments of the Union oí Soviet
Socialist Republics and the United States of America
to reach agreement on the composition of a negotiating
body which both they and the rest of the world can
regard as satisfactory ;
2. E.xpresses the hope that such negotiations will be
started without delay and will lead to an agreed recommendation to the General Assembly;
3. Requests the Governments of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America to report to the General Assembly, before the
conclusion of its sixteenth session, on the results of
such negotiations.
1067th plenary meeting,
28 N ovember 1961.

1664 (XVI). Question of disarmament
The General Assembly,
Convinced that all measures should be taken that
could halt further n~clear weapons tests and prevent
the further spread of nuclear weapons,
Recognizing that the countries not possessing nuclear
weapons have a grave interest, and an important part
to fulfil, in the preparation and implementation of such
measures,
Believing that action taken by those countries will
facilitate agreement by the nuclear Powers to discontinue all nuclear tests and to prevent any increase in
the number of nuclear Powers,
Taking note of the suggestion that an inquiry be
made into the conditions under which countries not
possessing nuclear weapons might be willing to enter
into specific undertakings to refrain from manufacturing or otherwise acquiring such weapons and to refuse
to receive, in the future, nuclear weapons in their ter~
ritories on behalf of any other country,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to make such an
inquiry as soon as possible and to submit a report on
its results to the Disarmament Commission not later
than 1 April 1962 ;
2. Requests the Disannament Commission to take
such further measures as appear to be warranted in the
light of that report;
3. Call.r ,i.pon the nuclear Powers to extend their
fullest co-pperation and assistance with regard to the
implementation of the present resolution.
1070th plenary meeting,
4 December 1961.

1665 (XVI). Prevention of the -wider diNemina•
tion of nuclear weapons
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1380 (XIV) of 20 November 1959 and 1576 (XV) of 20 becember 1960,
Convinced that an increase in the number of States
possessing nuclear weapons is growing more imminent
and threatens to extend and intensif y the arms race and

General Assembly-S1:stteenth Session

6

to increase the difficulties of avoiding war and of establishing international peace and security based on the
rule of law,
Believing in the necessity of an international agreement, subject to inspection and control, whereby the
states producing nuclear weapons would refrain from
relinquishing control of such weapons to any nation not
possessing them and whereby states not possessing such
weapons would refrain from manufacturing them,
l. Calls upan all States, and in particular upon the
States at present possessi;:ig nuclear weapons, to use
their best endeavours to secure the conclusion of an
international agreement containing provisions under
which the nuclear States would undertake to refrain
from relinquishing control of nuclear weapons and from
transmitting the information necessary for their manufacture to States not possessing such weapons, and
provisions under whi.ch States not possessing nuclear
weapons would undertake not to manufacture or otherwise acquire control of such weapons;
2. Urges all States to co-operate to those ends.

1070th plenary meeting,
4 December 1961.
1721 (XVI). International co-operation in the
peaceful uses of outer space
A

The General Assembly,
Recagnizing the common interest of mankind in
furthering the peaceful uses of outer space and the
urgent neeá to strengthen international co-operation
in this important field,
B<Jlieving that the exploration and use of outer space
should be only far the betterment of mankind and to
the benefit of States irrespective of the stage of their
economic or scientific development,
l. Cammends to States for their guidance in the
exploration and use of outer space the following principies:
(a) International law, including the Charter of the
United Nations, applies to outer space and celestial
bodies;
( b) Outer space and celestial bodies are free for
exploration and use by all States in conformity with
international law and are not subject to national appropriation ;
2. Invites the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to study and report on the legal problems
which may arise from the exploration and use of outer
space.
1085th plenary meeting,
20 December 1961.
B
The General Assembly,
Believing that the United Nations should provide
a focal point for international co-operation in the peaceful exploration and use of outer space,
l. Calls upan States launching objects into orbit or
beyond to furnish information promptly to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, through
the Secretary-General, for the registration of launchings;

2. Requests the Secretary-General to maintain a
public registry of the information furnished in accordance with paragraph 1 above;
3. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, in co-operation with the Secretary-General and making full use of the functions and resources
of the Secretariat:
(a) To maintain close contact with governmental
and non-governmental organizations concerned with
outer space matters;
( b) To provide far the exchange of such information relating to outer space activities as Governments
may supply on a voluntary basis, supplementing but not
duplicating existing technical and scientific exchanges;
(e) To assist in the study of measures for the promotion of international co-operation in outer space
activities;
4. Further requests the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space to report to the General Assembly
on the arrangements undertaken for the performance
of those functions and on such developments relating
to the peaceful uses of outer space as it considers significant.
1085th plenary meeting,
20 December 1961.

e
The General Assembly,
N oting with gratification the marked progress for
meteorological science and technology opened up by
the advances in outer space,
Convinced of the world-wide benefits to be derived
from international co-operation in weather research
and analysis,
l. Recommends to all Member States and to the
World Meteorological Organization and other appropriate specialized agencies the early and comprehensive
study, in the light of developments in outer space, of
measures:
(a) To advance the state of atmospheric science and
technology so as to provide greater knowledge of basic
physical forces affecting climate and the possibility of
large-scale weather modification ;
( b) To develop existing weather forecasting capabilities and to help Member States make effective use
of such capabilities through regional meteorological
centres;
2. Requests the World Meteorological Organization, consulting as appropriate with the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and
other specialized agencies and governmental and nongovernmental organizations, such as the International
Council of Scientific Unions, to submit a report to the
Governments of its Member States and to the Economic
and Social Council at its thirty-fourth session regarding appropriate organizational and financia! arrangements to achieve those ends, with a view to their
further consideration by the General Assembly at its
seventeenth session ;
3. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful uses
of Outer Space, as it deems appropriate, to review
that report and submit its comments and recommendations to the Economic and Social Council and to the
General Assembly.
1085th plenary meeting,
20 December 1961.
