A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/164
24 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 116 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/54/605/Add.2)]
54/164. Human rights and terrorism
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 the
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations2 and the International Covenants on Human Rights,3
Recalling the Declaration on the Occasion of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the United Nations,4
Recalling also the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on
Human Rights on 25 June 1993,5 in which the Conference reaffirmed that terrorism is indeed aimed at the
destruction of human rights, fundamental freedoms and democracy,
Recalling further its resolutions 48/122 of 20 December 1993, 49/185 of 23 December 1994, 50/186
of 22 December 1995 and 52/133 of 12 December 1997,

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3
4

See resolution 50/6.

5

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

00 26559

/...

A/RES/54/164
Page 2

Recalling in particular its resolution 52/133, in which it requested the Secretary-General to seek the
views of Member States on the implications of terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations, for the full
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling previous resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights, and taking note, in particular, of
resolution 1999/27 of 26 April 1999,6 as well as the relevant resolutions of the Subcommission on the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights,7
Alarmed that acts of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations aimed at the destruction of human
rights have continued despite national and international efforts,
Bearing in mind that the essential and most basic human right is the right to life,
Bearing in mind also that terrorism creates an environment that destroys the right of people to live in
freedom from fear,
Reiterating that all States have an obligation to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental
freedoms and that every individual should strive to secure their universal and effective recognition and
observance,
Seriously concerned about the gross violations of human rights perpetrated by terrorist groups,
Profoundly deploring the increasing number of innocent persons, including women, children and the
elderly, killed, massacred and maimed by terrorists in indiscriminate and random acts of violence and terror,
which cannot be justified under any circumstances,
Noting with great concern the growing connection between the terrorist groups and other criminal
organizations engaged in the illegal traffic in arms and drugs at the national and international levels, as well
as the consequent commission of serious crimes such as murder, extortion, kidnapping, assault, the taking
of hostages and robbery,
Emphasizing the importance of Member States taking appropriate steps to deny safe haven to those who
plan, finance or commit terrorist acts, by ensuring their apprehension and prosecution or extradition,
Mindful of the need to protect the human rights of and guarantees for the individual in accordance with
the relevant human rights principles and instruments, in particular the right to life,
Reaffirming that all measures to counter terrorism must be in strict conformity with the relevant
provisions of international law including international human rights standards,

6

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1999, Supplement No. 3 (E/1999/23), chap. II,
sect. A.

7

Formerly known as the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities.
/...

A/RES/54/164
Page 3

1.

Expresses its solidarity with the victims of terrorism;

2. Condemns the violations of the right to live free from fear and of the right to life, liberty and
security;
3. Reiterates its unequivocal condemnation of the acts, methods and practices of terrorism, in all its
forms and manifestations, as activities aimed at the destruction of human rights, fundamental freedoms and
democracy, threatening the territorial integrity and security of States, destabilizing legitimately constituted
Governments, undermining pluralistic civil society and having adverse consequences for the economic and
social development of States;
4. Calls upon States to take all necessary and effective measures in accordance with relevant
provisions of international law, including international human rights standards, to prevent, combat and
eliminate terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomever committed;
5. Urges the international community to enhance cooperation at the regional and international levels
in the fight against terrorism, in accordance with relevant international instruments, including those relating
to human rights, with the aim of its eradication;
6.

Condemns the incitement of ethnic hatred, violence and terrorism;

7. Commends those Governments that have communicated their views on the implications of terrorism
in response to the note verbale by the Secretary-General dated 16 August 1999;
8. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General,8 and requests him to continue to seek the views of
Member States on the implications of terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations, for the full enjoyment
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, with a view to incorporating them in his report;
9. Decides to consider this question at its fifty-sixth session, under the item entitled “Human rights
questions”.
83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999

8

A/54/439.
