S/PV.8738

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8738th meeting

Friday, 28 February 2020, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Ms. Morrison González
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Craft
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-05354 (E)
*2005354*

S/PV.8738

The situation in the Middle East

28/02/2020

yesterday, yesterday and today, without, as far as I am
informed, a solution having been found, I think that
all this creates an environment in which the risk of an
uncontrolled escalation, given the number of forces in
Idlib and surrounding areas, is something that cannot
be taken lightly.

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.

When I have been insisting on the need to stop
the fighting and for a ceasefire, I have therefore
been taking into account not only the humanitarian
consequences of the fighting — and of course any
escalation would inevitably have more desperate
humanitarian consequences — but also the enormous
risk that a potential escalation could in itself represent
a conflict of a different nature that could have a much
more tragic impact.

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

its

I would now like to ask Ms. DiCarlo to brief
the Council.

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, to whom I give
the floor.

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his presence and his remarks.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Syrian
Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in this meeting.

begin

The Secretary-General (spoke in French): If I
may be permitted, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo will brief the
Security Council on behalf of the Secretariat.
(spoke in English)
However, I would like to say a few words to express
my deep concern about what I believe is the changing
nature of the conflict in Idlib. The Council is well
aware of the desperate humanitarian situation in the
region, namely, following the most recent offensive. But
beyond the desperate humanitarian situation, I think
that it is important to acknowledge that the conflict
has changed in nature and we have witnessed a very
significant escalation in the past few days.
I want to take this opportunity to express my deep
gratitude to Ambassador Nebenzia of the Russian
Federation and Ambassador Sinirlioğlu of Turkey, who
have always made themselves available to me, not only
allowing the necessary contacts but also facilitating
other contacts with the two countries that have been
very useful in my commitment to follow the events
very closely.
Indeed, if one looks at what has happened in recent
days, knowing that there was a telephone conversation
between the Presidents of the Republic of Turkey and
of the Russian Federation this morning and a Russian
delegation in Ankara, which met the day before
2/16

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: The security situation has continued
to gravely deteriorate in and around Idlib. Let me recall
some of the key events.
In the past nine days, Syrian Government forces,
with the support of the Russian air force, have continued
to advance, taking a large swath of villages in southern
Idlib. Air strikes also continue in both front-line areas
and population centres far removed from the fighting.
During the same period, non-State armed groups
launched a counter-attack in eastern Idlib, retaking the
city of Saraqib, which they lost to Syrian Government
forces in recent weeks. That action cut off the Syrian
Government’s control of the strategic M5 highway.
Turkish forces reportedly played a supporting role in
the operation.
Delegations from the Russian Federation and
Turkey resumed their talks in Ankara from 26 February.
Those discussions have continued until today, along
with presidential contacts by telephone.
On 27 February, there were strikes on Turkish
troops inside Syria. The Turkish Minister of Defence
noted that 33 Turkish soldiers were killed and 32
wounded by strikes that Turkey has attributed to the
Syrian Government. Russian Ministry of Defence
officials confirmed that an unspecified number of
Turkish soldiers, who they said were co-located with
20-05354

28/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

non-State armed groups, had been hit by Syrian
Government shelling. Turkish Defense Ministry
officials have noted that after the strikes on Turkish
soldiers, Turkey targeted Syrian Government positions
with aircraft, weaponized drones and artillery. We
strongly urge Russia and Turkey to build upon their
previous agreements to secure a fresh ceasefire for
north-west Syria.
These latest developments are unfolding in the
context of a broader military escalation that was
already devastating for civilians in the north-west. For
months now, bombing and shelling by the Government
of Syria, supported by its allies, has continued in the
so-called de-escalation zone of Idlib. Strikes have been
launched on populated areas from both air and ground,
seemingly without regard for civilians.

S/PV. 8738

the parties that all military operations must respect the
rules of international humanitarian law. If such horrific
acts and tactics persist despite global outrage, is it
largely because their authors do not fear accountability
and justice?
Civilians in Idlib are living under daily threat and
terror, seeking refuge from airstrikes and volleys of
shells and mortar rounds. They are not asking for a
pause in the fighting. They are asking for an end to the
killing. We must all assume our responsibility to do all
we can to stop this violence.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council wishing to make statements.

Nearly a million people have been displaced since
early December, many multiple times, including more
than 560,000 children. They are fleeing north, away
from the intensifying aerial and ground bombardment
and into ever-shrinking areas where they still hope to
find relative safety.

Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): We welcome the
attendance and briefing by the Secretary-General today
and, of course, by Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo.
We share the Secretary-General’s concern at the gravity
of the situation and the real risk of escalation and echo
his call for an immediate ceasefire.

The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has verified that at
least 1,750 civilians have been killed since last April.
The actual number is probably higher. A total of 351
civilians have been killed in the last two months alone.
While the majority of those civilian deaths — 94 per
cent — have occurred in opposition-held areas exposed
to bombardment by pro-Government forces, 6 per
cent occurred in Government-held areas. This serves
as a reminder that Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which is
designated by the Council as a terrorist organization,
and other non-State armed groups have also struck
populated areas indiscriminately. Civilians are being
killed in camps for internally displaced persons,
schools and hospitals. This is happening in plain sight,
night and day, day in and day out. Hospitals destroyed,
schools destroyed, people’s lives destroyed, and it is
happening under our watch.

The Council has met so often over the past few
weeks to express its horror at the humanitarian
catastrophe unfolding in Idlib. Indeed, we met only
yesterday to discuss the suffering of the Syrian people,
caused by the merciless and disproportionate campaign
being waged by the Syrian regime and its Russian
backers — the 948,000 people displaced in the last
three months, the men, women and children living in
tents in the open air, the children literally freezing to
death and killed in attacks on hospitals, schools and
makeshift camps. We called in the name of humanity
for those waging this offensive immediately to cease
hostilities. Yesterday we warned of the recklessness
and brutality of the Syrian and Russian offensive and
the risk that they could escalate conflict further.

We continue to come before the Council with an
ever-growing record of destruction and atrocity. The
Secretary-General has consistently expressed alarm at
the dangerous escalation in north-west Syria.
The United Nations has countless times reminded
all parties that any attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure are simply unacceptable. We have
repeatedly called for a ceasefire. We have reaffirmed to

It is therefore with deep concern and regret that
because of those reckless and reprehensible attacks
on Turkish positions only hours after the conclusion
of yesterday’s meeting, it has been necessary to call
another meeting today. But meet we must. As members
of the Council, we all have a duty, under the United
Nations Charter, to take primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security and
therefore to seek to prevent further escalation of what
is already a dangerous and fraught situation. It is clear
that the only way forward is an immediate cessation of

20-053543/16

S/PV.8738

The situation in the Middle East

28/02/2020

hostilities and provision of humanitarian relief. I hope
that all members of the Council will agree with that
today.

Those attacks were wholly unjustified, senseless and
barbaric. Our deepest sympathies are with the loved
ones of the 33 Turkish soldiers who were killed.

Let me say that we were shocked and appalled to
hear of the tragic deaths of at least 33 Turkish soldiers
as a result of those attacks yesterday. We condemn
those attacks, and we express our deepest condolences
to the Turkish Government and people, with whom we
stand in solidarity as allies today.

In the days ahead, the commitment of the United
States to our NATO ally Turkey will not waver. Turkey
has our full support to respond in self-defence to the
unjustified attacks on Turkish observation posts that
resulted in the deaths of their own forces. We have now
seen Russia and the Al-Assad regime violate Astana
ceasefire agreements on three separate occasions: first,
in eastern Ghouta, then in Dar’a and, finally, in Idlib.
This attack should serve as the final nail in the Astana
format coffin. It is a format broken beyond all repair,
and we cannot return to it. We cannot entrust it with the
vital work of establishing a new ceasefire.

We are gravely concerned about the impact on
civilians of any further escalation in hostilities. The
bombing, shelling and fighting not only directly
cause civilian suffering, but they also hamper the
aid effort, magnifying the scale of this disaster. It is
the civilians, in desperate need of food, water, health
care and assistance to survive the cold of winter, who
suffer the most. It is vital that the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners continue to be able to deliver
cross-border aid and that humanitarian and medical
actors are able to provide assistance to all those in need
in the north-west in safety.
As we have said before, it is clear that the Astana
format is not capable of achieving a lasting cease-fire.
The fatal flaw in the Astana format is Russia’s uncritical
support for the Syrian regime and its continued disregard
for previously agreed ceasefires and agreements, as
well as its disregard for international humanitarian
law and the fate of Syria’s people. We must therefore
support the United Nations and Special Envoy Pedersen
in securing a ceasefire in north-west Syria, in close
consultation with the relevant parties and the Security
Council. We call on all Member States to work with and
support the United Nations in achieving this goal.

With that in mind, the United States calls for an
immediate, durable and verifiable ceasefire in northwestern Syria. As Secretary Pompeo has stated, a
permanent ceasefire is the answer to this conflict. We
call for the Russian Federation to immediately ground
its warplanes, and we call for all Syrian forces and
their Russian backers to withdraw to the ceasefire lines
first established in 2018. As President Trump has made
clear, the Al-Assad regime, Russia and Iran must halt
their offensive before more innocent civilians are killed
and displaced. To that end, we also urge the SecretaryGeneral to do everything in his power to broker a
ceasefire, as the United Nations must play a central,
active role if we are to avoid even greater escalation.

Mrs. Craft (United States of America): The United
States is not here today to listen and discuss. We are
here to speak directly and without qualification.

Today’s meeting is, of course, about the reckless
and serious risk that the Al-Assad regime and Russia’s
offensive places on the security of a NATO ally, but it
is not only about that. We sat in this Chamber yesterday
(see S/PV.8734) and heard the stories of the people of
Idlib, whose daily existence has been reduced to the
simple task of survival. Amid the Russian airstrikes,
the chill of the Syrian winter and the pangs of unending
hunger, the Syrian people are desperate for aid; they are
begging for relief and they are praying for deliverance.
That is just enough. I said yesterday that each country
represented here has a choice to make. It is a choice
we are confronted with again today. So I am going to
ask again: Are we going to sit back and watch? Are we
going to remain silent, or will we deliver? How many
more babies have to freeze to death before we raise our
voices and say, “Enough”?

The United States condemns in the strongest
possible terms yesterday’s attacks on Turkish troops.

And so, this is the message of the Trump
administration today. To the relentless violence against

Responding to Syria’s and Russia’s increased
offensive against the Syrian people, Foreign Secretary
Dominic Raab said today that: “There is no justification
for such blatant disregard for international law or basic
human decency”.
Syria and Russia must immediately turn off this
offensive. Russia should prioritize the Syrian people
and the safety of the region over the interests of the
murderous cabal at the heart of this conflict.

4/16

20-05354

28/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

innocent women, children and men; to the obstruction
of life-saving humanitarian assistance; and to the
embrace of unforgivable cruelty toward the Syrian
people, we say: “Enough. Simply enough.”
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Secretary-General for his presence among
us and, above all, for his tireless commitment. I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
The Council met yesterday on the humanitarian
situation in Syria, in particular in Idlib (see S/PV.8734).
Today is our sixth meeting on Syria this month. The
situation is serious. The escalation is happening. It is
urgent to put an end to the offensive of the regime,
supported by Russia, in Idlib.
France is extremely concerned about the recent
developments that took place in Idlib yesterday.
The French Minister for Foreign Affairs today
conveyed his condolences to his Turkish counterpart,
Mr. Çavuşoğlu. He reaffirmed France’s solidarity with
Turkey following the attack carried out against Turkish
forces in north-western Syria. On behalf of France, this
afternoon I wish to reiterate those condolences and that
solidarity. Mr. Le Drian also condemned the repeated
violations committed by the Syrian regime and Russia
of international humanitarian law, and the undermining
of the commitments made in autumn 2018 concerning
de-escalation in Idlib province. The fight against
terrorist groups cannot justify the massive violations of
international law that we are witnessing at Idlib.
We therefore call for an immediate de-escalation,
echoing the appeal of the Secretary-General. A new
escalation would be in no one’s interest and would
further threaten international peace and security.
That would exacerbate an already dire humanitarian
situation, even on the scale of the Syrian conflict.
Nearly a million people have been displaced since
December in Idlib province. This would increase the
risk of dispersal of terrorist fighters.
In recent days, France has made a commitment,
together with Germany, to contribute to a de-escalation
of the violence. The President of the Republic and the
Chancellor discussed it with President Erdoğan and
President Putin last week. France will spare no effort, in
conjunction with its partners, to achieve de-escalation.
Our priority must be to work collectively to put in place
an immediate cessation of hostilities in Idlib. We call
on the Syrian regime and Russia to end the military
offensive in the north-west of Syria, to fully respect

S/PV. 8738

their obligations under international humanitarian law
and to return to the ceasefire arrangements of the fall
of 2018 so as to put an immediate and sustainable end
to hostilities. The commitments made must be kept by
everyone, especially by Russia.
Efforts to achieve a ceasefire must be collective.
Russia must pursue negotiations with Turkey in order to
achieve a de-escalation in Idlib and allow the revival of
the political process. The Astana framework has shown
its limits and it cannot in any case encompass all the
dimensions of the settlement of the crisis or replace a
process led by the United Nations, which enjoys full
international legitimacy in that respect. This is why it
is essential that the Secretary-General and his Special
Envoy continue to work to achieve an immediate,
lasting and verified ceasefire, in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 2254 (2015). They must also
devote themselves to the resumption of the inter-Syrian
process, which alone can lead to a settlement of the
Syrian crisis, and which must now tackle the question
of elections, refugees and detainees.
Finally, I recall the urgent need to respond
to the humanitarian crisis and to work towards a
political solution. France will continue to mobilize
at the humanitarian level, on a national basis and
with the European Union and its Member States.
Everything must be done to guarantee humanitarian
access, including through cross-border assistance. I
welcome the Secretary-General’s initiative to deploy
an emergency mission to Idlib in the days ahead. We
also welcome the efforts made by Syria’s neighbours to
assist the Syrian refugees.
Finally, the political process cannot be reduced
to constitutional discussions, which today serve as
a screen for the regime to pursue its strategy limited
to military reconquest. The Special Envoy of the
United Nations must take note of this and address
head-on the most pressing political questions, starting
with the de-escalation in Idlib and the conditions for
the organization of the elections to be held this year
and next.
Ms. Morrison González (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We come to this Chamber with deep
regret and deep concern. Despite the continued calls for
a cessation of hostilities in the face of growing human
suffering in the north-west of Syria, we are here once
again. We thank the presidency for acceding to our

20-053545/16

S/PV.8738

The situation in the Middle East

request to convene this meeting today. We understand
that the current situation calls for it.
The situation of extreme tension that is developing
before us foreshadows an uncertain panorama for the
civilian population. The Dominican Republic therefore
demands an immediate cessation of hostilities,
maximum restraint on the part of all belligerent parties
and protection for the civilian population. Humanitarian
workers in the field must be given the opportunity to
fulfil their task of addressing the needs of civilians in a
safe, complete and timely manner, before it is too late.
Without their presence on the ground, the catastrophic
situation of these people could quickly become the
saddest human tragedy of recent times. We offer them
our most meaningful and determined support for their
commendable work. As the representative of Indonesia
said yesterday, “[t]hey are our real heroes” (S/PV.8734,
p.15). For that reason, and for them, we are here.
There is only one Council, not two; there is only one
Charter, not two. And there is only one humanity, and
it is in crisis right now. Let our sense of humanity — of
shared responsibility for peace — be the only thing that
drives our actions.
Our position in this Chamber today, for all of us
without exception, must be to seek a diplomatic solution
to the current military offensive and to protect the
civilian population. Our inaction will be unjustifiable.
No tactical or military objective will prevail in the face
of the suffering of almost a million displaced persons,
half of whom are children. We can do more.
We call on the Russian Federation and Turkey
to redouble their efforts and recommit to the Sochi
ceasefire agreement and to its full implementation.
Have no doubt that the Dominican Republic will
support every effort to that end. Accordingly, we stress
the need for the United Nations, playing its unique and
irreplaceable role, to support those efforts as well. We
echo the Secretary-General’s urgent appeal and his
assessment that the most pressing need at this time is
the cessation of hostilities before the situation gets out
of control.
Finally, we are saddened to see the families of all the
fallen, Syrians and Turks — sons, husbands, brothers,
parents and friends — who, together with the civil
authorities, are paying too high a price for a conflict
whose only solution, we know, is political. It is in their
name, and in the name of all Syrians of goodwill, that
we ask once again for an end to be put to this tragedy.
6/16

28/02/2020

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): It was only yesterday that
we spoke in this Chamber, and we did not think that we
would be meeting again today. But we are witnessing a
dramatic escalation in Idlib. The situation is becoming
more worrying — more than 30 Turkish soldiers have
been killed. Germany strongly condemns the attack.
We express our deepest condolences to the Turkish
Government and the families of the victims. We stand
in full solidarity with Turkey.
We see a risk for a wider regional escalation. I can
only repeat what we have said numerous times in this
Chamber: we demand that Syria immediately stop its
military offensive against civilians and against Turkish
forces. Further, we demand that Russia end its support
for the military offensive by the Syrian regime.
There is no military solution to the Syrian conflict
or to other conflicts on the Security Council agenda.
There are no military solutions; there are political
solutions. Whenever these military solutions are
undertaken, it is always civilians that are the victims.
We see this in Syria, in Yemen and in Libya, where,
also today, we saw attacks on civilian targets in Tripoli.
The impact of the ongoing air strikes of the Syrian
regime and its allies on the civilians in Idlib are
abhorrent. I wish to quote German Foreign Minister
Heiko Maas who said yesterday in this Chamber:
“[I]ndiscriminate attacks against civilians are war
crimes. Those responsible must be held accountable”
(S/PV.8734, p. 8). He also said, “Conducting counterterrorism measures does not absolve anyone ... from
respecting international humanitarian law” (ibid.).
The Syrian regime and Russia must fully abide by
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and should return to the 2018 ceasefire arrangements
and end the hostilities. We also call on Russia to continue
negotiations with Turkey to bring about a de-escalation
in Idlib and facilitate the start of a political process.
We have said this again and again — we need a
humanitarian ceasefire and we need it now. Germany,
together with France, as my French colleague just said,
is ready at the highest levels to work towards that goal
with Russia and Turkey.
The hope for a lasting ceasefire emanating from the
Astana format appears to have been in vain. As others
before me have said, the Astana format does not work.
We also call on the Secretary-General to continue his
engagement, and we very much appreciate his presence
20-05354

28/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

in the Chamber today, which is proof of his commitment
to this issue. We encourage him to personally continue
to try to find a ceasefire without delay.
A sustainable solution to the Syria conflict — I
can only repeat this again and again — can be achieved
only through diplomatic efforts. We need to go back to
resolution 2254 (2015). We need to reach this political
solution under the auspices of the United Nations. The
Constitutional Committee must succeed. Instead of
investing in bombs, warplanes and fighting, Russia
should invest in these peace talks. Instead of making
cynical remarks about failing radiators, Russia should
invest in and support the humanitarian efforts and assist
the people who are suffering under the horrendous
attacks by Syria with Russia’s backing.
My Minister made it clear yesterday:
“[W]e must step up our efforts to find a political
solution. A regime that has been killing and
torturing its own people cannot bring lasting peace
and stability to Syria, and reconciliation without
accountability for the terrible crimes committed
will not work. Those who continue to fight in this
war should finally realize that” (ibid., p. 9).
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): Yesterday morning, our
Russian colleagues told us here in this Chamber that
the Astana format is working (see S/PV.8734). The
same afternoon, however, we witnessed another attack
against Turkish troops in Idlib, where at least 33 Turkish
soldiers lost their lives. I offer my deepest condolences
to our good colleague Feridun Hadi Sinirlioǧlu, the
Government of Turkey and the families of the victims.
These forces were in the area as part of a
de-escalation agreement from May 2018, which was
an effort that emerged from the Astana format. With
yesterday’s attack, it has now completely lost its
meaning. Our thoughts are with Turkish families
today, as they have so long been with Syrians in Idlib
and elsewhere, who have suffered from an intense
bombardment since the beginning of the offensive three
months ago. There is no justification for the ongoing
military campaign of the Syrian regime, backed by
Russian armed forces and airplanes. Together with the
European Union (EU) and most other members of the
Security Council, we demand an immediate cessation
of hostilities in Idlib.
Fighting terrorism by waging terror against a
civilian population must stop. Granting unimpeded

S/PV. 8738

humanitarian access to millions in need remains a
priority for us in the next weeks and months.
As alternative ways to ensure peace and stability
in Syria have failed, this is now the moment when
the Security Council needs to act. Unfortunately, the
resolutions calling for a nationwide ceasefire have so
far been blocked. In the light of what has happened,
we urge Russia to reconsider its position and allow a
chance for a humanitarian truce. Estonia and the EU
remain determined in their calls on Damascus to abide
by international humanitarian law and provisions of
resolution 2254 (2015).
Finally, in the light of an ongoing attack, we
repeat here our determination to ensure accountability
in Syria. As our British colleagues have put it on
multiple occasions, those who have committed
crimes will be held accountable not only collectively,
but also personally. Initiatives such as the General
Assembly’s International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to assist in the investigation and prosecution
of persons responsible for the most serious crimes
under International Law committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, the Human Rights Council
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
and the Secretary-General’s board of inquiry will all
help us to collect evidence and uncover truth.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his remarks and Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for her briefing.
Let me begin by expressing our serious concern
over the worsening situation due to the escalation in
Idlib. During yesterday’s humanitarian meeting (see
S/PV.8734), Indonesia clearly emphasized the urgent
need for all key countries in the conflict to immediately
cease hostilities. Today we would like to reiterate
that call.
The intensification of hostilities has worsened
the humanitarian situation in the north-west. More
individuals are displaced and their lives are increasingly
at risk. We endorse the Secretary-General’s statement
today that the most pressing need is an immediate
ceasefire before the situation gets entirely out of
control. We urge a continued dialogue to de-escalate
conflict between key countries.
Indonesia appreciates the ongoing efforts made
by and talks among various parties with the aim of
ending the violence. These dialogues, however, need

20-053547/16

S/PV.8738

The situation in the Middle East

28/02/2020

to be immediately implemented and translated into
impactful action to achieve a sustainable ceasefire. The
current priority must be the civilians. Indonesia echoes
the Secretary-General’s call on all parties to fulfil their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
to avoid any additional resulting harm to civilians,
including civilian infrastructure.

humanitarian law, particularly with regard to the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure. As
we have stated in the Council previously, the increase
in violence has a devastating knock-on effect on the
humanitarian situation. We cannot expect innocent
civilians in the region to endure any further hardship or
threats to their safety.

As the need for humanitarian assistance increases,
the international community also needs to support the
immediate delivery of emergency assistance, shelter
support, food, non-food items and other logistical
support. The provision of humanitarian deliveries
requires timely, safe, unimpeded and sustained
access by the United Nations in order to reach all
civilians in need in the north-west and in other areas
of Syria. Indonesia encourages and supports enhanced
cooperation between the Syrian Government and the
United Nations in this regard.

The Council must be united in calling for an
immediate cessation of hostilities in Syria, for all sides
to exercise maximum restraint so as to prevent a further
escalation of hostilities, and for the parties to adhere
to their international obligations under international
humanitarian law, particularly with regard to the
protection of civilians

The Security Council indeed has a critical role to
play in supporting the humanitarian efforts in Syria.
Once again, my delegation underlines the importance
for the issues of humanitarian assistance not to be
politicized by anybody.
To conclude, Indonesia extends its strong support
to the work of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen in engaging
the Syrian parties, as well as other key countries, to try
to unlock progress on the political track, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I would like first to
thank the Secretary-General and Rosemary DiCarlo
for their briefings on the unfolding situation in northwestern Syria.
Let me begin by stating that there can be no military
solution to the conflict in Syria. As with any conflict,
in the end all sides must come to the table to negotiate
a long-term, peaceful settlement for the benefit of all.
Syria is no exception.
South Africa is deeply concerned at the escalation
of violence in north-western Syria and the further
deterioration of the situation. It is essential for all parties
to exercise the utmost restraint in order to prevent
the further inflammation of tensions. We support the
Secretary-General in his call for an immediate ceasefire
and for the parties to step back from the edge of direct
military confrontation.
All parties must adhere to their obligations
under international human rights and international
8/16

South Africa reiterates its position that the only way
forward is an inclusive Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
dialogue aimed at achieving a political solution that
is reflective of the will of the Syrian people, based on
the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015). The violence
must stop and negotiations must begin. We hope that
the ongoing discussions between Russia and Turkey
will bear fruit.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation wishes to thank Secretary-General
Guterres and Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for
their briefings.
China has been following the developments in Idlib
very closely. The Idlib problem is rooted in the control
of Idlib by terrorist forces. The parties concerned should
continue to seek a comprehensive, long-term solution to
the Idlib problem through dialogue and negotiations. In
that process, Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity
and territory integrity must be upheld.
We have noted that the leaders of Russia and Turkey
maintain close communication. That Syrian issue has
its complicated background. The Council must act in
an impartial, objective and comprehensive manner to
create enabling conditions for a political settlement of
the Syrian crisis.
Terrorism is the common enemy of the international
community. According to the Secretary-General’s
report, terrorist forces systematically harm civilians,
journalists and medical workers in Idlib. Eradicating
the forces of terror is a necessary requirement for the
restoration of peace and stability in Syria and the region.
Listed terrorist groups should be resolutely crushed
in accordance with the relevant Council resolutions
20-05354

28/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

and international law. The safe haven established by
terrorist forces in Syria should be liquidated.
At the same time, counter-terrorism operations
should be cautious not to harm civilians. The origin
of weapons seized in the course of counter-terror
operations should be investigated and the channels
for supplying weapons to terrorists should be cut off.
Measures should be taken to prevent foreign terrorist
fighters from fleeing to other countries and regions to
continue to wreak havoc.
China is deeply concerned about the overall
humanitarian situation in Syria. China supports the
efforts of the United Nations to assist Syrian refugees
and displaced civilians. The living conditions of the
Syrian people are very difficult as a result of years of
war, dilapidated infrastructure and economic sanctions.
The international community should provide the United
Nations with adequate funding and resources to ensure
the provision of humanitarian supplies to populations
in need throughout Syria. We note that the Syrian
Government has taken a number of decisions to assist
international humanitarian relief operations. The United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs should actively communicate with the Syrian
Government and prioritize the channels it has provided
to carry out humanitarian relief operations and address
the needs for medical supplies in north-eastern Syria.
China supports the Syrian Government in its
reconstruction efforts in areas where the security
situation is relatively stable as well as its work to clear
explosive remnants of war, which is conducive to
improving the humanitarian situation on the ground.
The United Nations should continue to make
progress on a Syrian political process that is Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015). With regard to the Syrian political process, it
should be up to the Syrian people themselves to find a
solution, free from external interference.
China supports the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy for Syria, Mr. Pedersen, strengthening his
communication with the Syrian Government and
making full use of the platform of the Constitutional
Committee in an effort to make new progress.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his remarks and Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for her briefing.

S/PV. 8738

As we have stated our positions on issues relating
to Syria on many occasions, I will not repeat them all.
In the light of the recent developments, I would like to
highlight the following.
First, we are deeply concerned about the most recent
escalation of the situation in north-western Syria and
even more concerned about the terrible risk of a more
serious and uncontrollable conflict in the next few days.
We would therefore like to reiterate our support for the
Secretary-General’s call for an immediate ceasefire.
We welcome the ongoing exchanges among the relevant
parties at various levels. We nevertheless urge all
parties to exercise maximum restraint and strengthen
dialogue to find a feasible solution to the conflict in
this area. That is needed more than ever before.
Secondly, our consistent position is that the conflict
in Syria must be settled through a political solution in
accordance with the principles of international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2254 (2015).
We fully support the important facilitating role of the
United Nations, including that of Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen, as well as any viable diplomatic efforts,
bilateral and multilateral, towards peace and stability
in Syria.
Thirdly, we are of the view that the deteriorating
situation in Idlib is now too great a burden for millions
of civilians to bear. Humanitarian concerns must be
addressed and humanitarian work must be facilitated,
including through feasible ways and means that can
ensure the timely delivery of aid.
We must spare no efforts in fighting against
United Nations-designated terrorists and terrorist
organizations but we must combat them in a way
that defeats their purpose. We must therefore uphold
international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and international humanitarian law. The protection of
civilians must be our top priority.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to welcome the Secretary-General,
who is present with us. We also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.
As the Secretary-General said in his remarks
today, we are following with deep concern the
escalation in north-western Syria and the expansion
of military operations there. We call on all parties to
exercise restraint and to continue their communication

20-053549/16

S/PV.8738

The situation in the Middle East

efforts to achieve a ceasefire. The continued and
expanded escalation is a genuine threat to civilians.
It exacerbates the humanitarian situation and causes
increased suffering.
We reaffirm the need to respect international
humanitarian law and to spare civilians and civilian
infrastructure. We urge all sides to facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian and medical assistance to all
those in need.
We would also like to express our condolences to
the families of those from Turkey and Syria who have
died. We reaffirm our position that there is no military
solution to the crisis in Syria. The only sustained
solution is a political settlement in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015) through the resumption of a
political process.
Today we would like to emphasize that the military
option will further complicate the situation and cause
more suffering to the population. We therefore support
the current contacts between the relevant parties, the
appeal of the Secretary-General and the efforts of the
United Nations. We hope that all such efforts will lead
to an immediate ceasefire, which is the most urgent
priority at the moment.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): Through
you, Mr. President, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his introductory remarks and Ms. DiCarlo
for her briefing, which, unfortunately, describe the
serious situation currently in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The conflict has changed not only in nature but
also in intensity, as the Secretary-General rightly said.
On behalf of the Niger, we call on Russia and Turkey
to continue the dialogue. We trust in their ability to
find a compromise so as to stop the current escalation,
for, otherwise, even the slight hard-won gains in
humanitarian terms will be jeopardized. While the
Syrian Government has the right to fight terrorists,
whose presence on its territory no one doubts, that must
be done in compliance with international humanitarian
law. We deplore the loss of lives in recent days and
extend our deepest condolences to the grieving families.
Yesterday, in this very Chamber, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and the
Executive Director of UNICEF, supported by United
States Ambassador Craft, spoke from a mother’s
heart about the tragedy in Syria, the victims of which
are women and children (S/PV.8734). We must listen
10/16

28/02/2020

to their poignant call to put an end to this tragedy
unfolding in Syria before our very eyes. It is time to do
something; it is time to act. In that regard, we support
the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General and of
certain countries to stop the dangerous deterioration
that has been taking place in Syria in recent days.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Secretary-General for his
remarks and Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing.
The situation in the Idlib de-escalation zone has
deteriorated and remains very tense. We continue
our contacts with our Turkish colleagues, at both the
inter-ministerial and the highest levels. President
Putin and President Erdoğan had another telephone
conversation this morning. It was agreed to arrange a
face-to-face meeting in the very near future, in early
March, when the schedules of the two leaders will
allow it.
The Russian delegation is currently in Ankara
and is intensively negotiating ways to stabilize the
situation. We are therefore continuing our contacts
within the Astana format. We are convinced that if
the military, diplomats and representatives of security
services participating in the Astana format focus on
basic agreements with regard to the Idlib de-escalation
zone, it will pave the way for changes on the ground in
the very near future.
Yesterday, there was an incident with the Turkish
military, not at the observation post, as our United
States colleague told us today. Turkish soldiers feel
completely safe at the observation posts. The incident
took place near the village of Balyun, which is outside
the observation post. The Russian Defence Ministry
made detailed comments in which it confirmed that
the Turkish and Russian forces on the ground are in
constant daily contact. The Turkish forces, in real time,
informed the Russian Centre for the Reconciliation of
Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic about the
location of Turkish soldiers in the Idlib de-escalation
zone. Those coordinates were conveyed by Russia to
the Syrian Armed Forces to ensure the security of
Turkish soldiers when responding to terrorist attacks.
As noted by the Defence Ministry, the coordinates
transmitted yesterday made no mention of the areas
where the Turkish soldiers later died. As soon as it
became clear what had happened, the Russian side took
exhaustive measures to cease hostilities and to ensure
20-05354

28/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

the safe evacuation of the dead and injured. In order to
prevent speculation, the Defence Ministry confirmed
that the Russian air forces had not used combat aircraft
in that particular area.
We regret the fact that the Turkish soldiers died,
just as we regret the deaths of Syrian soldiers. We are
convinced that respecting the agreements reached,
including on de-conflicting, will help avert such
tragedies in future. Our military forces on the ground
stand ready to continue to work towards that goal.
Both in discussions with our Turkish colleagues and
in the Security Council, we have reiterated that we are
committed to the Sochi memorandum of 17 September
2018. I should like to recall for the Council the essence
of those agreements: the separation of the opposition
from terrorists; the creation of a demilitarization
zone free of jihadists, so that no one can shell civilian
facilities, Syrian army positions or Russian military
bases from there; and the provision of unhindered
access to the M4 and M5 highways, which are vital to
the Syrian economy, humanitarian assistance and all
the people of Syria. We share that goal with our Turkish
colleagues. We are well aware of the challenges that we
will face in achieving those goals, but together we can
make them a reality.
I should like to underscore that the Sochi decisions
are temporary because, as the Sochi memorandum of
understanding states, they refer to the national territory
of Syria and its sovereignty and territorial integrity,
which the parties must respect and which is guaranteed
by the Charter of the United Nations.
In recent months, terrorists, mainly from Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham, seized Idlib and ramped up their
incursions against civilians, the population in
neighbouring populated areas and Syrian forces. In
response to the ongoing violations of the ceasefire
from within the Idlib zone, the Syrian army has the
right to retaliate and clamp down on the terrorists.
We cannot ban the Syrian army from upholding the
commitments made in Security Council resolutions
on an uncompromising fight against terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations. I would underscore
here that this is taking place on its own territory, the
territory of sovereign Syria — no one else’s territory.
Today Rosemary DiCarlo reminded us that Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham is designated recognized as a terrorist
organization by the United Nations, as well as Russia,
Syria, Europe, the United States and Turkey.

S/PV. 8738

In this regard, we would once again draw the
attention of colleagues and everyone who is closely
following the situation in Idlib that attempts are being
made to justify the terrorists’ actions. Unfortunately,
that is happening at the level of officials, including
representatives of the United States of America. An
argument is being made that Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham
members are not actually terrorists but patriots and
revolutionaries, simply because they are fighting the
legitimate Syrian authorities. We deem such statements
to be unacceptable and very dangerous.
It is unfortunate, but today such statements seem
to be taken as a call to action. Recently, a well-known
non-governmental organization decided to hold an
interview with the leader of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham,
Al-Julani, who said that the activities of the group are
changing and that it is starting to focus on combating
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic rather than
terrorist attacks. My Syrian colleague asked yesterday,
when talking about the calls for a ceasefire, why no
one had spoken to Bin Laden or Al-Baghdadi? He noted
that he did not recall such people being interviewed by
Western journalists.
To be frank, we have some questions about the
weapons that the terrorists are using. The Russian
Defence Ministry regularly provides such information,
which is available on various websites. There are video
clips and photos, and it is clear that the fighters are
armed with the latest versions of Western military
products: drones, armoured vehicles, small arms and
light weapons, missiles, and anti-tank and anti-aircraft
equipment. Those weapons are used against Syrian and
Russian forces and against civilians.
I would warn our Western colleagues against
repeating their past mistakes, when in order to
achieve their geopolitical goals of regime change in
Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya and Libya, they relied on
the use of terrorists, hoping that the latter could be
controlled later, once their geopolitical aims had been
achieved. This is historically unprecedented. We urge
all our colleagues to bear in mind the fact that it is
impossible to make deals with terrorists, especially in
the context of reaching a settlement in Syria.
We have repeatedly underscored the need to pool
our efforts to combat terrorism and to cooperate in order
to de-escalate tensions. We are prepared to cooperate
with all who genuinely desire to do so. It is important
for this understanding of the need for cooperation to be

20-0535411/16

S/PV.8738

The situation in the Middle East

demonstrated at all stages, not just when we urgently
need to resolve crises.
I should like to remind the Council that in 2003,
when Iraq was bombed on trumped-up charges, our
United Kingdom and United States colleagues did
not speak of cooperation. Libya, following the NATO
operation carried out in violation of Security Council
resolutions, has de facto fallen apart. They are trying
to do the same to Syria. We once again reiterate our
call for the parties to be guided by the interests of the
region rather than by narrow geopolitical interests,
which are often incompatible with the interests of the
people who live in the region, whom they supposedly
care so much about.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Belgium.
Yesterday’s strike against the Turkish contingent
in Idlib, in which dozens of Turkish soldiers lost their
lives, represents a dramatic turning point in the already
alarming situation in Idlib. We strongly condemn this
attack and convey our condolences to the Government
of Turkey and the families of the victims.
We are following with great concern these
new developments, which pose a major threat to
international peace and security. The parties must
weigh the implications.
As we know, Turkey is present in Idlib on the
basis of the 2017 Astana agreement and the 2018
Sochi memorandum of understanding, which created
a de-escalation zone around Idlib. Syria and Russia
have on numerous occasions violated those ceasefire
agreements. Each time those violations contributed
to the humanitarian disaster on which we met just
yesterday, under the presidency of our Deputy
Prime Minister (S/PV.8734. I wish to reiterate that
humanitarian access must absolutely be respected.
The Secretary-General described the situation in
Idlib as a man-made disaster, and we could not agree
more. The situation, with a million people living in
appalling conditions, could have been completely
avoided if the parties had respected their own
commitments. The situation will only get worse if
Syria, supported by Russia, does not stop its offensive
immediately, otherwise it will once again be the Syrian
people who pay the price.
12/16

28/02/2020

We therefore once again call on Syria and Russia
to put an end to the military escalation. Without urgent
action, the threat of an even greater escalation is
increasing by the hour.
We support the efforts of the Secretary-General
and encourage him to continue to spare no effort to
achieve an immediate and lasting ceasefire.
Finally, the political commitment of the Syrian
authorities is vital in order for the cycle of violence and
instability to finally stop in the region. The only path
towards stability is a credible and inclusive political
solution facilitated by the United Nations, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015).
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I welcome the presence of
the Secretary-General at this meeting and I thank
him for his responsible introductory remarks. I also
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs for her briefing.
At the fourth round of meetings, hosted in the
Kazakh capital on 3 and 4 May 2017, the Astana
guarantors agreed, as my colleague the representative
of Russia has said, on establishing de-escalation zones
in my country for six months as a temporary measure.
At the end of that meeting in Astana, the guarantors,
including the Turkish regime, asserted their firm
commitment to the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic and
agreed, inter alia, to the following, as per an official
Security Council document: take all measures to ensure
a ceasefire on the part of all parties to continue fighting
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Da’esh, the Al
Nusra Front, Fath al-Sham and all other individuals,
groups, proxies and entities associated with Al-Qaida
or Da’esh, as designated by the Security Council, in and
out of the de-escalation zones. The three guarantors,
including the Turkish regime, had to take measures by
4 July 2017 to separate the armed opposition groups
from the terrorist groups that I have just mentioned.
On 3 May 2017, the same day on which Astana
agreement was concluded, my Government announced
its support of the Russian initiative on the de-escalation
zones in order to stop the bloodshed of the Syrian
20-05354

28/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

people and to ensure, to the extent possible, a return
to normal life. The Government stressed that it would
pursue its war against terrorism — namely Da’esh, the
Al-Nusra Front and other associated terrorist groups.
On 17 September 2018, the Sochi agreement
provided for the establishment of a demilitarized
zone in Idlib province and parts of rural Aleppo and
Hama, while the Turkish regime committed itself to
withdrawing armed groups and terrorist organizations
from that region, including the Al-Nusra Front and other
associated groups, to disarming them by 15 October
2018 and to ensuring normal traffic on the M4 and M5
highways by the end of 2018.
My Government welcomed that time-bound and
temporary initiative. It was the result of intensive
consultations between the Syrian Arab Republic and
the Russian Federation. We once again stressed that
we would continue combating terrorism until we had
liberated every inch of our territory, whether through
military operations or local reconciliation. That is
the substance of a formal Council document on the
Sochi agreement.
Although we, our friends and other countries
demanded that the Turkish regime honour the
commitments to which I have just referred within the
timeframe set in the Astana and Sochi agreements,
the Erdoğan regime, which does not abide by
international legitimacy, reneged on them. Along with
its terrorist organizations, Erdoğan regime exploited
the de-escalation agreements in order to bolster their
presence and capabilities, especially in the Syrian
areas adjacent to Turkey, and to impose a sustained
terrorist reality at the cost of our people’s suffering
in Idlib, Aleppo and rural areas of Hama and Latakia,
where they have endured crimes committed by those
terrorist organizations. The victims of those crimes,
as I explained yesterday, are civilians, humanitarian
workers and everyone who dares to reject the practices
of the terrorist groups. In the north-west, there have
been repeated demonstrations against the practices
of Turkey-supported terrorist groups, including
plundering, looting, killing, kidnapping, detentions,
torture, rape, the imposition of taxes, the stealing
of produce, the pillaging of archaeological items,
human trafficking, and the looting and selling of
humanitarian aid.
Two years after the Astana agreement and a year
and a half after the Sochi agreement, the Turkish regime

S/PV. 8738

maintained observation posts on Syrian territory with
the ostensible purpose of monitoring terrorist activities,
preventing continued terrorist crimes and repelling
attacks on the positions of the Syrian Arab Republic
and the Russian forces. However, the Turkish regime
turned those posts into operating rooms for supporting
terrorist organizations. Proof of that is the fact that
Turkish soldiers were killed far from those observation
posts, as they were supporting terrorists.
In her briefing today, the Under-Secretary-General
confirmed what I have noted by saying that Turkish
forces played a supporting role in terrorist operations
against Syrian forces in Saraqib. In furtherance of its
constitutional and national duties, relevant Security
Council resolutions on counter-terrorism, the Astana
agreement and the Sochi agreement, the Syrian
Arab Army and its allies launched a precise military
operation to rid our people in Aleppo, Idlib and the
surrounding areas of terrorist organizations and to
restore State authority and the rule of law to areas
controlled by the Al-Nusra Front. The latest report
(S/2020/53), dated 20 January, a copy of which I have
with me today, contains the twenty-fifth report of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
presented in accordance with resolution 2368 (2017). I
will now read out the following paragraph from page 3
of that report:
“Idlib Province, in the north-west of the Syrian
Arab Republic, remains dominated by groups
affiliated with Al-Qaida but also plays host to
relocated ISIL fighters and dependents. Parts
of Iraq, especially the area of Anbar Province
bordering the Syrian Arab Republic, also represent a
permissive security environment for the movement
of ISIL fighters.”
They controlled the entire Idlib province. However,
the Syrian Arab Army and its allies have succeeded in
liberating large swathes of land, including more than 140
towns and villages, from the control of cannibals and
the sponsors of international terrorism, who immerse
themselves in the values and concepts of international
humanitarian law which they learned from terrorist and
extremist schools and academies. After all these efforts
in counter-terrorism, some are now demanding that the
Syrian army should go back to the lines of 2018.
My country condemns in the strongest terms the
practices of the Turkish regime and its aggression
against Syria in support of terrorism, entertaining the

20-0535413/16

S/PV.8738

The situation in the Middle East

illusion of reviving the bygone Ottoman sultanate. We
categorically reject the claims of the Turkish regime
that its aggression against my country is a form of selfdefence, a way of implementing the Adana agreement
concluded between our two countries in 1998 or any
other illusionary pretexts.
Speaking of self-defence, members of the Council
are aware that the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations ended its work two days ago. The
Mexican delegation proposed a good idea, namely, not
misusing or misinterpreting Article 51 of the Charter.
No one objected to the proposal except for the Turkish
delegation. Indeed, the Turkish delegation opposed the
Mexican proposal. It is the Erdoğan regime that violated
the Adana agreement, as well as its commitments under
the Astana and Sochi agreements. It has disregarded
good-neighbourliness and Security Council resolutions
on counter-terrorism.
I told the Council yesterday that the Erdoğan
regime has even used water as a terrorist weapon (see
S/PV.8734). It cut off water supplies from the city of
Al-Hasakah, which is host to 600,000 civilians, who
were deprived of water. This regime has for years been
recruiting, supporting, training and arming thousands
of terrorists, including foreign terrorist fighters from
more than 100 countries, according to United Nations
reports. Turkish intelligence received them at Turkish
airports and allowed them to infiltrate the shared borders
between Turkey and my country. Turkish intelligence
planned the crimes to be committed by those terrorists
and provided them with military, political and media
support. It then brought them together, integrated them
into the Turkish forces and used them in its aggression
in the north-east and the north-west of my country. It
then transferred some of them to Libya and the Horn
of Africa.
My country categorically rejects the Erdoğan
criminal regime’s targeting of Syrian civilians as fuel
in its unrestrained war against my country, and its use
of civilians as a way to pressure the Governments of
European countries — to blackmail them and drag
NATO into its childish adventures — to expedite the
accession of Turkey to the European Union or to allow
Turkish citizens to enter European territories without
visas. We call on European countries to honour their
commitments under international law and human
rights instruments. We call on them not to get involved
in shameful deals or political bazaars with the rogue
Turkish regime at the expense of the Syrian people.
14/16

28/02/2020

In the past few days, we have witnessed the fighting
of the Turkish army whose leaders Erdoğan dismissed
in 2016, claiming that they had orchestrated a coup. He
has transformed the Turkish army from a secular force
into an arm of the Muslim brotherhood, fighting with
terrorist takfiri groups in Syria and Libya, in violation
of international law, the Charter, Security Council
resolutions and the Sochi agreement.
It is regrettable that some continue to commend
the Turkish regime while ignoring its crimes, such
as transforming humanitarian delivery mechanisms,
as contained in resolution 2504 (2020) and previous
resolutions, into corridors for bringing in thousands
of troops and military equipment, including tens of
thousands of foreign terrorist fighters and all sorts of
arms and munitions, along with chemical weapons.
My country is fighting terrorism on our territories.
Idlib is in Syria; it is not in Turkey or on NATO territories.
It is not in Belgium, Estonia, France, Germany or
California. My country is fighting terrorism on its own
territories, not on the territory of another country. We
are determined to use all legitimate tools to address
the Turkish aggression in support of terrorism. We
protect our people and defend the unity of Syria, our
sovereignty and our independent national decisions.
The Security Council must shoulder its responsibilities
to put an end to the adventures of the Erdoğan regime,
which threaten international and regional peace and
security. As the Secretary-General has said, this is
what the Charter and international law require.
In conclusion, I ask the States that called for
convening today’s meeting to answer the following
questions. Does the presence of the Turkish forces
on the territory of my country constitute a military
aggression and a form of occupation or not? The Turkish
regime seeks to impose Turkish practices and raise
the Turkish flag on the Syrian areas that it occupies.
It seeks to change the names of our streets to Turkish
names, impose Turkish curricula in our schools and
loot our wealth, resources and monuments. Is all that
in accordance with international law or not? Have the
Security Council’s approaches to combating terrorism
and maintaining international peace and security,
in accordance with the Charter, changed or do some
want to replace the Charter with a new, non-consensual
and controversial document? Is there a remnant of
credibility in the Security Council that allows the
Member States that have entrusted it with its powers to
continue to rely on the Council?
20-05354

28/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

It has become apparent that the aim of this meeting
is to target the Astana format and distort the concept of
international law — nothing else. If there had been any
commitment to international law, as my colleague the
British representative has said, his country would have
never invaded and destroyed Iraq. It would not have
killed a million Iraqis, stolen Iraq’s national museum
and resources, or destroyed its infrastructure. If there
was an international law at that time to prevent the
invasion of Iraq by the United States and Britain, we
would not have reached this situation and Libya would
not have faced what it is facing today.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement and Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for her briefing.
It has been only 24 hours since we discussed the
situation in Syria in this Chamber (see S/PV.8734).
Yet new and grave developments warranted the
Security Council’s further attention today. Yesterday,
around the time the Council was in session, a Turkish
military convoy was targeted by a series of air strikes
for a duration of five hours. This heinous attack took
place in the vicinity of the village of Balyun, in the
Idlib de-escalation area. The convoy was deployed to
reinforce a Turkish observation post and some of the
fortifications. As a result of a series of air strikes that
took place yesterday afternoon, we lost 34 soldiers.
In addition, a significant number of members of the
Turkish Forces were wounded.
The radar tracks show that regime and Russian
aircraft were in formation flight during that time.
Let me underline that the Turkish forces that were
attacked were alone in that area. The logical conclusion
therefrom is that they were deliberately attacked.
We had prior coordination, in writing, with Russian
forces about the location of our convoy. And air strikes
continued despite the warnings we immediately issued,
right after the very first attack. Even the ambulances
that were sent for wounded soldiers were targeted. This
was a belligerent act of aggression against Turkey. In
self-defence, Turkish forces responded in kind.
The Turkish contingent attacked yesterday had been
deployed in accordance with existing de-escalation
arrangements in Idlib to ensure the security of our
military personnel serving at observations posts; to
protect civilians against the regime’s aggression; to

S/PV. 8738

ensure rapid and uninterrupted humanitarian access to
those in need; to prevent mass displacement movements
into Turkey and beyond; to preserve the de-escalation
area status of Idlib; and to contribute to the establishment
of a nation-wide ceasefire, as called for by resolution
2254 (2015). These were the parameters of the Sochi
memorandum of 17 September 2018. Our aim is to
return to the status quo ante established then.
We continue our dialogue with Russia on that basis.
In fact, another Russian delegation was in Ankara
yesterday, on the very day of this dastardly attack on
Turkish forces. Today, President Erdoğan spoke with
President Putin. We have made it clear to the Russian
side once again that we will not abandon our observation
posts and we will continue our military reinforcement.
We have a moral responsibility, at least, to protect
the helpless, desperate children of Idlib. Some may
interpret de-escalation of violence to mean that all
forces are equally responsible for de-escalation.
Following that logic would mean leaving those civilians
defenceless and at the mercy of the regime. In that case,
it is clear what almost 5 million people in the area
would do — they would flee the country. But this is
exactly what the murderous Al-Assad regime wants.
There is no doubt that the regime and its backers aim at
depopulating Idlib.
Yesterday’s events are a stark reminder that the
regime is hell-bent on continuing its attacks to intimidate
Syrian civilians and destroy the Syrian opposition and
the prospects for a political solution. Today, the Turkish
presence in Idlib represents hope for the millions of
civilians stuck in that area and the only bulwark against
the regime’s crimes against humanity. The Turkish
presence in Idlib is the only reason why millions of
Syrians can remain in their homeland without fear. It
needs to be clear to everyone that our soldiers sacrificed
their own lives to save the lives of civilians in Idlib. The
Turkish presence in Idlib is also the sole guarantee for
the continuation of humanitarian assistance.
These are exactly the reasons why the regime and
its backers are targeting the Turkish armed forces. The
regime and its backers want to drag Turkey into their
dirty war because Turkish soldiers stand in the way of
the regime fulfilling its dream of a military solution.
But there is a miscalculation here; the regime and its
backers have for years been used to killing innocent
civilians and members of the opposition. They should
make no mistake — this time, they have targeted

20-0535415/16

S/PV.8738

The situation in the Middle East

the Turkish armed forces directly. Some warlords in
Damascus may not know the difference. Some extremist
mercenaries fighting along with the regime may not
know the difference. If they want to learn the hard
way, they will. Turkey does not want war, but Turkey
will not hesitate to use force if and when its security
is threatened. Any provocation and harassment will be
retaliated against by all means.
Turkey has been displaying the utmost restraint to
avoid direct military confrontation. But this is a fight
between right and wrong. Turkey is undertaking these
efforts on behalf of the international community in
order to protect millions of civilians, mostly women
and children. Most members of the Council have
thanked us for our tireless efforts. What we want from
them is not only their gratitude; we want them to share
in the responsibility. The fate of millions of civilians
is our joint responsibility. It is time for the Security
Council to say, “enough is enough”. The Council has
to stop the regime’s war crimes and reckless behaviour,
which pose a direct threat to international peace and
security. The international community should not
remain indifferent to the developments unfolding in
Idlib. Otherwise, there will be repercussions on a much
wider scale across Europe, in the region and beyond.

16/16

28/02/2020

As to the previous speaker’s statement, I would like
to emphasize that it is a disgrace that he is still sitting
behind the Syrian nameplate and telling us shamelessly
that millions of Syrians, including the newly uprooted
560,000 children, are terrorists. He is not a legitimate
representative of the Syrian people and he is not worthy
of my response.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of
February, I would like to express thank all members
of the Council for their cooperation during what was
not only a particularly busy month but also a very
productive one on several matters. I would also like to
thank the Council secretariat for its continuous, highly
effective support. I would also like to thank the teams
of conference service officers, interpreters, translators,
verbatim reporters and security staff for their work.
As we end our presidency, I know that I speak on
behalf of all Council members in wishing the delegation
of China good luck as it assumes the presidency for the
month of March.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

20-05354
