VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Consult with Member States to encourage
compliance with United Nations resolutions on
Namibia;
(iv) Co-ordinate aid for Namibia provided by
United Nations agencies and other bodies
within the United Nations system;
(v) Actas trustee of the United Nations Fund for
Namibia and in this capacity administer and
manage the Fund;
(b) As Administering Authority for Namibia, it
shall:
(i) Examine periodically the deleterious consequences of the illegal South African administration in Namibia;
(ii} Formulate projects and programmes of assistance to Namibians;
(üi} Consult with the South West Africa People's
Organization, as appropriate, in the formulation and implementation of its programme of
work;
(iv} Propase to the United Nations Development
Programme projects of assistance to Namibians in accordance with the resources made
available through the indicative planning figure
for Namibia;
(v) Review and approve the annual budget of the
United Nations Institute for Namibia at Lusaka, to be submitted to the Council by the
Senate of the lnstitute, and make recommendations on the general direction of its work;
(vi) Formulate a policy of intensive dissemination
of information on Namibia, in consultation
with the Office of Public Information of the
Secretariat;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, to strengthen the Units which service the
Council in accordance with its requirements so that
it may fully discharge all additional tasks and functions
arising out of the new situation conceming Namibia;
4. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to authorize the United Nations Commissioner
for Namibia to appoint a resident representative of the
Commissioner in Botswana in order to enhance the
effectiveness of assistance to Namibians by the Council.
105 th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
(iii)

31/148.

Intensification and co-ordination of
United Nations action in support of
Namibia

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Namibia,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia87 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 88
87 /bid.,
88 lbid.,

Supplement No. 24 (A/31/24).
Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.1), chaps. I, 11,
IV-VII and IX.

133

Recalling its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967, as well
as subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly relating to Namibia,
Strongly deploring the policies of those States which,
despite the relevant decisions of the United Nations and
the advisory opinion of the Ioternational Court of Justice of 21 June 1971, "' continue to maintain diplomatic,
economic, consular and other relations with South Africa, purporting to act on behalf of or concerning Namibia, as well as military or strategic collaboration, all
of which has the effect of supporting or encouraging
South Africa in its defiance of the United Nations,
Strongly condemning the support which the illegal
South African administration continues to receive from
those foreign economic, financia} and other interests
which are collaborating with it in its exploitation of the
human and natural resources of, and in the further entrenchment of its illegal and racialist domination over,
the international Territory of Namibia,
l. Calls upon those States which have not yet done
so to comply with the relevant provisions of the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council concerning Namibia and the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971;
2. Urges those States which have not yet done so
to break off economic relations with South Africa that
concem Namibia and to take measures with a view to
compelling the Government of South Africa to withdraw immediately from Namibia in accordance with
resolutions 2145 (XXI) and 2248 (S-V) as well as subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly relating
to Namibia;
3. Requests once again ali Member States to tak:e
all appropriate measures to ensure the full application
of, and compliance with, the provisions of Decree No. 1
for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia,
enacted by the United Nations Council for Namibia on
27 September 1974,90 and such other measures as may
be necessary to assist in the protection of the natural
resources of Namibia;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare u~
dated lists of foreign corporations operating in Namibia,
accompanied by a summary of the major operations, including an historical note on their involvement in
Namibia;
5. Commends the inauguration of the United Nations
Institute for Namibia at Lusaka and requests all States
and the specialized agencies and other organizations
within the United Nations system to make adequate
financia! contribution to the United Natíons Fund for
Namibia so that the United Nations Council for Namibia can meet the additional costs of the Institute;
6. Authorizes the Uníted Nations Council for Namibia to hold hearings and to continue to seek information regarding the exploitation and purchase of Namibian uranium and to report on this matter to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session;
7. Authorizes the United Nations Council for Namibia to notify the Governments of States whose
sn Legal Conscqucnces for States of the Continued Presence
of South A/rica in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Counci/ Resollllion 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion.
/.C.J. Reports /971, p. 16.
no Official Records of thc General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supp/eme-nt No. 24A (A/9624/ Add.l), para. 84.

134

General Assemhly-Thirty-first Session

corporations, whether public or private, operate in
Namibia of the illegality of such operations and the
position of the Council in this regard;
8. Authorizes the United Nations Council for Namibia to contact administering and managing bodies of
foreign corporations operating in Namibia, with particular emphasis on those which are not under direct
governmental control, to warn them of the illegal basis
on which they are operating in Namibia and of the
position of the Council in this regard;
9. Calls upan those States which have resident
or non-resident consular representation in Namibia,
whether ordinary or honorary, to termínate such representation.
105th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
31/149.

Action hy intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations with respect
to Namibia

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia 91 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 92
Recalling its resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967,
by which it established the United Nations Council for
Namibia with the responsibility of administering N amibia until independence,
Recalling f urther the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, and the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, contained in its resolution
2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, as well as ali other
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council,
Taking into account the statements of the representative of the South West Africa People's Organization, 93
who participated in an observer capacity in the consideration of the ítem by the Fourth Committee, and conscious of the urgent and pressing need of Namibians
outside Namibia for concrete assistance from the specialized agencies and other institutions within the
United Nations system,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations
system to take ali effective measures, within their respective spheres of competence, to ensure the full and
speedy implementation of the Declaration and other
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, particularly
in the provision of moral and material assistance, on a
priority basis, to the peoples of colonial Territories and
their national liberation movements,
1. Requests ali specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to prepare, in consultation with the United Nations Council
91 lbid.,

Thirty-first Session, Supp/ement No. 24 (A/31/24).
92Jbid., Supp/ement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.l), chaps. I, VI,
VII and IX.
9 3 Jbid., Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 30th and
45th meetings.

for Namibia and within their respective spheres of
competence, programmes of assistance to the people
of Namibia and their liberation movement, the South
West Africa People's Organization;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Development Programme for the indicative planning
figure granted to Namibia and requests it to continue
to co-operate with the United Nations Council for
Namibia in the claboration of programmes of assistancc
to Namibians;
3. Requests all specialized agencies and other organizations and conferences within the United Nations
system to consider granting full membership to the
United Nations Council for Namibia so that it may
participate in that capacity as the Administering Authority for Namibia in the work of those agencies, organizations and conferences;
4. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to consider favourably granting a waiver of the assessment
of Namibia during the period in which Namibia is
represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia;
5. Requests all intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, bodies and conferences to ensure
that the rights and interests of Namibia are protected
and to invite the United Nations Council for Namibia
to participatc, in its capacity as the Administcring
Authority for Namibia, whenever such rights and interests are involved;
6. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to continue to examine this question and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session.
105th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
31/150.

Dissemination of information on Namibia

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia 94 and the relevant chapters of
the report of the Special Cornmittee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, 95
Recalling its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967, as well as
subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council relating to the question of Namibia,
Stressing the urgent need to arouse world public
opinion on a continuous basis with a view to assisting
effectively the people of Namibia to achieve selfdetermination, freedom and independence in a united
Namibia and, in particular, to intensify the widespread
and continuous dissemination of information on the
struggle for liberation being waged by the people of
Namibia, guided by their liberation movement, the
South West Africa People's Organization,
9 4 Jbid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/31/24).
95 Jbid., Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.1), chaps. I, 11,

VI, VII and IX.
