116

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session,

3. Authorizes the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, at its fifth session, to take
appropriate action for the United Nations Conference
on Restrictive Business Practices, including decisions
on relevant issues and, in particular, the determination
of the precise dates for the Conference within the
period referred to in paragraph 2 above;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to invite:
(a) All States to participate in the Conference;
(b) Representatives of organizations that have
received a standing invitation from the General Assembly to participate in the sessions and the wo~k
of all international conferences convened under its
auspices in the capacity of observers to participate in
the Conference in that capacity in accordance with
Assembly resolutions 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November
1974 and 31/152 of 20 December 1976;
( c) Representatives of the national liberation
movements recognized in its region by the Organization
of African Unity to participate in the Conference in
the capacity of observers in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 3280 (XXIX) of 10 December
1974;
(d) The United Nations Council for Namibia to
participate in the Conference in accordance with paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 32/9 E of
4 November 1977;
( e) The specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, as well as interested organs
of the United Nations, to be represented at the Conference;

(f) Intergovernmental bodies in consultative status
with the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development to be represented by observers at the
Conference;
(g) Directly concerned non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development to be represented by observers at the Conference;

5. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
endeavour to find ways to facilitate the effective participation of representatives of the least developed
countries in the Conference by seeking extrabudgetary
funds to finance travel expenses of two representatives
from each least developed country;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the necessary arrangements are made for the effective
participation in the Conference of representatives of
the organizations referred to in paragraph 4 (b) and
( c) above, including the requisite financial provisions
for their travel expenses and per diem;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary arrangements for holding the Conference
at Geneva, to submit to the Conference all relevant
documentation and to arrange for the necessary staff,
facilities and services that it will require;
8. Decides that the languages of the Conference
shall be those used in the General Assembly and its
Main Committees.

90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/154.

Fifth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964, as amended, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of I May 1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, 31/
159 of 21 December 1976, 32/174 of 19 December
1977 and 32/197 of 20 December 1977,
Recalling also its resolution 32/189 of 19 December 1977, whereby it accepted with appreciation the
invitation of the Government of the Philippines to
hold the fifth session of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development at Manila and decided
that the fifth session of the Conference should be held
from 7 May to 1 June 1979, with a pre-Conference
meeting of senior officials at Manila on 3 and 4 May
1979,
Considering that a number of important issues relating to the establishment of the new international
economic order are under negotiation or consideration
in the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, notably the Integrated Programme for
Commodities, including the establishment of the Common Fund, economic co-operation among developing
countries, the debt problem of developing countries,
the transfer of real resources to developing countries,
access to markets, the interrelationship between trade,
development, money and finance, the international
code of conduct on the transfer of technology and
equitable principles and rules for restrictive business
practices, and a convention on international multimodal transport,
Reaffirming the major role of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development as envisaged
in resolution 90 (IV) of 30 May 1976 of the Conference, 140 as an organ of the General Assembly for
deliberation, negotiation, review and implementation
in the field of international trade and related areas of
international economic co-operation,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the Trade and Development Board on the second and
third parts of its ninth special session and the second
part of its seventeenth session 141 and on its eighteenth
session; 142
2. Welcomes the adoption by the Trade and Development Board at its eighteenth session of the provisional agenda for the fifth session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development as
well as of the arrangements for the organization of
the session; 143
3. Considers that the fifth session of the Conference will provide an important and timely occasion
for:
(a) Review of progress and developments relating
to the major ongoing negotiations and agreement on
appropriate further action;
140 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Sessio11, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.Il.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.
141 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/33/15), vol. r.
142 Jbid., vol. II.
143 Ibid., annexes II and III.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

( b) Examination of current economic developments, particularly those having an adverse effect on
the developing countries, and consideration of appropriate action including corrective measures;
( c) Evaluation of the world trade and economic
situation and consideration of issues, policies and appropriate measures to facilitate structural changes in
the international economy, taking into account the
interrelationship of problems in the areas of trade,
development, money and finance with a view to attaining the establishment of a new international economic order and bearing in mind the further evolution
that may be needed in the rnles and principles governing international economic relations and the necessary contribution of the Conference to an international
development strategy for the third United Nations
development decade;

4. Urges all Member States to take the necessary
steps with a view to ensuring satisfactory results from
the fifth session of the Conference through adequate
preparations at the regional and interregional levels
and through the full utilization of the permanent machinery of the Conference for the purpose of facilitating negotiations on the agenda items of the fifth session;
5. Further urges all Member States to work towards agreement on action-oriented and other decisions
at the fifth session of the Conference that would contribute effectively to the establishment of the new
international economic order.

90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/155.

Effects of the world inflationary phenomenon on the development process

Recalling its resolution 32/175 of 19 December
1977, in which the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development was
requested to establish a governmental group of highlevel experts to study the world inflationary phenomenon and to transmit that study together with the comments of the Trade and Development Board to the
General Assembly, in order to enable it to decide on
measures to be taken, including the possibility of
convening a world conference on inflation,
1. Takes note of the report of the Group of HighLevel Governmental Experts on the Effects of the
World Inflationary Phenomenon on the Development
Process established by the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, 144 as well as of the comments of the Trade and Development Board at its
eighteenth session; 14 :;
2. Takes note, in particular, of the general conclusions arrived at by the Group of Experts on the
analysis of the effects of the world inflationary phenomenon on the developing countries;
3. Requests the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, at its fifth session, to recommend international policy measures to combat the
world inflationary phenomenon, as apparent in the
decline of some of the major currencies, and to eliminate the economic and social effects of internationally
transmitted inflation on developing countries, taking
into account the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Group of Experts;
4. Requests further the international community
to pay special attention to the international inflation
problem during the negotiations for the establishment
of the new international economic order and during
the elaboration of the new international development
strategy.
§0th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970 containing the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974
containing the Declaration and the Programme of
Action on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974
containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States and 3362 (S-VI) of 16 September 1975 on
development and international economic co-operation,
Bearing in mind that the effects of the inflationary
phenomenon have spread universally, and deeply concerned about the high rates of world inflation which
affect negatively the economies of all countries, especially those of the developing countries,
Recognizing, in particular, that the world inflationary
phenomenon distorts international trade and the international monetary system,
Recognizing further that no country or group of
countries alone can solve the problems caused by
world inflation and that isolated measures that have
been adopted so far are not in themselves sufficient
to combat this world-wide phenomenon,
Bearing in mind that the measures within the scope
of the developing countries cannot in themselves control internationally transmitted inflation,

117

33/156.

United Nations Conference to Negotiate
an International Arrangement to Replace the International Wheat Agreement of 1971, as Extended

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration
and the Programme of Action on the Establishment
of a New International Economic Order and 3362
(S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and
international economic co-operation,
Taking note of the report of the World Food Council on the work of its fourth session, held at Mexico
City from 12 to 15 June 1978,146
Ta king note of the resolution adopted on 24 November 1978 by the United Nations Conference to
Negotiate an International Arrangement to Replace
the International Wheat Agreement of 1971, as Extended,147
144 TD/B/704.

145 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/33/15), vol. II, paras. 392-404.
6
14 Jbid., Supplement No. 19 (A/33/19 and Corr.1).
147 TD/WHEAT.6/9.
