S/2019/988

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 December 2019
Original: English

United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2435
(2018), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, and Council resolution 2366 (2017), in which it requested the
Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the mandate of the Mission
every 90 days. The report covers the period from 27 September to 26 December 2019.

II. Major developments
2.
On 24 November, Colombians commemorated the third anniversary of the
signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace. In a statement on 29 November, the Presidential Counsellor for
Stabilization and Consolidation, Emilio Archila, recounted the progress made in the
Government’s “Peace with legality” strategy and reaffirmed the Government’s
commitment to the comprehensive implementation of the peace agreement. On the
occasion of the anniversary, an act of reconciliation was carried out at the former
territorial area for training and reintegration in Agua Bonita (Caquetá Department)
between former members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) in the process of reintegration and victims of the
conflict. In a statement commemorating the anniversary, the Mission called upon
Colombians to persevere in all efforts necessary to consolidate a sustainable peace
and acknowledged the commitment to peace of both signatory parties to the
agreement.
3.
The anniversary occurred in the middle of widespread social mobilizations that
began on 21 November with a national strike backed by various sectors, including
student movements, unions and indigenous and Afro-descendant organizations,
making a broad array of demands, including the withdrawal of proposed tax reforms,
opposition to possible modifications to the pension system, the implementation of
previous agreements with student groups, the protection of social leaders and former
FARC-EP combatants and the comprehensive implementation of the peace agreement.
The demonstrations have been mostly peaceful, although there have been some
incidents of vandalism, violence and confrontation between protestors and public
security forces. One death was reported in Bogotá and two in Buenaventura (Valle del
Cauca Department). In a statement through my spokesperson on 23 November, I

19-22018 (E)

301219

*1922018*

S/2019/988

acknowledged the largely peaceful spirit that had characterized the marches,
welcomed the stated willingness of the Government to engage in dialogue and called
upon all actors to refrain from violence, exercise maximum restraint and engage
peacefully.
4.
In response to these mobilizations, which have continued in various parts of the
country, on 26 November, the President of Colombia, Iván Duque Márquez, launched
a national conversation with different sectors around six themes: inclusive growth,
transparency and the efforts to combat corruption, education, “peace with legality”,
the environment, and institutional strengthening, which was later changed to youth.
The Government has stated that these conversations will continue until 15 March
2020. On 29 November, my Special Representative for Colombia and Head of
Mission participated in the first meeting held within the framework of the national
conversation on “peace with legality”, chaired by President Duque. He noted that the
comprehensive implementation of the peace agreement was one of the demands of
the mobilization and acknowledged the Government’s efforts in that regard, and noted
the significant challenges that still remained in the consolidation of peace in
Colombia.
5.
On 28 November, the national committee established as part of the strike,
members of Congress from various political parties, and civil society platforms
promoting the peace process jointly issued a letter requesting the Government to
create a round-table national dialogue separate from the national conversation, which
would involve direct dialogue with each sector to address its specific concerns. It was
proposed in the letter that the second item of the agenda for the round table be the
comprehensive implementation of the peace agreement and the possibility of
restarting dialogue with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN).
6.
The elections on 27 October were the first local and departmental elections since
the signing of the peace agreement and the first in which the political party Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) and former FARC -EP members
participated. There were incidents of violence and stigmatization during the
campaign; however, less incidents were recorded on election day compared with
previous elections (5 homicides were reported on the election day in comparison with
28 in the 2015 local elections). Voter turnout exceeded 61 per cent, as 13.1 per cent
more polling stations were installed than in 2015, including in places where it was
previously difficult owing to security problems associated with the conflict. These
developments were widely praised as a testament to the positive effects of the peace
process for democracy in Colombia.
7.
On 16 October, Congress approved the general national budget for 2020. The
bill presented by the Government included an annex on peace -related investments. In
December, Congress approved a constitutional reform authorizing the use of
resources from future royalties from hydrocarbon exploitation for investments in
conflict-affected municipalities. However, opposition parties and civil society actors
continue to consider that financing for the implementation of the peace agreement is
still inadequate.
8.
Members of Congress continued to play an important role in monitoring the
implementation of the peace agreement. Members of the peace commissions of both
chambers have visited communities affected by violence and former territorial areas
for training and reintegration. Congress has also held hearings on the implementation
of specific parts of the agreement.
9.
During the reporting period, two proposed reforms relate d to the transitional
justice aspects of the peace agreement were not approved by Congress, amid concerns
by lawmakers from different parties that the reforms could have an impact on the
legal security of persons covered by the Special Jurisdiction for Pea ce. President
2/17

19-22018

S/2019/988

Duque has stated that any reforms proposed by his Government will not have
retroactive effect.
10. Congress has made progress in discussing a bill to extend for 10 additional years
the Victims and Land Restitution Act (Act No. 1448 of 2011), due to expire in 2021.
Victims’ organizations asked for this extension so that victims’ rights, including
comprehensive reparations, could continue to be fulfilled. The Constitutional Court
has ruled that, if no measures are taken to extend the law, it will be a utomatically
extended until 2030. President Duque has stated that his Government supports
extending the law.
11. During the reporting period, the National Council for Peace, Reconciliation and
Coexistence, established under section 2 of the peace agreement, submitted to the
Government its input on the development of a national public policy on peace,
reconciliation, coexistence and non-stigmatization, which was prepared through a
nationwide participatory process with the territorial councils for peace, reconcilia tion
and coexistence.
12. On 6 November, the Minister of Defence, Guillermo Botero, resigned following
the presentation of a motion of no-confidence in Congress and controversy over an
air strike in late August against the camp of a FARC-EP dissident group in Caquetá
Department that claimed the lives of several recruited children. President Duque
named the former Minister for Foreign Affairs, Carlos Holmes Trujillo, as the new
Minister of Defence, and Claudia Blum de Barberi as Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Resolution of disputes regarding the implementation of the peace agreement
13. The Government and members of the ruling party have continued to charge that
FARC has not fully complied with some of its obligations under the peace agreement,
including handing over the entirety of its assets – which are to be used for reparation
to victims – and disclosing the location of mines and minefields, and have also
claimed that it has not fully contributed to the overall truth -seeking efforts. On
12 December, ruling party legislators officially requested clarification from the high
courts, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and other State institutions regarding which
entities are responsible for holding the FARC-EP accountable for the alleged lack of
compliance. The FARC party has continued to state that it has complied with its
obligations and reiterated claims that the Government has not fulfilled many of its
own commitments. The FARC party cites, among others, insufficient measures to
protect the security of former combatants, lack of respect for the implementation
architecture established under the agreement and failure to implement the agreement
comprehensively. The Government, meanwhile, has denied these claims and
repeatedly stated its commitment to the implementation of the peace agreement
through its “Peace with legality” strategy.
14. During the reporting period, the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and
Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement, the principal mechanism
established under the agreement to resolve such controversies and overcome
implementation challenges, met only twice.
Comprehensive rural reform
15. One of the elements of the comprehensive rural reform set out in section 1 of
the peace agreement is the establishment of the development programmes with a
territorial focus for conflict-affected municipalities. The Government reports that, of
the 1,207 works planned so far, 780 have been implemented, 315 are being carried
out and 112 are pending. These projects have benefited communities in 76
municipalities. The Government has been expanding financing strategies to enhance
the coverage of the programmes, including through projects approved with resources
19-22018

3/17

S/2019/988

from royalties from mineral and hydrocarbon exploitation and through t he “Obras por
impuestos” (works for taxes) mechanism involving the private sector. A total of 140
of the 170 municipalities in which such programmes are being implemented, and nine
departments, have adopted legal measures to include the programmes in their
departmental and local planning instruments. Civil society organizations have urged
that the participatory nature of the design of the programmes, in which more than
220,000 members of local communities were involved, continue during their
implementation.
16. The Government, through the Territorial Renewal Agency, has been working on
a framework plan to strengthen inter-institutional coordination and promote a more
comprehensive implementation of the development programmes. On 1 November,
Cabinet ministers, accompanied by representatives of the international community
and local authorities, visited the 16 areas in which the programmes are being carried
out to inaugurate projects and to discuss their implementation with local actors.
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition
17. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace continued to make progress on its seven
cases. Regarding case 001, on kidnappings by the former FARC -EP, the Special
Jurisdiction has held six territorial hearings across the country, including in four
former territorial areas for training and reintegration, in which former combatants
have participated and contributed to the truth, including acknowledging responsibility
for representative cases. Concerning case 003, on extrajudicial killings presented as
casualties of combat (known as “false positives”), 156 members of the armed forces
have voluntarily provided testimonies and, for the first time, a group of victims ’
relatives made observations regarding these testimonies in a public hearing. Regarding
case 004, on the situation in the Urabá region, the Special Jurisdiction ordered
precautionary measures to protect the safety of indigenous and Afro -Colombian
communities in the region to guarantee their participation in th e case. Case 007, on
the recruitment and use of children, includes 8,839 individual cases of children
recruited by the former FARC-EP, and 37 former FARC-EP commanders have been
identified to appear before the Special Jurisdiction.
18. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace has accredited more than 60,000 victims to
date, including the first collective accreditations of ethnic communities as victims.
The Special Jurisdiction continues to review on a case-by-case basis the 657 requests
presented by State officials and third parties to the conflict to voluntarily come under
its jurisdiction. Meanwhile, the Special Jurisdiction also continues to conduct
hearings with former State officials and third parties, including a former senator.
Some persons participating in the proceedings, including victims, have reported
threats against them. In November, 23 lawyers defending former FARC -EP
combatants before the Special Jurisdiction received threats.
19. To date, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace has excluded six former FARC-EP
commanders from its jurisdiction, including three during the reporting period:
Luciano Marín Arango, alias “Iván Márquez”, José Manuel Sierra Sabogal, alias
“Zarco Aldinever”, and Henry Castellanos Garzón, alias “Romaña”. All are part of
the group that announced its return to arms in August 2019.
20. During the reporting period, the Truth Commission organized two visits of
victims who had participated in the Havana peace talks to engage in reconciliation
initiatives with former combatants in former territo rial areas for training and
reintegration. The Commission continued to hold “dialogues for non-repetition” in
different regions of the country to discuss risks facing social leaders, as well as an
event in Medellín on the impacts of the conflict on children and adolescents. Together
with the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the Commission held the first hearings abroad
4/17

19-22018

S/2019/988

with victims living in exile. So far, the Commission has conducted more than 7,500
collective and individual interviews.
21. The Unit for the Search for Persons deemed missing in the context of and due
to the armed conflict completed 8 of the 12 regional forums for individuals and
organizations to contribute to the development of its national search plan. On
2 December, the Unit held the first national forum to compile and consolidate the
contributions from the regional forums.
22. The Comprehensive System continues to receive reports from State authorities,
the public security forces and social and victims’ organizations. Upon request by
victims’ organizations, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace extended the deadline for
submission of reports to March 2021.
Substitution of illicit crops
23. Illicit economies continue to be one of the main drivers of violence. The
National Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops was
established under section 4 of the peace agreement to support rural families and
communities in transitioning from the cultivation of illicit crops towards other
economic activities. According to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), of the 60,082 ha of coca registered by 99,097 families participating in the
Programme, an estimated 40,506 ha have been eradicated voluntarily since August
2017. A total of 38,525 families have received their full year of interim payments,
60,842 families have received technical assistance and 34,492 families have received
support for food security projects.
24. Individuals and social organizations participating in the Programme continue to
be the target of threats, attacks and killings. The Government is advancing initiatives
aimed at characterizing the specific risks faced by individuals who are actively and
visibly involved in the Programme, in order to implement prevention measures.
25. UNODC also reports that 95 per cent of families are complying with their
voluntary eradication commitments. Some families participating in the Programme
have expressed concerns over delays in the implementation of alternative productive
projects and investments in local development, which are critical to supporting their
transition away from illicit economies.
Ejército de Liberación Nacional
26. Confrontations between ELN and other illegal armed groups and the public
security forces continue to affect communities, especially in Chocó, Norte de
Santander, Arauca and Nariño Departments. Communities and civil society
organizations in areas with ELN presence have called for the resumption of dialogue
with the group. The Catholic Church continues to call for renewed dialogue efforts
and for ELN to release kidnapped persons. The Government has reiterated its
conditions for resuming negotiations, namely the cessation of all criminal activities
and the release of kidnapped persons.

III. Mission tasks
A.

Reintegration
Political reintegration
27. In October, the FARC party and former combatants participated in their first
local and departmental elections. Over 300 candidates were endorsed by FARC and

19-22018

5/17

S/2019/988

by coalitions including FARC, 67 per cent of whom were not former combatants.
Some former combatants also ran with other parties. A total of 12 candidates were
elected for different offices, including 3 for mayor. Two of the candidates elected as
mayors were former FARC-EP members endorsed by other parties, while the other,
who was not a former FARC-EP member, ran under a coalition that included FARC.
Women former combatants participated actively (38 per cent of candidates), despite
challenges in access to resources and protection schemes. Two of the elected
candidates were women.
28. Despite the stigmatization against them, funding limitations and security issues
during the campaign, the FARC party and former combatants participated actively in
the elections, including exercising their right to vote. Timely collaboration among
electoral and government authorities was instrumental in overcoming obstacles,
including regarding former combatants’ ability to vote in their current places of
residence.
29. In December, the Steering Committee of the Chamber of Repres entatives
declared temporarily vacant the congressional seat of former FARC -EP commander
Seuxis Hernández Solarte, alias “Jesús Santrich”, following the Supreme Court’s
decision to formally open criminal proceedings on drug-trafficking charges and order
his pretrial detention. In accordance with the Constitution, the FARC party has
temporarily lost this seat in the lower house while the investigation is being
conducted.
Evolving geography of reintegration
30. In November, the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization reported that
9,225 former combatants (representing 70 per cent of those who have been accredited)
are residing outside former territorial areas for training and reintegration, roughly a
quarter of whom are residing in urban contexts and thre e quarters in semi-rural and
rural settings. These former combatants face challenges in terms of access to basic
services and security, among others. Notably, 19 of the 47 approved collective
projects benefit former combatants outside former territorial ar eas for training and
reintegration.
31. The Agency for Reintegration and Normalization continues its efforts to find
permanent solutions for land, housing and services for all former territorial areas for
training and reintegration, whether they are being relocated or staying in their current
locations. The positive results of the initial phase of visits by the Government, FARC
and the Mission to the former territorial areas were acknowledged by both parties,
who committed to jointly follow up on decisions taken during the visits and to extend
the visits to all other such areas. However, no joint visits were carried out during the
reporting period.
32. Land for the 24 former territorial areas for training and reintegration remains a
critical need. The Agency for Reintegration and Normalization has requested the
National Land Agency to purchase land plots for nine former territorial areas, and the
Colombia in Peace Fund has allocated around $6.1 million for that purpose.
Economic and social reintegration
33. The National Reintegration Council met twice during the reporting period and
approved 12 new collective productive projects, bringing the number of approved
projects to 47, benefiting 2,454 former combatants (including 688 women) and 83
members of local communities. A total of 24 of these approved projects have received
funds, benefiting 1,530 former combatants (including 450 women). As for individual
projects, the number of initiatives approved and disbursed is now 705, benefiting 827
former combatants (including 178 women). In total, 18 per cent of accredited former
6/17

19-22018

S/2019/988

combatants have received financial support for productive projects through these
mechanisms.
34. Of the 47 collective projects approved, 77 per cent are being carried out on
rented land, which affects their sustainability and highlights the need to make
meaningful progress in the allocation of land for productive projects.
35. In an encouraging development, the Gender Technical Working Group of the
National Reintegration Council has restarted its activities. The Working Group
continues to raise awareness of the guidelines for the inclusion of gender-related
actions in economic reintegration and to strengthen support for the reintegration of
female former combatants.
36. In November, a group of companies led by Proantioquia, the largest business
sector association in Antioquia Department, announced that it would provide 270 ha
to develop a productive project for 185 former combatants, with the participation of
the local community. This initiative illustrates the important role the private sector
can play in supporting reintegration and peacebuilding more broadly.
37. An entity of the Ministry of Industry, Tourism and Trade known as “iNNpulsa”
has established a partnership with the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization to
provide technical assistance for 500 individual and 40 collective projects.
38. The dedicated efforts of former combatants in productive initiatives continue to
show positive results. In October, the coffee produced by former combatants and
nearby communities in Cauca Department was awarded a prestigious international
prize. During the reporting period, former combatants from across the country
presented their products in three major national product fairs.
39. In December, the National Reintegration Council approved the extension of
health-care services in former territorial areas for training and reintegration and
surrounding communities for 2020. To date, 98 per cent of former combatants are
affiliated with the national health-care system, although former combatants still report
challenges in gaining access to health care. To strengthen local capacities regarding
health, including sexual and reproductive health, the Government launched the
second phase of the “Health for peace” project, implemented by the International
Organization for Migration (IOM), the United Nations Population Fund and the Pan
American Health Organization.
40. Guidelines on economic support for housing projects for former combatants are
still pending approval by the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization. Efforts are
under way by the Agency to resolve pending issues for the collective housing project
for 350 former combatants in the former territorial areas for training and reintegration
of Pondores and Tierra Grata.
41. The number of former combatants pursuing academic studies increased from
2,461 in January to 5,059 in October. The Ministry of Education recently announced
an additional 3,300 slots for former combatants and community members in the
education programme entitled “Arando la educación”. In addition, 3,475 former
combatants are currently enrolled in vocational training activities, mainly through the
National Training Service, the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization and the
Colombian Red Cross. However, in some remote areas, such as Chocó Department,
former combatants still face challenges in gaining access to educational opportunities.
42. Progress has been made in reaching consensus between FARC and the
Government on the reintegration road map. Its formal adoption, which remains
pending, will help to provide more clarity on matters, including education, health, the
sustainability of economic reintegration, housing, community-based reintegration and
psychosocial assistance.
19-22018

7/17

S/2019/988

Role of local actors and communities
43. Since the elections in October, the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization
and other actors have undertaken efforts to promote the inclusion of reintegration
policies into the programmes of the incoming regional and local authorities.
44. Reintegration activities that benefit local communities are key to both the
sustainability of such communities and to the fostering of long-term reconciliation.
While some initiatives are under way, their scope remains limited.

B.

Security guarantees
45. Violence against communities and killings of social leaders, human rights
defenders and former FARC-EP combatants continues. Violence remains
concentrated in the rural areas of Cauca, Nariño, Antioquia, Caquetá and Norte de
Santander Departments, where there is a convergence of weak State presence, illegal
economies and poverty. The Office of the Attorney-General reports that the vast
majority of these killings can be attributed to illegal armed groups and criminal
organizations and their support networks.
Security guarantees for former FARC-EP members
46. During the reporting period, the Mission verified 20 homicides of former
FARC-EP members, making 2019 the most violent year for former combatants since
the signing of the peace agreement, with 77 killings to date, compared with 65 in 2018
and 31 in 2017. The total number of killings has now reached 173, in addition to 14
disappearances and 29 attempted homicides.
47. Of particular concern was the killing of Alexander Parra Uribe, known as
“Rodolfo Fierro”, a respected leader in the former territorial area for training and
reintegration of La Guajira in the Mesetas municipality (Meta Depa rtment). His wife,
also a former combatant, was a candidate for the FARC party in the local elections
and his homicide occurred two days before election day. This was the first killing to
occur inside the protection perimeter in a former territorial area for training and
reintegration, which accentuated the perception of insecurity of former FARC -EP
members. The Government called for investigations and announced enhanced
security measures in the former territorial area and for the victim ’s family.
48. Although the Ministry of Defence has repeatedly stated that it will ensure
continued security around former territorial areas for training and reintegration, a
clear regulation to normalize the deployment of security forces in these areas would
help assuage concerns of former combatants in the former territorial areas. It is also
important to extend security measures to new settlements, where the situation of
former combatants is even more precarious.
49. Several threats and incidents of stigmatization against FARC candidates were
reported during the campaign. No security incidents were reported against FARC
candidates or former combatants on election day. The Tripartite Protection and
Security Mechanism helped to coordinate and monitor protection measures at the
national, regional and local levels to guarantee the security and right to vote of the
FARC candidates and former combatants. A total of 78 protection measures were
implemented for FARC candidates through the electoral protection r oad map of the
Ministry of the Interior.
50. The Government has established an inter-institutional mechanism coordinated
by the Office of the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation to
monitor security for former combatants and to follo w up on the implementation of

8/17

19-22018

S/2019/988

the measures announced by the Government in June to strengthen protection for
former combatants and investigations into attacks against them. The Government
reports progress in 15 of these measures, including the deployment of additional
investigators and police officers in the territories to strengthen the Special
Investigation Unit of the Office of the Attorney General and the Elite Corps of the
National Police and the implementation of mechanisms to follow up on early
warnings of the Office of the Ombudsman, paying special attention to risks for former
FARC-EP members.
51. Cooperation between the local community and the Office of the Attorney
General was instrumental in bringing to justice a non-commissioned officer of the
Colombian armed forces who was found guilty of the murder of former FARC -EP
member Dimar Torres, killed in April in Norte de Santander. The case was halted for
two months owing to a conflict of jurisdiction between the military and ordinary
justice systems, which was finally resolved in favour of the latter. The judicial
prosecution of the other persons linked to the killing has yet to advance. The Office
of the Attorney General continues to investigate a case involving members of the
public security forces in an attack in Arauca Department in March 2018 against family
members of two former combatants.
52. Regarding the killings of former FARC-EP members, the Special Investigation
Unit reports 21 convictions and 13 cases at the trial stage. The Unit also repor ts that
80 per cent of the attacks are linked to illegal armed groups and criminal
organizations. Challenges remain regarding the dismantling of the structures behind
these killings, as only 9 of the 67 arrested suspects are the intellectual authors.
53. The joint working group on the investigation of attacks against former FARC -EP
members, which includes FARC, the Special Investigation Unit and the Mission, is
reinforcing its coordination mechanisms, including regional tools to strengthen access
for former combatants to the justice system and to improve risk analysis on potential
threats.
54. The Specialized Subdirectorate for Security and Protection of the National
Protection Unit, which provides protection measures for former FARC -EP members,
continues to face budgetary and capacity shortfalls. In a positive development, a new
training programme for 77 bodyguards is being implemented to cover incomplete
protection schemes and to meet the full requirement of 1,200 bodyguards set out in
the peace agreement. It is important that discussions on the restructuring of the
National Protection Unit include the Subdirectorate and FARC.
55. As at 24 November, 233 individual and collective protection schemes had been
put in place, benefiting 250 men and 74 women. Enhanced gender-sensitive measures
and an equitable access to protection measures are fundamental to addressing the
specific risks facing women former combatants.
Security guarantees for communities, human rights defenders and social leaders
56. Communities, human rights defenders, social leaders and persons involved in
the implementation of the peace agreement, especially in rural areas, continue to be
targets of violence and intimidation by illegal armed groups, criminal organizations,
drug cartels and other actors.
57. Since the signing of the peace agreement, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) has verified 303 killings of human rights
defenders and social leaders, 86 of which (including 12 women) occurred in 2019.
The Office of the Attorney General and the Elite Corps of the National Police are
leading investigations and have reported progress in 39 per cent of the 86 cases.

19-22018

9/17

S/2019/988

58. In addition to investigations into those responsible for these killings, section 3.4
of the peace agreement includes a call for the development of a public policy on the
dismantling of criminal organizations and their support networks. The body charged
with developing this public policy, the National Commission on Security Guarantees,
did not meet during the reporting period and has met only twice in 2019.
59. In December, the Government presented guidelines for the comprehensive
public policy on guaranteeing and respecting the work of defending human rights. In
November, human rights platforms and civil society organizations suspended their
participation in discussions over the policy, citing differences with the Government ’s
approach. Among other demands, the platforms were urging President Duque to
reconvene the National Commission on Security Guarantees and to implement Decree
No. 660 of 2018, on the comprehensive security and protection programme for
communities and organizations in the territories, the establishment of which is part of
section 3.4 of the peace agreement.
60. The presence of illegal armed groups in ethnic territories continues to have
devastating consequences for indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities, in
particular in Chocó and Cauca Departments, including recruitment, forced
recruitment of children, homicides, displacement, confinement, and attacks and
threats against ethnic authorities and leaders. The institutional response has been
limited despite repeated early warnings from the Office of the Ombudsman.
61. The widespread violence in northern Cauca Department has not been contained.
Two massacres occurred in less than 36 hours in October, including an ambush that
claimed the lives of Cristina Bautista, a Nasa community leader, and four others,
including members of the indigenous guard. In October, the Government announced
the deployment of 2,500 members of the public security forces to Cauca. Local
communities expressed concerns that strengthened military operations might increase
risks for civilians. The Government also launched a social investment plan for the
Department and included Cauca in the strategy known as “Zonas futuro”, as one of
the strategic zones of comprehensive intervention.
62. The deteriorating situation in Chocó Department is cause for alarm. Chocó is
one of the poorest departments in Colombia and a strate gic corridor for illicit
economies and trafficking. In early December, the Office of the Ombudsman
confirmed the displacement of 3,200 members of 17 ethnic communities of the Alto
Baudó municipality and the confinement of eight Afro -Colombian and indigenous
communities, as a result of clashes among illegal armed groups, including ELN and
the Autodefensas Gaitanistas de Colombia. Communities, social leaders and civil
society organizations have voiced their concern that more widespread violence is
imminent.
63. During the reporting period, the Office of the Ombudsman issued 11 early
warnings covering areas in Norte de Santander, Chocó, La Guajira, Putumayo, Meta,
Magdalena, Cundinamarca, Tolima, Cauca, Nariño and Bogotá. Six of these were of
imminent character, requiring urgent State response. The Mission has consolidated
information-sharing mechanisms with the Office of the Ombudsman and the Office
of the Inspector General to monitor the follow-up of the early warnings and the work
of the Intersectoral Commission for Rapid Response to Early Warnings. With support
from the Mission, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
OHCHR, the Ministry of the Interior is strengthening its local capacities for enhanced
monitoring of the implementation of recommendations, including specific
recommendations for local authorities.

10/17

19-22018

S/2019/988

C.

Legal guarantees
64. Notwithstanding the regular meetings between the Office of the High
Commissioner for Peace, FARC and the Mission, no substantial progress has been
made in the process of accreditation of former combatants. The lack of accreditation
limits their access to benefits provided through the reintegration process, including
employment opportunities.
65. Over the reporting period, the Government reported progress on 29 cases of
former FARC-EP members from the list submitted to the Government on 15 August
2017 who were awaiting accreditation. Approximately 130 former combatants from
the list continue to await accreditation despite having submitted all their required
documentation, some of whom have been waiting for over a year.
66. No progress has been made regarding the list of approximately 1,000 individuals
submitted by FARC after 15 August 2017. The Inspector General has underlined the
specific risks of recidivism for these individuals due to the legal uncertainty that they
face, and corresponding difficulties in gaining access to the reintegration process.
67. No progress was made in the accreditation of approximately 270 individuals
whose cases remain under review by the Government, of whom 164 are in prison.
FARC and the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace, with the support of the
Mission and within the framework of the Commission for the Follow -up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement, visited penitentiary
institutions to meet with 135 of these individuals; discussions are under way to decide
on their accreditation.
68. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace has denied conditional liberty to 74 out of
approximately 160 accredited former combatants who remain in prison. Those
individuals will remain in prison while the Special Jurisdiction rules on the
applicability of the pardon on the basis of Act No. 1820 of 2016. FARC
representatives to the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of
the Implementation of the Final Agreement have voiced their concerns related to the
pace at which the Special Jurisdiction is reviewing these cases, as well as their
concern over the cases of accreditation still under the Government ’s review. In
November, the Office of the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and
Consolidation organized a meeting with the Special Jurisdiction, during which FARC
had the opportunity to submit its concerns to the Special Jurisdiction.

D.

Cross-cutting issues
Gender
69. Modest progress has been made in implementing the gender actions of the
national reintegration policy. The Government High-level Forum on Gender, the
National Reintegration Council Gender Technical Working Group and the FARC
Gender Committee play a key role in advancing this agenda. Adequate resourcing for
the full implementation of these actions remains a challenge.
70. The security of women human rights defenders and social leaders continues to
be of concern. According to the analysis by the Office of the Ombudsman of its 2019
early warnings, women continue to be targeted by illegal armed groups, including to
discourage them from participating in political, social and peacebuilding processes.
Women who denounce sexual violence and those participating in the implementation
of the peace agreement are at particular risk. The Intersectoral Commission on
Safeguards for Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders has yet to finalize and
implement its action plan. Despite these challenges, departmental and local initiatives

19-22018

11/17

S/2019/988

have continued, including regional security round tables for women leaders in the
Montes de María region and Putumayo and Magdalena Departments. The Ministry of
the Interior and local authorities have an important role to play in implementing the
local action plans derived from these round tables.
71. Two recent reports, one by the Special Forum on Gender and one by the
international verification component for gender established under the peace
agreement, noted slow progress in the implementation of the gender provisions of the
agreement and urged stronger efforts in that regard.
72. As part of the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women,
the Mission supported more than 10 events in communities and former territorial
areas for training and reintegration, in which women and men from different sectors
were engaged in dialogues and cultural activities on the prevention of violence against
women.
Ethnic affairs
73. Progress remains limited in the provision of tailored support for former
combatants of ethnic origin. Many are living in remote locations outside the territorial
areas for training and reintegration, and some have returned to their communities of
origin. Former combatants who have established new settlements in ethnic territories
face precarious security conditions and difficulties in gaining access to basic services.
For example, in Mandé (Antioquia Department), a group of 53 former combatants,
mostly Afro-Colombians, from the territorial area for training and reintegration in
Vidrí, are facing critical security risks in a context of very limited institutional
presence. In November, the Office of the Ombudsman reported that the risks in its
June 2019 early warning regarding the danger to former combatants in this new
settlement had materialized as predicted.
74. In September, my Special Representative met with the High-level Forum of
Ethnic Peoples to discuss ethnic issues within the framework of the Mission ’s
mandate. The Mission’s ethnic affairs focal points continue to engage with ethnic
communities and organizations at the regional and local levels.
75. Continued progress by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace in case 002, on the
situation in the Tumaco, Barbacoas and Ricaurte municipalities, and case 004, on the
situation in the Urabá region, including the accreditation of ethnic communities as
victims, is important for the recognition of the disproportionate effect of the conflict
on ethnic communities.
Children
76. The Agency for Reintegration and Normalization continues to implement the “A
different path of life” reintegration programme for 123 children formerly associated
with FARC-EP. As at November, 115 adolescents were receiving monthly stipends
and 8 adolescents were under the protection of the Colombian Family Welfare
Institute. At least 64 adolescents have been granted reparations in accordance with
the Victims and Land Restitution Act. It is crucial that measures be taken to ensure
the sustainability of the programme, including through adequate resources and regular
meetings of its local follow-up committees.
77. Access to productive projects for adolescents formerly associated with FARC -EP
remains challenging. Only six participants in the programme have received
disbursements (one has not received the full amount), and an additional nine requests
are pending evaluation. During the reporting period, the Mission identified and
followed up on cases in which there was incomplete documentation and a need for
psychological support.
12/17

19-22018

S/2019/988

78. The Technical Working Group on Children of the National Reintegration
Council has not been convened since July, postponing urgent decisions regarding the
218 new cases of young people identified by FARC that could be included in the
programme.
79. More than 2,200 children of former combatants continue to require dedicated
support and services. A total of 900 of those children live in former territorial areas
for training and reintegration, while those living outside the territorial areas have even
more difficulty gaining access to basic services. Five former territorial areas for
training and reintegration have initiated planning for establishing child protection
spaces and day-care activities with support from the Peacebuilding Fund, which are
being implemented by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women).
A strategy to address issues related to the economy of care is important for facilitating
the participation of women former combatants in reintegration activities. Many
former combatants are still facing difficulties in regularizing the legal guardianship
of their children.
Youth and peace and security
80. Young people, in particular those involved in student organizations, have been
very active within the popular mobilizations of the past few weeks, including in
calling for the protection and full implementation of the peace agreement. Young
people also participated actively in the electoral campaign, including as candidates.
81. Young volunteers continue to support and lead reintegration and reconciliation
activities. Over 40 youth volunteers, including from the National Training Service,
supported the organization of the national rafting c hampionship in the former
territorial area for training and reintegration in Miravalle in November. In Remedios
(Antioquia Department), young women organized a soccer league to promote
reconciliation among former combatants and the local community, includi ng the
creation of a team composed of local women and women former combatants. Inspired
by their experience in Mission-facilitated visits to former territorial areas for training
and reintegration, youth leaders from the World Economic Forum Global Shapers hub
in Bogotá arranged for former combatants involved in 10 productive initiatives to
participate in a national product fair in December, with support from the Mission and
the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization.
Coordination with the United Nations country team
82. During the reporting period, the United Nations multi-partner trust fund for
sustaining peace in Colombia approved additional funding for United Nations and
civil society projects and initiatives related to the implementation of the peace
agreement, including support for reintegration, local stabilization projects for
economic recovery, community infrastructure and the protection of human rights
defenders. Support was also provided for collective reparations to victims, the return
of internally displaced persons, the participation of victims in the transitional justice
process and the strengthening of the Office of the Inspector General.
83. The United Nations country team has engaged with the Presidential Counsellor
for National Security to provide international expertise for the Government ’s “Zonas
futuro” strategy and share best practices on civil-military stabilization approaches in
territories with limited State presence. The country team will continue to provide
technical assistance as requested in the early phases of the implementation of the
strategy.
84. The international community continues to provide key support to the
reintegration process, including through the multi-partner trust fund and the European
19-22018

13/17

S/2019/988

Union, as well as through projects implemented by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the World Food Programme, UNDP, IOM and
others. Progress was made on the joint reintegration project funded by the
Peacebuilding Fund and implemented by UNICEF, UNDP and UN-Women in
coordination with the Mission, with nine gender equality professionals deployed to
15 locations and activities to address issues related to the economy of care
implemented in two former territorial areas for training and reintegration.

IV. Mission structures
A.

Mission support
85. The Mission has been working to further delegate financial and other
management decisions to the field, reflecting the new delegations of authority. In
addition, the Mission is replacing its vehicle fleet to better reflect the Mission’s
mobility needs and continues to keep its deployment under review, in particular in the
context of the evolving geography of the reintegration process.
86. The percentage of professional and field service female staff on fixed-term,
continuing and permanent contracts was 42 per cent as at 28 November 2019. For
other categories, women represented: 54 per cent of United Nations volunteers; 33 per
cent of international observers; and 50 per cent of consultants and individual
contractors. Overall, 44 per cent of all civilian staff were women.

B.

Safety and security
87. The Department of Safety and Security has been closely monitoring the security
impacts of ongoing strikes and protests. Activities in Bogotá and Cali (Valle del Cauca
Department) were suspended on some days in the context of the national strike, and
the Mission’s office in Popayán suffered minor damage. In some parts of the country,
the presence of illegal checkpoints (in particular those set up by ELN in Nor te de
Santander Department) and the presence of anti-personnel landmines have resulted in
mobility restrictions for the Mission. In Arauca and Córdoba Departments, Mission
contractors have received threats of extortion by illegal armed groups. The residual
risk level after the implementation of the security risk management measures remains
medium to low.

C.

Conduct and discipline
88. The Mission’s Conduct and Discipline Team continues activities to raise
awareness across the Mission of the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse and of measures to prevent discrimination, harassment, including sexual
harassment, and abuse of authority.
89. During the reporting period, five cases of misconduct were closed and five new
allegations were reported, including an allegation of sexual exploitation. Of the five
allegations, one has been referred to the Office of Internal Oversight Services, two
are under investigation by the Mission, one is pending the investigation of a fact finding panel and one has been documented in an investigation report, which is under
review.

14/17

19-22018

S/2019/988

V. Observations
90. Three years after the signing of the peace agreement, Colombians are striving
to write a new chapter of peacebuilding, reconciliation and hope. Thousands of former
combatants continue their reintegration into civilian life while Colombian society
continues to show inspiring signs that it is willing to embrace them. Victims are
participating more and more actively in the transitional justice mechanisms and
continue to be powerful voices in the search for truth, justice and reconciliation. The
strong participation and comparatively peaceful nature of the local and departmental
elections in October demonstrated once again the gradual advance towards a more
inclusive and democratic Colombia. The peace agreement and the commitment of the
parties to its implementation, despite multiple challenges, have created the conditions
for these and many other positive changes. Indeed, in recent meetings, elected mayors
and governors have expressed nearly unanimous interest in taking advantage of the
opportunities presented in the agreement to bring long-awaited peace and
development to communities that have suffered immensely from the conflict.
Business leaders are recognizing the economic benefits of the peace process and are
getting personally involved in supporting reintegration efforts. Furthermore, in recent
mobilizations, Colombians across the country, especially young people, have called
for the protection and full implementation of the agreement. All these developments
are clear reflections of a widening consensus that the positive advances brought as a
result of the agreement must be preserved and that its implementation will continue
to improve the country’s prospects for peace and prosperity.
91. I trust that ongoing conversations between the Government and the sectors that
have mobilized in recent weeks will bring Colombians closer together towards
common solutions, in a spirit of inclusive, respectful and peaceful dial ogue. Sustained
dialogue is also essential for the parties to the agreement to overcome differences
over its implementation. I urge the parties to make full use of the Commission for the
Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Fi nal Agreement
to resolve their disputes. In addition, tripartite arrangements between the
Government, FARC and the United Nations have also been a valuable tool in
promoting dialogue, from the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism that oversaw
the bilateral ceasefire to the recent joint visits to the former territorial areas for
training and reintegration to prepare for their transition. I encourage the parties to
continue to make use of such valuable tripartite mechanisms. The United Nations, as
always, stands ready to support.
92. I commend the Colombian people and institutions for the successful conduct of
the local and departmental elections. Despite regrettable cases of violence and
stigmatization during the campaign, election day took place relatively peacefully and
many more Colombians were able to run for office and to vote than in previous local
elections. The participation of former combatants and the FARC party in these polls,
including the election of party members and former combatants to politic al office,
represents an important step in the political reintegration process.
93. The role of local and departmental authorities is critical for the success of the
country’s peacebuilding efforts. I congratulate the new mayors, governors and other
officials on their election and encourage them to make peace implementation an
agenda of their own. Municipal and departmental authorities will be key in
implementing the development programmes with a territorial focus and in improving
security for communities and leaders, as well as in ensuring the sustainability of the
reintegration process, as they gradually take on increasing responsibilities over the
former territorial areas for training and reintegration. I invite the newly elected
authorities to continue to make use of regional and local coordination mechanisms
such as the departmental reintegration boards, the local reintegration councils, the
19-22018

15/17

S/2019/988

territorial councils for peace, reconciliation and coexistence and the tripartite
mechanisms for protection and security. The new administrations can count on the
partnership of the Mission and the United Nations entities, funds and programmes,
and the international community more broadly. We look forward to working closely
with them.
94. I call, once again, for more effective measures to protect the lives of social
leaders, human rights defenders and persons involved in the implementation of the
peace agreement, including specific measures for women and for indigenous and
Afro-Colombian leaders. I urge the Intersectoral Commission on Safeguards for Women
Leaders and Human Rights Defenders to finalize and implement its action plan, in
coordination with women’s organizations. It is also important to work towards improved
dialogue between the Government and civil society regarding the comprehensive
public policy on guaranteeing and respecting the work of defending human rights.
95. I also reiterate my calls for more effective measures to protect the lives of former
combatants, particularly considering that 2019 has been the most violent year for
former FARC-EP members since the signing of the peace agreement. Family
members, including children, of former combatants killed since the signing are facing
particular vulnerabilities; specific measures should be considered to support them.
96. The security of social leaders and human rights defenders, as well as of former
combatants, is intrinsically tied to the safety of their communities. Notwithstanding
the overall improvements in security following the peace agreement, communities
continue to be preyed upon by illegal armed groups and criminal organizations in
areas where the limited presence of the State has left institutional vacuums and where
the lack of economic opportunities has left the communities vulnerable to illicit
economies. I am alarmed by the consequences, in particular for ethnic communities,
of the fighting among illegal armed groups in the illicit trafficking corridor that
extends from the Bajo Cauca region in Antioquia Department to Chocó Department,
as well as the incessant violence in Cauca Department.
97. A public policy for the dismantling of illegal armed groups and criminal
organizations and their support networks, as called for in the peace agreement, is
essential to curb the violence that these groups inflict upon vulnerable communities.
I encourage the Government to reconvene the National Commission on Security
Guarantees in order to make progress in the finalization and implementation of this
policy. As another important vehicle for improving the security of communities in
former conflict areas, further progress on the implementation of Decree No. 660 of
2018, regarding the comprehensive security and protection programme for
communities and organizations in the territories, should be considered.
98. As stated in my previous reports and as confirmed repeatedly by the
Government, the vast majority of former FARC-EP combatants continue to make
efforts to reintegrate into civilian life and remain committed to the peace process
despite continued uncertainties and attacks against them. Multiple actors, including
the Government, local authorities, universities, the private sector and religious and
civil society organizations, continue to develop initiatives to support former
combatants in their reintegration efforts, including educational, productive and
employment opportunities. However, there are several pending challenges that
require concerted action. First, it is important for FARC, the Government and the
range of actors supporting the reintegration process to adopt a longer-term vision for
former combatants’ productive projects in order to ensure the sustainability and
viability of such projects. This includes essential elements such as access to land and
credit; technical assistance; linking projects to viable commercial opportunities;
strengthening former combatants’ productive associations; and ensuring the active
participation of women. Second, a community-based approach should be further
16/17

19-22018

S/2019/988

pursued so that productive projects involve and benefit local communities, which in
turn will help to promote reconciliation and broader local development. Third,
although the first phase of the transition of the former territorial areas for training and
reintegration has proceeded successfully, greater clarity on timelines, locations, roles
and responsibilities and increased outreach and communication efforts are key to
reducing remaining uncertainties among inhabitants of the former territorial areas in
terms of the sustainability of health, food, housing, security, infrastructure and
services. Fourth, it is important to make further progress on specific measures to
support former combatants of ethnic origin. Finally, I acknowledge the steps taken by
the Government to reach former combatants living outside former territorial areas for
training and reintegration, specifically through productive projects, and urge all actors
to continue their efforts to help to ensure that they have adequate access to security,
basic services and opportunities for education, employment and productive projects.
I urge the parties to make increased use of the National Reintegration Council and its
working groups to have strategic discussions on the range of issues regarding the
reintegration process.
99. The slow progress in resolving the accreditations of former combatants remains
an urgent concern. Failure to address their situation impedes their participation in the
reintegration process and makes them vulnerable to recidivism and recruitment by
illegal armed groups. I urge all relevant actors to redouble their efforts in this regard.
100. I welcome progress in the implementation of the development programmes with
a territorial focus, envisioned under section 1 of the peace agreement as part of a
broader rural reform, which are starting to bring peace dividends to these conflict affected rural communities in the form of much needed investments in infrastructure
and services. Local authorities and communities participated actively in the planning
phase of the development programmes; I trust that they will continue to be as actively
involved in the implementation phase. These investments must be coupled with
progress in extending to these areas a sustained and integrated presence of the State,
including not just the public security forces but also the civilian institutions that can
bring education, health, basic services and overall development.
101. While a long-term transformation of Colombia, in particular the areas ravaged
by the conflict, was envisaged under the peace agreement, the foundations of that
transformation should be built now through concrete actions by all actors to
implement the entirety of the agreement. It is important to underscore the
interconnected nature of its provisions. Consolidating progress in the reintegration of
former combatants and the security guarantees for communities in conflict -affected
areas requires that progress be made simultaneously in other areas of the agreement:
in the rural reforms designed to combat poverty and underdevelopmen t in the
countryside; in the political reforms aimed at more inclusive and participatory
politics; in the illicit crop substitution efforts to counter illegal economies; and in the
transitional justice mechanisms that are providing Colombian society, espec ially
victims, with truth, justice and reconciliation. Furthermore, the gender-related
provisions and ethnic chapter of the agreement provide specific measures to support
women and ethnic communities. Implementing all aspects of the agreement will help
to build confidence between conflict-affected communities and State institutions in
areas where this vital link has been eroded by decades of war. This in turn will provide
opportunities for sustainable progress, security and development.
102. With the peace agreement as its road map, Colombia can continue to build the
peace that its citizens yearn for. The United Nations remains fully committed to that
goal, working in partnership with the parties, with Colombian society and with the
international community.

19-22018

17/17
