A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/97
6 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 105
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/637)]
52/97.

Violence against women migrant workers

The General Assembly,
Recalling all previous resolutions on violence against women migrant workers adopted by the General
Assembly, the Commission on the Status of Women, the Commission on Human Rights and the Commission
on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, as well as the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against
Women,1
Reaffirming the outcome of the World Conference on Human Rights, held at Vienna from 14 to 25 June
1993, 2 the International Conference on Population and Development, 3 the World Summit for Social
Development4 and the Fourth World Conference on Women,5 specifically as the results pertain to women
migrant workers,

1

Resolution 48/104.

2

See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

3

See Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5-13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18).
4

See Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6-12 March 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8).
5

See Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4-15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13).
98-76627

/...

A/RES/52/97
Page 2

Emphasizing the need for accurate, objective and comprehensive information, as well as for a wide
exchange of experiences and lessons learned by individual countries in protecting and promoting the rights
and welfare of women migrant workers for policy formulation and joint action,
Acknowledging the results of the Expert Group Meeting on Violence against Women Migrant Workers,
held at Manila from 27 to 31 May 1996, and the comments thereon by Member States and relevant
international organizations,
Noting the large numbers of women from developing countries and some countries with economies in
transition who continue to venture forth to more affluent countries in search of a living for themselves and
their families as a consequence of poverty, unemployment and other socio-economic conditions, and
acknowledging the duty of the sending States to work for conditions that provide employment and security
to their citizens,
Acknowledging the economic benefits that accrue to sending and receiving States from the employment
of women migrant workers,
Recognizing the importance of joint and collaborative approaches at the bilateral, regional, interregional
and international levels in protecting and promoting the rights and welfare of women migrant workers,
Underlining the important role of relevant United Nations treaty bodies in monitoring the implementation
of human rights conventions and the relevant special procedures, within their respective mandates, in
addressing the problem of violence against women migrant workers and in protecting and promoting their
rights and welfare,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on violence against women migrant workers;6

2. Encourages concerned Governments, in particular those of sending and receiving countries, to
develop, as appropriate, systematic data collection methods and to update and share information on violence
against women migrant workers;
3. Urges concerned Governments, in particular those of sending and receiving countries, to strengthen
their national efforts to protect and promote the rights and welfare of women migrant workers, including
through sustained bilateral, regional, interregional and international cooperation, by developing strategies and
joint action and by taking into account the innovative approaches and experiences of individual Member
States;
4. Also urges concerned Governments, in particular those of sending and receiving countries, to
support and allocate appropriate resources for programmes aimed at strengthening preventive action, in
particular information for relevant target groups and education and campaigns to increase public awareness
of this issue at the national and grassroots levels, in cooperation with non-governmental organizations;
5. Encourages concerned Governments, in particular those of sending and receiving countries, to
support training programmes for public officials dealing with the problem of violence against women migrant
workers, in particular law enforcers, to assist women migrant workers who are victims of violence, to
provide, in the reporting of such cases and the prosecution of the perpetrators, adequate consular, counselling,
legal and welfare services and to consider adopting appropriate legal measures against intermediaries who
deliberately encourage the clandestine movement of workers and who exploit women migrant workers;

6

A/52/356.
/...

A/RES/52/97
Page 3

6. Encourages Member States to consider signing and ratifying or acceding to the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families,7 as well
as the Slavery Convention of 1926;8
7. Invites all relevant United Nations human rights treaty bodies, in particular the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women, relevant thematic and country rapporteurs, in particular the
Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on violence against women, its causes and
consequences, the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities and its
working groups, within their respective mandates, to address the problem of violence against women migrant
workers in their deliberations and findings, with a view to promoting and protecting their rights and welfare;
8. Invites the Commission on the Status of Women to address the issue of violence against women
migrant workers at its forty-second session under the thematic issues on violence against women and/or
human rights of women;
9. Invites the Economic and Social Council and the Commission on Human Rights, at their sessions
in 1998, to address the protection and promotion of the rights and welfare of women migrant workers in
connection with the five-year review of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action 2 and the
commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;9
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session a
comprehensive report on the problem of violence against women migrant workers, taking into account the
views of Member States and based on the expertise and all available information from the organizations of
the United Nations system, in particular the International Labour Organization, the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Development Fund for Women, the International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women, the International Organization for Migration and other
relevant sources, including non-governmental organizations, as well as to report on the implementation of
the present resolution.
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997

7

Resolution 45/158, annex.

8

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 212, No. 2861.

9

Resolution 217 A (III).
