S/PV.7855

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7855th meeting

Saturday, 31 December 2016, 1 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Martins
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Bessho
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Seck
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Toro-Carnevali

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 29 December 2016 from the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation and the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Turkey to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/1133)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-00071 (E)
*1700071*

S/PV.7855

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 1 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 29 December 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation and the Chargé d’affaires a.i.
of the Permanent Mission of Turkey to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2016/1133)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/1138, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the Russian Federation and Turkey.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/1133, which contains a letter dated
29 December 2016 from the Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation to the United Nations and
the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Turkey to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2336 (2016).
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): Yesterday,
we learned from our Russian colleagues about a
2/9

31/12/2016

proposed arrangement that Russia and Turkey had
concluded to introduce a cessation of hostilities and
restart intra-Syrian discussions. Their goals are
laudable and we welcome all efforts to end the violence
in Syria and strongly support a nationwide ceasefire
accompanied by unfettered humanitarian access to all
besieged areas.
That having been said, we are still learning more
about this initiative, including details regarding its
implementation. In this regard, we regret that the
annexes to the agreements, which outline the ceasefire
arrangement brokered by Russia and Turkey in detail,
have not yet been made available.
We voted in favour of resolution 2336 (2016)
because it strikes the right balance between cautious
optimism and support, predicated on hope but tempered
by a realistic need to wait to see how this arrangement
is implemented before casting the full weight of the
Security Council behind it. We would highlight two
key points.
Our hope is that a ceasefire will truly hold and will
not serve as a justification for further unacceptable
offensives. In that regard, we are concerned at reports
of a regime offensive, supported by Hizbullah militia,
in Wadi Barada. The Security Council’s adoption of
this text should be seen as a strong signal that such
activities must cease.
We have also seen press reports that some
signatories are concerned about differences between
regime and opposition versions of delegation documents.
In that regard, we hope that the reconciliation of
any differences — or an explanation of why there
are differences — will occur swiftly. We especially
stress that paragraph 2 of the resolution just adopted
emphasizes the need for the full implementation of
resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016). Likewise, it is
clear from paragraph 3 that talks in Astana will relate
directly to the United Nations process.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): France is
in favour of any initiative to save civilian lives in Syria.
It was in that spirit that, on 16 December, it proposed
a draft resolution to deploy an evacuation monitoring
mechanism in Aleppo. It is for those same reasons that
France today voted in favour of resolution 2336 (2016).
France hopes that this ceasefire agreement
will be implemented immediately and calls on the
guarantors to assume their full responsibilities in this
17-00071

31/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

regard. The text of the Russian-Turkish agreement, as
partially presented to the Security Council yesterday,
nevertheless still contains areas of obscurity.
France’s first concern concerns the genuine
adherence of the Syrian parties to the truce agreement,
while bombardments have been carried out by the
regime in violation of the agreement in the past 48
hours, while a regime offensive, supported by Iran,
is still under way in the Barada valley. The Security
Council has received no document signed by the regime
or opposition groups. The list of groups considering
themselves to be parties to the agreement has not been
communicated to us. Russia said that some groups had
mandated others to accede to the agreement, which is
not corroborated by the texts that have been transmitted
to us.
Under these conditions, the degree of commitment
of the parties to the truce appears relatively uncertain
and its implementation fragile. In particular, France
considers that the cessation of hostilities must apply
to all armed groups, with the exception of groups
designated as terrorists by the Security Council. Armed
groups that are not parties to the cessation of hostilities
should not automatically be regarded as terrorists.
It is also essential that the monitoring of compliance
with the ceasefire be coordinated with the United
Nations. In this respect, France would have liked to
be able to study, with its partners, the modalities of
extending the monitoring arrangements provided for in
resolution 2328 (2016) to other localities in Syria. France
remains at the disposal of the guarantors to consider a
rigorous and impartial monitoring mechanism.
All the efforts of the international community
must now be aimed at facilitating the resumption of
the negotiations to be held on 8 February under the
auspices of Staffan de Mistura, to whom we reiterate
our full support. The preparatory exercises must fall
within the framework defined by resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex). The Astana meeting could be a useful first step
in that regard. To that end, the process of appointing
opposition representatives to the Astana meeting should
be transparent. However, it raises important questions.
France recalls that the High Negotiation Committee is
the legitimate representative of the opposition in the
inter-Syrian negotiations. There can be no credible
exercise that excludes it.

S/PV.7855

France hopes that the discussions on these points
will continue in a transparent manner with a view to
an effective political transition, which is essential if
Syria is to recover and begin its reconstruction. France
remains fully committed to the search for a lasting
solution to the conflict, which has lasted too long.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the efforts of Russia, Turkey and others to
reduce the level of fighting in Syria. We also welcome
the efforts of the presidency, Russia and Turkey, and
all other Council members to work for the adoption of
a resolution that all Council members could support.
That is a demonstration of what the Council can do
when we turn our collective minds to achieving a
positive outcome. We are very pleased, therefore, that
the Council could put its weight behind a measure
designed to reduce civilian suffering in Syria and
restart the political process.
As others have said, there are aspects of the
ceasefire and other agreements that must be clarified.
In particular, there are uncertainties about the
participation of opposition groups in the ceasefire and
the Astana talks. The implications for groups that are
not participating should also be clarified. New Zealand
would also welcome greater clarity about humanitarian
access and the role of the United Nations in the Astana
political process. That said, we are pleased that the
Council was able to come together to support this
important development.
New Zealand’s term on the Security Council will
end very soon. We hope that further clarity will be
provided and that this agreement will alleviate the
suffering of the Syrian people and help to put Syria on
a path to a lasting and enduring peace. Since this is, I
hope, the last time we will be addressing the Council
during our current term, I would like to conclude by
commending the Spanish presidency for its outstanding
leadership over the past month and by thanking all
our colleagues in the Secretariat for the courtesy and
cooperation they have shown me and my delegation
over the past two years.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom supports all efforts to maintain a full,
nationwide cessation of hostilities and an end to the
bloodshed in Syria. For that reason, we welcome the
Security Council’s adoption of resolution 2336 (2016)
today. In the coming days and weeks the world will
be watching to make sure that the ceasefire is upheld.

17-000713/9

S/PV.7855

The situation in the Middle East

We call on all the parties to adhere to the terms of the
ceasefire. Those with influence over them, particularly
the Russian and Turkish guarantors, must use it to
ensure that the ceasefire lasts. We are concerned about
reports of violations on the ground. The ceasefire is the
essential first step required to create the conditions for
the return to political negotiations, which we all agree
is the only way to end this terrible conflict. In order to
ensure that, the confusion over some of the key texts
and the discrepancies between them must be resolved.
As the failure of previous cessations of hostilities has
shown, monitoring the ceasefire will be crucial.
The role of the United Nations is essential. As
guarantors of the agreement, Russia and Turkey must
ensure that any monitoring measures are genuinely
independent and closely coordinated with the United
Nations and with the International Syria Support
Group’s ceasefire task force. Fundamental to the
ceasefire’s success is implementation, not just of this
agreement and the resolution we have just voted on,
but also of other Security Council resolutions, which,
when they were agreed on, gave us a sadly short-lived
optimism that the suffering of the Syrian people would
see some respite.
First and foremost, all sides must ensure unfettered
humanitarian access across the country, as is required
by resolution 2328 (2016), adopted earlier this month.
Secondly, the talks in Astana must be in support of
the United Nations-led political process, under Special
Envoy De Mistura. The United Kingdom will be a
steadfast supporter of any steps towards an inclusive
political settlement that realizes the aspiration for a
peaceful Syria, as set out in resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522,
annex).
As we end 2016, we can all agree that it is time to
end the bloodshed in Syria. The ceasefire is still very
fresh, and the situation on the ground will develop in
the coming days and weeks. But if the ceasefire holds,
I sincerely hope that it can provide a foundation for a
breakthrough in the wider political process, and that
2017 turns out to be a far better year for the people
of Syria than 2016 has been. Following a political
transition, we will all have to support reconstruction.
Mr. Martins (Angola): Like the other members
of the Security Council, Angola voted in favour of
resolution 2336 (2016), and we would like to thank the
delegation of the Russian Federation for convening
4/9

31/12/2016

today’s meeting for the unanimous adoption of a
resolution aimed at establishing a ceasefire agreement
in the Syrian Arab Republic. We should consider it a real
contribution to creating a path to peace and stability in
a country that has occupied such a central place on our
agenda during the past year, the year that is about to
end. We would like to commend the Russian Federation
for the central role that it has played in achieving that
goal, and Turkey for the joint agreement that has been
signed. We look forward to the peace talks to be held
in Astana.
Obviously, there are no perfect agreements. What is
essential is that the efforts should focus on the common
goal of achieving peace and enabling the citizens
of Syria to reconcile and rebuild their nation within
parameters that they establish themselves, with the
support of the international community. The Security
Council resolution remains a relevant and important
instrument for resolving the conflict. We are aware
that its unanimous adoption has reinforced the chances
for peace, and that unanimity represents a very good
way of ending the year with a decision that we have
repeatedly insisted on — that the solution must be a
political one. This decision will enable that.
As Angola’s membership of the Security Council
ends — and coincides with the very last day of
2016 — I would like to take this opportunity to wish all
our colleagues and the members of the Council a very
peaceful and prosperous new year.
Mr. Toro-Carnevali (Bolivian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are greatly
encouraged by the Council’s unanimous adoption today
of resolution 2336 (2016), submitted by the Russian
Federation and Turkey in support of the urgent call by
the Syrian people and the international community for
a cessation of hostilities on the ground and a speedy
start to negotiations for a political settlement that
can provide a comprehensive peaceful solution to
the conflict in Syria. In that regard, we welcome the
meeting to be held in Astana at the end of January
between the Syrian Government and the opposition,
and we wish it every success. It will be particularly
important to ensure that the agreements forged by
Russia and Turkey — along with resolution 2328 (2016),
adopted on 19 December — form an integral part of
the determined efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, establishing
once and for all the conditions and standards for all
the national, regional and international stakeholders
17-00071

31/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

and supporting the peace process. With the adoption
of today’s resolution, Venezuela leaves the Security
Council proud of having helped the Syrian people to
reach this important moment.
We congratulate you, Mr. President, on the success
of your presidency, and we thank the Secretariat for all
the support it has given us over the past two years.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): The Ukrainian delegation
voted in favour of resolution 2336 (2016) today for
one reason, which is that it focuses on establishing a
ceasefire regime. While numerous questions linger
about the scope and substance of all the understandings
reached in Ankara on 29 December, we support all
efforts to put an end to the bloodshed and alleviate the
suffering of the Syrian people. In that regard, we would
like to stress that, in order to make the ceasefire work,
the necessary level of confidence and trust — which is
clearly missing after so many years of the conflict in
Syria — must be established among all the parties. The
latest reports of fighting in Wadi Barada testify to the
fragility of the situation.
Although it is a part of human nature to hope for the
best, given the track record of broken ceasefires and the
deficit of trust in one of the guarantors of the latest one,
at this point we would caution the Council to be prudent
and to keep a watchful eye on further developments as
we enter the new year.
As this is hopefully the last time we will meet under
the Spanish presidency, let me conclude by expressing
our sincere thanks and congratulations to the delegation
of Spain for its dedicated efforts and leadership during
this difficult month.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, my delegation would like to thank the
Russian Federation and Turkey for this proposal.
Although the text is imperfect could have been further
improved, we voted in its favour. Today, similar to what
occured on 19 December when the Security Council
adopted resolution 2328 (2016), members had additional
consultations to occur and for adjustments to be made to
the original text. To our satisfaction, that strengthened
the text and made possible its unanimous adoption.
As indicated in today’s resolution 2336 (2016), it will
be necessary to implement the provisions of resolutions
2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016), and to harmonize the
forthcoming Astana talks with the United-Nationsbacked negotiations. We sincerely hope that 2017 will

S/PV.7855

be a better year for the Syrian Arab Republic and
Syrians than the year ending today. With everyone
participating, we can achieve a lasting cessation of
hostilities and the resumption of successful political
negotiations. We owe that to the tens of thousands of
Syrian civilians who lost their lives in this terrible war.
In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the
Spanish presidency for its leadership and the consistent
coordinating role it played in achieving consensus
among Council members during the month of December.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): With
regard to the Syrian crisis, the efforts of my country
have been focused on one priority, namely, putting
an end to the suffering of the Syrian people. We are
committed to that approach and support any approach
that prioritizes the Syrian people, regardless of the
interests that can be seen at play and which are the
real cause of the suffering in that country. We have
voted in favour of all resolutions put to vote in the
Security Council that were aimed at providing access to
humanitarian aid, regardless of the party that put those
resolutions to vote.
With our partners Spain and New Zealand, we
undertook an initiative to put an end to the hostiities
and to ensure that humanitarian aid was delivered. We
never hesitated to use our experience or diplomatic
strength to attempt to resolve the crisis in the Syrian
Arab Republic. That is why, and this is in parallel with
our consistent position, we voted in favour of resolution
2336 (2016), which calls for an end to the hostiities. We
must act quickly to remedy the high level of violence
and to launch the diplomatic process. We know that this
will not lead to a complete cessation of the violence
and the hostilities but, at the very least, it is a step in
the right direction, and one on which we can continue
to build.
Initiatives aimed at resolving the Syrian crisis have
multiplied over the last few years. As with any other
initiative, there are no complete or ideal initiatives.
We need real intentions that will result in a final
settlement. Regardless of the nature of those approaches
and initiatives, all of us must look at the previous
frameworks agreed upon at the international level and
base our actions on them as we we move forward.
We backed today’s resolution, including the
references to resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), which are
the foundations for any settlement. Furthermore, we

17-000715/9

S/PV.7855

The situation in the Middle East

wish to reiterate that the current challenges, which
will continue for a long time, require a comprehensive
political approach based on those frameworks. It is
true that we see a military approach being taken on the
ground, but that can never be the solution. For that reason
we call upon all Syrian parties to act in a responsible
way, especially with respect to their communities and
their people. During this transition phase, dialogue
should be initiated between the Government and the
opposition as rapidly as possible in order to find a
Syrian solution without any foreign intervention. That
solution should protect the territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic and result in the realization of
the aspirations of the Syrian people, far from the reality
of violence and extremism.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): There are no
military solutions to the protracted and complex Syrian
crisis. That is a conclusion the Security Council has
reached repeatedly here in this Chamber, and that is why
the Senegalese delegation, having backed resolution
2236 (2016), submitted by the Russian Federation, is
gratified to see that it enjoyed unanimous support.
The Senegalese delegation reaffirms that a solution
conducive to the resolution of the crisis in the Syrian
Arab Republic will involve a political process, without
exception, and be Syrian-led on the basis of the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), as underscored
in the various resolutions adopted by the Council, in
particular resolutions 2118 (2013), 2254 (2015) and
2268 (2016).
The Senegalese delegation is gratified by the fact
that this resolution refers to swift and unimpeded
access for humanitarian assistance throughout Syrian
territory. For that reason our delegation would like to
congratulate the delegation of the Russian Federation for
its constructive spirit and the flexibility it consistently
demonstrated throughout the negotiation process of
what has today become resolution 2336 (2016). There
could be no nicer gift for the Syrian people, who have
suffered so long from this conflict.
Before I conclude, I would like to convey to the
Spanish delegation and to Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi the warm congratulations of the Senegalese
delegation for a very productive Council presidency
during the month of December. I wish you a happy
new year.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China): China welcomes the
signing of the ceasefire agreement between the Syrian
6/9

31/12/2016

Government and the opposition, and appreciates the
positive result achieved by the Russian Federation and
Turkey in facilitating its conclusion. China welcomes
the fact that the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2336 (2016). This reflects the support of the
United Nations and the international community for a
comprehensive ceasefire in the Syrian Arab Republic and
a political settlement of the Syrian issue. The resolution
is conducive to the strengthening of mutual trust among
the conflicting parties, the advancement of the political
process, the easing of the humanitarian situation in
the country and the efforts to combat terrorism. China
hopes that the Syrian Government and the opposition
groups concerned will effectively and comprehensively
implement the ceasefire agreement and calls on other
opposition groups to join the ceasefire arrangement as
soon as possible.
The political solution is the only way out for
Syria. The international community should seize the
current favourable opportunity and work on the basis
of respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria to create conditions
for relaunching the political process in the country as
soon as possible. China hopes that the United Nations
and the international community will work towards
the comprehensive implementation of the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and resolutions 2254
(2015) and 2268 (2016).
Special Envoy De Mistura has announced the
relaunching of Geneva talks in February 2017. We hope
that the peace talks will promote the political process
in Syria with a view to achieving positive results at an
early date. China hopes that the Astana meeting, as an
important component part of the political process led
by Syria and an important step towards the relaunching
of the Geneva peace talks will play a positive role in
advancing the political settlement of the question of
Syria. China calls on the Syrian parties to cherish
this hard-won achievement, set as their priorities the
fundamental interests of their nation and the security
of their people, come back to the track of dialogue and
consultations, and work under the principle of Syrianowned and Syria-led processes so as to reach a political
settlement acceptable to all.
China has taken active part in promoting the
political process in Syria and is willing to continue to
work with the rest of the international community for
a comprehensive, fair and appropriate settlement of the
Syrian issue.
17-00071

31/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): About two weeks ago, in
the midst of a difficult setting, the Security Council
managed to find convergence and unanimity to
endorse the evacuation operation out of eastern Aleppo
(resolution 2328 (2016)). As a result of the Council’s
action, the swift deployment of United Nations
personnel to oversee and monitor the evacuation
alongside International Committee of the Red Cross
and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, a successful
evacuation with minimal reported instances of human
rights violations and abuses, was undertaken.
Under a similarly difficult and dynamic situation on
the ground, the Council is meeting today to discharge
its responsibility to effectively address the Syrian
conflict. We appreciate the efforts of both the Russian
Federation and Turkey in brokering the nationwide
ceasefire that commenced two days ago and is currently
holding. We are convinced that the Council’s backing
of the ceasefire will only add to its legitimacy. Our
support of a ceasefire and an end to the fighting signals
to ordinary Syrian civilian men, women and children
that we are not oblivious to their prolonged suffering.
We have collectively on many occasions
pronounced, first, undivided support for Special
Envoy De Mistura’s effort to bring together conflicting
parties to the negotiating table, and secondly, that the
only resolution to the conflict is through a political
process. It is our belief that the Council’s support for
the ceasefire and the subsequent Astana process will
lead to a more substantive political dialogue among the
conflicting parties, hence our support for resolution
2336 (2016) just adopted.
As Malaysia will be vacating its seat on the
Council in a few hours’ time, my delegation hopes that
the positive momentum of the Council’s action on the
situation in Syria over the past few weeks continues
to gather strength for the sake of the long-suffering
Syrians, especially civilians, non-combatants, women
and children.

S/PV.7855

supported the draft resolution because we hope that the
cessation of hostilities across Syria can open a path
to the fundamental improvement of the devastating
humanitarian situation there.
As with resolution 2328 (2016), adopted
unanimously two weeks ago (see S/PV.7841), the United
Nations should coordinate humanitarian assistance
efforts under this cessation of hostilities. We do not
want to hear any more reports by the United Nations
or other implementing partners of obstructions or
delays in gaining access to besieged or hard-to-reach
areas by the Syrian Government. We urge the Syrian
Government to take measures to allow immediate and
unhindered access.
Japan calls upon the guarantors of the cessation of
hostilities to elaborate monitoring mechanisms with
the United Nations and the International Syria Support
Group (ISSG) task force. We take note of the serious
concern about the possibility of further attacks on
civilians in all areas of Syria. Japan urges Russia and
Turkey, as guarantors, to fully address these concerns.
As prescribed in paragraph 3 of the resolution, we look
forward to the Astana meeting to be held in January.
Japan hopes the meeting will have the participation
of key regional stakeholders and will meaningfully
contribute to Special Envoy De Mistura’s formal
political process.
As a member of the Council and of the ISSG, Japan
reiterates its determination to contribute responsibly to
addressing the situation in Syria. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Spain for its excellent presidency
this month. I would also like to thank the five outgoing
non-permanent members for their assiduous efforts in
the Council during their two-year terms.

Finally, Mr. President, I would like to congratulate
you and the Spanish delegation for the productive
and excellent stewardship of the Council this month.
I would also like to wish all colleagues a happy and
prosperous new year.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I did not intend to speak here today, as it
seems to me that resolution 2336 (2016), which we have
just adopted, speaks for itself. But as all members of the
Security Council have spoken it would probably be odd,
to say the least, if one of the sponsors of the resolution
and a member of the Council simply stayed silent. This
would probably be seen as perhaps not endorsing or
approving of what has been said by my colleagues. Far
be it from this.

Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2336 (2016). Japan also welcomes
the efforts of the Russian Federation and Turkey to
bring about a nationwide cessation of hostilities. Japan

As I take the floor, the natural first step is to
thank all of the members of the Council for voting in
favour of the resolution we elaborated together with
the Turkish delegation. We would like to individually

17-000717/9

S/PV.7855

The situation in the Middle East

thank the delegation of Turkey for its very substantive
contribution to the work on the resolution.
All of us know that this has been a very difficult
year — a year which comes to an end in our capital in
only two and a half hours. It was very difficult from the
point of view of the work of the Security Council on a
Syrian settlement, but the fact that we are concluding
this year by unanimously adopting two such resolutions
means that if all of us together look together at certain
objectives rather than attempt to gain self-interested
benefit, then we are able to make important decisions.
During this year, as all of us will recall, a number of
very serious efforts were undertaken to achieve a radical
improvement in the settlement of the Syrian crisis. All
of us remember the numerous meetings of our Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Sergei Lavrov, and the United
States Secretary of State, John Kerry, always leading to
serious agreements that, for reasons that I am not going
to go into now, unfortunately remained unfulfilled.
At the end of this year, the Russian Federation and
Turkey, alongside the Syrian Government, in contact
with opposition groups, took it upon themselves to
reach a number of very important agreements that were
enshrined in the documents published on 29 December
and which were then circulated as an official document
of the Security Council.
This is a very important initiative. The resolution
adopted by us today speaks to the need to comply
with a cessation of hostilities regime in Syria and to
the very important meeting in Astana, the capital of
Kazakhstan, which, in Astana, in just two and a half
hours, will become a member of the Security Council.
At that meeting, delegations of the opposition and the
Government will for the first time meet face to face,
all of this in the context of efforts that have been
undertaken under the Security Council’s mandate
pursuant to resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016)
and other very well-known documents. All of this is
enshrined in the resolution adopted here today. It is
very important indeed that the Security Council today
backed these efforts made by Russia and Turkey.
I do not wish to level criticisms today, but I would
like to delicately convey to my colleagues that this is
a very complicated process. Everything we achieve
is the result of enormous effort, so let us be clear. I
urge members to help us, and if they cannot or do not
want to help then I urge them not to complicate things,
cast doubt on the agreements reached or attempt to
8/9

31/12/2016

reinterpret them in some way. I would ask them not
to simply repeat outdated clichés ad infinitum. Some
representatives have been repeating the same clichés for
six years now, despite the fact that it achieves nothing.
That is not helpful. We must work very seriously to
ensure that, in 2017, we are able to achieve a political
settlement to the crisis in Syria. We are convinced
that if the international community is guided by the
objective of upholding the interests of the Syrian people
and restoring stability in the region as a whole, then we
can achieve success.
My last comment is an expression of gratitude to the
Council members who are leaving us today, including
the delegation of Spain, which during this long difficult
month of 31 days has carried out duties that are coming
to an end almost at midnight on the very last day.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement briefly in my national capacity.
Spain voted in favour of resolution 2336 (2016)
and welcomes its unanimous adoption. We express our
sincere gratitude to Turkey and the Russian Federation
for their efforts in achieving this consensus, having
reached an agreement on the cessation of hostilities,
and moving forward towards a political solution to the
crisis in Syria.
We voted in favour of the resolution while bearing
in mind the unspeakable suffering of the Syrian people
and the fact that the monitoring of the ceasefire must
be conducted transparently and impartially and that
information must be provided to the Security Council
in a timely manner. We are also aware that the next
steps in the political process must be carried out under
the auspices of the United Nations. We want to be very
clear on this point. It is not enough for the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General to simply be associated with
the Astana talks; he must play a central role and ensure
that we do not lose sight of the provisions of resolution
2254 (2015). In that regard, we once again welcome the
changes that have been made to the text of the resolution,
which was submitted by the Russian Federation.
Finally, the European Union and its 28 member
States have much to contribute to Syrian initiatives. The
European Union is not only the country’s main financial
donor, but it will also be a key player in rebuilding the
country when the necessary political conditions are in
place. Only a united, democratic and peaceful Syria
will be able to put a lasting end to the terrorism wrought
by Da’esh. Spain is bidding farewell to the Security
17-00071

31/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

Council in the hope that the resolution that we adopted
today will be a first step in that direction.
I honestly do not see a better way to conclude
Spain’s presidency of the Security Council. I already
bid farewell to Council members on 21 December and,
at that time, I said that if we were to meet again, it would
only be in order to receive good news, and that is indeed
the case — a resolution adopted unanimously by all 15
members. I would like to thank Council members once
again for the kind words I heard in the Chamber today.
This effort would not have been successful without the
help of all Council members.
There are only 10 hours left in the Spanish
presidency. I believe that we will not have any further

S/PV.7855

meetings in the next 10 hours, so I will take this
opportunity to definitively wish all Council members
a very happy New Year. I strongly hope that the people
of Syria will achieve peace. As a continuing member of
the General Assembly, Spain will remain very attentive
to the work carried out in this Chamber. I also wish our
dear friends from Sweden, who are seated here in the
Chamber, every success during their presidency, which
promises to be very favourable.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no further speakers on my list.
The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.

17-000719/9
