A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/164
24 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 97
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/607)]
49/164.

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that one of the purposes of the United Nations, as
stated in Articles 1 and 55 of the Charter, is to promote universal respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction of any
kind, including distinction as to sex,
Affirming that women and men should participate equally in social,
economic and political development, should contribute equally to such
development and should share equally in improved conditions of life,
Recalling its resolution 34/180 of 18 December 1979, by which it adopted
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women,
Recalling also its previous resolutions on the Convention, and taking
note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1994/7 of 21 July 1994,
Welcoming the growing number of States parties to the Convention, which
now stands at one hundred and thirty-four,
Noting with deep concern that the Convention is still one of the human
rights instruments with a large number of reservations, many of which run
contrary to the object and purpose of the Convention, despite the fact that
some States parties have withdrawn their reservations to it,
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by the
World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 1/ in which the Conference

1/
95-76963

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
/...

A/RES/49/164
Page 2
stipulated that the human rights of women and the girl child were an
inalienable, integral and indivisible part of universal human rights,
Recalling also that, in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,
the Conference recommended the adoption of new procedures to strengthen
implementation of the commitment to women’s equality and human rights,
including a call upon the Commission on the Status of Women and the Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women to examine quickly the
possibility of introducing the right of petition through the preparation of an
optional protocol to the Convention,
Taking note of the decision adopted at the Sixth Meeting of States
Parties to the Convention, on 4 February 1992, 2/
Aware of the important contribution that the implementation of the
Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women 3/ can make
to eliminating all forms of discrimination against women and to achieving
legal and de facto equality between women and men,
Having considered the reports of the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women on its twelfth 4/ and thirteenth 5/ sessions,
Taking note of the suggestions and general recommendations made by the
Committee in accordance with its mandate, as demonstrated most recently by the
Committee at its thirteenth session, at which the Committee adopted suggestion
No. 6 on the International Conference on Population and Development and
general recommendation No. 21 related to articles 9, 15 and 16 of the
Convention as its contribution to the International Year of the Family, as
well as other general recommendations made by the Committee,
Noting that the workload of the Committee has increased because of the
growing number of States parties to the Convention, that the annual session of
the Committee is still the shortest of all the annual sessions of the human
rights treaty bodies and that, in spite of the recommendation by the Economic
and Social Council in its resolution 1992/17 of 30 July 1992, which was
supported by the General Assembly in its resolution 47/94 of 16 December 1992,
that three weeks be allowed for each session of the Committee to enable the
Committee to consider the reports submitted by the States parties until the
backlog in reports has been eliminated, a considerable backlog still remains,
Convinced of the need to adopt measures to enable the Committee to
consider in a thorough and timely manner the reports submitted by States
parties and to discharge all its responsibilities under the Convention,

2/

See CEDAW/SP/1992/4.

Report of the World Conference to Review and Appraise the
3/
Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development
and Peace, Nairobi, 15-26 July 1985 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.85.IV.10), chap. I, sect. A.
4/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 38 (A/48/38).
5/

Ibid., Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/49/38).
/...

A/RES/49/164
Page 3
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the working
methods of the Committee and its capacity to fulfil its mandate
effectively, 6/ which included a comparison of other treaty bodies,
Welcoming the efforts of the Committee to improve further its working
methods by adopting concluding observations containing specific suggestions
and recommendations,
Recalling that, under article 17, paragraph 9, of the Convention, the
Secretary-General is required to provide the necessary staff and facilities
for the effective performance of the functions of the Committee,
Recalling also its resolutions 44/73 of 8 December 1989, 45/124 of
14 December 1990 and 47/94 of 16 December 1992, in which, inter alia, it
strongly supported the view of the Committee that the Secretary-General should
accord higher priority to strengthening support for the Committee,
Strongly supporting general recommendation No. 19 of the Committee on
violence against women, and calling upon States parties to prepare their
periodic reports in accordance with this and other general recommendations of
the Committee,
Noting with satisfaction the appointment of a Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights on violence against women, including its causes and
consequences,
1.
Expresses its satisfaction with the increasing number of States
that have ratified or acceded to the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, and supports the general recommendation
of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women to draw
attention to those reservations which are incompatible with the objective and
purpose of the Convention;
2.
Urges all States that have not yet ratified or acceded to the
Convention to do so as soon as possible;
3.
Emphasizes the importance of the strictest compliance by States
parties with their obligations under the Convention;
4.
Encourages States to consider limiting the extent of any
reservation they lodge to the Convention, to formulate any reservations as
precisely and as narrowly as possible and to ensure that no reservation is
incompatible with the object and purpose of the Convention or otherwise
contrary to international law;
5.
Requests States parties to the Convention to review their
reservations regularly, with a view to withdrawing them expeditiously so that
the Convention may be fully implemented;
6.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the status of
the Convention, 7/ and requests him to continue to report annually to the
General Assembly;
7.
Takes note also of the reports of the Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women on its twelfth 4/ and thirteenth 5/ sessions;

6/

A/49/308, sect. III.

7/

Ibid., sect. II.
/...

A/RES/49/164
Page 4
8.
Recommends that the States parties to the Convention, in the light
of the reports mentioned in paragraphs 6 and 7 above, review the working
situation of the Committee and its capacity to fulfil its mandate more
effectively, and in this context also that the States parties consider the
possibility of amending article 20 of the Convention so as to allow for
sufficient meeting time for the Committee;
9.
Requests the States parties to the Convention to meet in 1995 in
order to consider the review of article 20 of the Convention mentioned in
paragraph 8 above;
10.
Invites States parties to the Convention to make all possible
efforts to submit their initial as well as their second and subsequent
periodic reports on the implementation of the Convention, in accordance with
article 18 thereof and with the guidelines provided by the Committee, and to
cooperate fully with the Committee in the presentation of their reports;
11.
Welcomes the efforts made by the Committee to rationalize its
procedures and expedite the consideration of periodic reports, and strongly
encourages the Committee to continue those efforts;
12.
Welcomes also, in accordance with general recommendation No. 11 of
the Committee, 8/ the initiatives taken to provide regional training courses
on the preparation and drafting of reports of States parties for government
officials and training and information seminars for States considering
acceding to the Convention, and urges the relevant organs and organizations of
the United Nations to support such initiatives;
13.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to provide
secretariat staff, including legal staff members expert in human rights treaty
implementation, and technical resources for the effective performance by the
Committee of its functions;
14.
Strongly supports the view of the Committee that the SecretaryGeneral should accord higher priority, within existing resources, to
strengthening technical and substantive support for the Committee, in
particular to assist in preparatory research;
15.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide for,
facilitate and encourage, within existing resources, the dissemination of
information relating to the Committee, its decisions and recommendations, the
Convention and the concept of legal literacy, taking into account the
Committee’s own recommendations to that end;
16.
Supports the request of the Committee at its twelfth and
thirteenth sessions for additional meeting time, with adequate support from
the Secretariat, so as to allow for the Committee to meet once a year for
three weeks for its fourteenth and fifteenth sessions, and recommends that the
request made by the Committee for additional meeting time be considered within
the existing level of budgetary resources;
17.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure adequate support to the
Committee, and also requests that sufficient resources be provided for that
purpose from within the existing regular budget to enable the Committee to
deal in a thorough and timely manner with reports submitted by States parties;

8/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-fourth Session,
Supplement No. 38 (A/44/38), sect. V.
/...

A/RES/49/164
Page 5
18.
Decides that, at its fifty-first session, it will review once
again whether the backlog of the Committee in considering reports has been
reduced;
19.
Recommends that meetings of the Committee be scheduled, whenever
possible, to allow for the timely transmission of the results of its work to
the Commission on the Status of Women, for information, in the same year;
20.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its fifty-first session a report on the implementation of the present
resolution and to make the report available to the Commission on the Status of
Women at its forty-first session.
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
