United Nations

S/PV.6354

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6354th meeting
Wednesday, 7 July 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Mugoya
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-43853 (E)

*1043853*

S/PV.6354

I invite Ms. Pillay to take a seat at the Council

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
table.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Bangladesh, Canada, Colombia, Germany, India, Israel,
Italy, Liechtenstein, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Sierra
Leone, the Syrian Arab Republic, South Africa,
Switzerland, the United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Holmes to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
It is so decided.

2

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Serrano.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I would like to welcome the presence of His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. I now
invite him to take the floor.
The Secretary-General: I would like to thank
the Government of Nigeria for convening this debate,
and I commend the Security Council for its continued
engagement on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
The wilful targeting of civilians, disproportionate
attacks, sexual violence, forced displacement and the
denial of humanitarian access remain widespread in
armed conflict and are often carried out with impunity.
Ongoing or recent events and conditions in
Kyrgyzstan, Gaza, the Sudan, Sri Lanka, Somalia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and elsewhere
remind us that the protection of civilians remains a
huge common challenge.
The Council has adopted important measures
designed to put civilians first. It has been especially
encouraging to see the institutional steps that the
Council has taken to improve its ability to respond.
The aide-memoire (S/PRST/2009/1, annex) is bringing
greater consistency to efforts to address protection
concerns. The informal expert group that has been
established has become a valuable forum for providing
the Council with essential and timely perspectives from
the humanitarian community. But there is more that the

10-43853

S/PV.6354

Council can, and must, do. With that in mind, today I
will focus on specific aspects of the core challenges I
identified in my report of May 2009 (S/2009/277).
The first is to maximize the impact of
peacekeeping missions in protecting civilians. I
welcome the Council’s efforts in designing
peacekeeping mandates to increase emphasis on the
protection of civilians. However, in order for
peacekeeping operations to successfully implement
those challenging mandates, it is essential that the
Council provide missions with the sustained political
support they require. The Council’s engagement is vital
to make certain that peacekeeping operations are
adequately resourced and to ensure that mission
leadership is fully empowered to take forward that
complex mandated task on the international
community’s behalf. Similarly, troop and police
contributors must arrive to the mission area with a
common understanding of what protection of civilian
mandates entails, and with the capabilities and
willingness to implement them.
As we seek to protect civilians from the effects of
violence, it will also be critical to manage
expectations. Certainly, we would like to be able to
protect all people from all threats at all times. But that
is a very difficult task even for national Governments
in times of peace.
The dialogue on those issues has made positive
progress within the Council, as well as within this
year’s meeting of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. The recently published joint
independent study by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations also offers important
suggestions for bridging the gaps between mandates
and action on the ground. I count on Member States’
support as the Secretariat continues to address the areas
in which its performance vis-à-vis the protection of
civilians must be improved. Developments in two
missions warrant particular attention.
In Chad and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, respectively, we face the withdrawal and
drawdown of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
While I welcome the wish of host Governments to
uphold their sovereign responsibilities to their civilian
populations, we must fully consider the effects of a
premature drawdown in situations that are still fragile.
Clear benchmarks should be set for the achievement of

10-43853

civilian protection goals. Once set, they should be
achieved before peacekeepers leave.
A second core challenge is increased compliance
by non-State armed groups with international law. With
non-State armed actors figuring in every armed conflict
today, there is clearly a need to engage such groups on
humanitarian issues. Let us recognize the distinction
between dialogue for humanitarian purposes and for
political ones. This is necessary so that States can
overcome their reluctance to engage for fear that doing
so is tantamount to according recognition or status to
such groups. It is also essential, since even armed
groups that violate basic international norms as a
matter of routine can and should be brought into
dialogue for purely humanitarian purposes, including
humanitarian access.
Indeed, States and non-State actors alike must be
encouraged to provide and permit greater humanitarian
access. In too many cases, States lack capacity or,
worse, are inclined to deny their responsibilities, deny
the existence or degree of humanitarian need, and
construct unnecessary bureaucratic obstacles.
This brings me naturally to another core
challenge: accountability. Violent crimes are not the
only ones that harm civilians. Acts of omission,
including the hindering of humanitarian access, can be
just as or even more damaging. Those who create such
obstacles must also be held accountable, be they State
or non-State actors. This is a crucial part of our
work — to rid the world of zones where humanitarian
needs go unmet.
There have been significant advances in the
normative capabilities of national and international
systems. Much of this progress derives from the work
of the International Criminal Court and its beneficial
effects, including the integration of the Rome Statute
crimes into national legal systems. But here, too, more
must be done to increase the expectation that violators
will have to face the consequences of their actions.
Earlier this year, and in consultation with
regional organizations, I dispatched a commission of
inquiry to Guinea to help bring accountability for
crimes committed during violence there in September
2009. In Sri Lanka, I have emphasized the importance
of an accountability process for alleged violations of
human rights and humanitarian law by all sides to the
conflict that ended there in 2009. I have appointed a
panel of experts to advise me on these issues.

3

S/PV.6354

Over the past decade, the protection of civilians
agenda has advanced considerably, thanks in great part
to the work of this Council. While the conduct of
hostilities and their immediate consequences must
remain a major focus, that alone would mean treating
symptoms rather than causes. Armed conflict,
particularly the intra-State disputes that are now the
norm, is often the result of a lack of good governance,
competition for scarce resources, or the complex
interaction of factors, including ethnicity, or all of
these combined. Climate change, desertification and
land disputes can be additional drivers of conflict, and
a lack of effective security and rule of law mechanisms
can exacerbate the problems.
These are the broader challenges the Security
Council must address with determination to prevent
and resolve conflicts. That, in the longer term, is the
best way of bringing about real protection for civilians.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by Mr. John Holmes and Ms. Navanethem Pillay. I now
give the floor to Mr. Holmes.
Mr. Holmes: First of all, allow me to express my
sincere appreciation to you, Madam President, and the
Government of Nigeria for convening this high-level
open debate.
I will reflect not only on some recent
developments, but also briefly on those of my almost
three and a half years as Emergency Relief
Coordinator. I will also cover five specific issues:
engaging non-State actors, humanitarian access, the
harmful effect of explosive weapons, protection in
peacekeeping missions, and accountability.
The decade since the Security Council first
focused on the protection of civilians has seen
significant development of the normative framework.
The Security Council has played an important role in
expanding the weight of international jurisprudence on
the conduct of hostilities; on the regulation of small
arms, light weapons, mines and explosive remnants of
war; on the displacement of civilian populations; on
assistance to conflict-affected populations, including
humanitarian access and the safety and security of
humanitarian workers; on accountability for violations
of the law; and on the protection of especially
vulnerable groups, such as women and children.

4

But, as I have asked before, the key question is
whether these positive developments have actually
improved the condition of civilians in armed conflict,
or have normative advances merely widened the gap
between international rules and reality on the ground,
or created a new gap and called further into question
the relevance of the law and the credibility of Security
Council pronouncements?
Since I last briefed the Council (see S/PV.6216),
there have been two important institutional
developments that should bear fruit. Following the
adoption of resolution 1888 (2009), the first ever
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Margot Wallström, was
appointed. Should anyone doubt the need for urgent
attention to the problem, according to the United
Nations Population Fund, 15,275 rapes — the vast
majority by armed men — were reported in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2009. And we
know how few of the real number of rapes are
reported. The director of the Panzi Hospital of Bukavu,
Dr. Mukwege, told me recently that the problem of
violent rape was worse than ever. The Council needs to
continue to insist on comprehensive strategies to help
put an end to sexual violence in armed conflict.
More recently, in May, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Radhika Coomaraswamy, briefed a United
Nations sanctions committee for the first time on the
unlawful recruitment of children into armed groups in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Security
Council has not often launched targeted measures
against identified perpetrators responsible for grave
violations against children. Doing so in the case of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo would be an
important signal in a region where impunity is so
prevalent.
Other mechanisms have helped to improve the
quality of information available to the Security
Council. For example, the Security Council’s informal
expert group on the protection of civilians has been
briefed 14 times since its inception in 2009.
Nevertheless, I fear that all too little has changed for
the better on the ground in recent years. Civilians
account for the vast majority of casualties in armed
conflicts, especially in the internal conflicts that are
now the norm, and they are increasingly targeted by
combatants and armed elements.

10-43853

S/PV.6354

In 2009 alone, there were thousands of civilian
conflict deaths, from Gaza to Sri Lanka to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to Pakistan,
Afghanistan and Somalia, and elsewhere too; and
untold numbers of other casualties, including physical
and psychological injury to men, women and children,
as well as the destruction of their social, economic and
cultural ties and institutions.

solutions and in the wider context of peace
negotiations in places like Darfur, issues of land and
property be given higher priority. The High
Commissioner for Refugees also reported recently that
there remained 15.2 million refugees around the world
in 2009, many of them in protracted situations, and that
2009 was the worst year for voluntary repatriations in
two decades.

This year does not look, so far, much better.
According to official reports, 275 people were killed
by the violence that broke out on 10 June in southern
Kyrgyzstan, although the real death toll may be much
higher, and the ethnic element involved is very
worrying. In Somalia, in the past three months, just
two of the main hospitals in Mogadishu have admitted
over 1,384 war casualties, of whom 328 were children
under 15.

In my last briefing (see S/PV.6216), I noted that
every armed conflict in the world today involves the
participation of one or more non-State armed groups.
So it is clear that enhancing the protection of civilians
and reducing human suffering must, in part, be
achieved by engaging with them over access and aid
delivery and also by trying to influence their conduct
and improve their compliance with humanitarian and
human rights law.

Displacement through conflict is also getting
worse. In 2009, 6.8 million people were displaced
within their own country by conflict, more than at any
point since the mid-1990s. Some 1.8 million alone
were in Pakistan, although many have since returned,
but the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan,
Somalia, the Philippines and Colombia also
experienced large-scale new displacements. In
Colombia, the number of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) is estimated by the Government to have
increased in 2009 by 146,000. An alarming total of
27.1 million — the highest ever — were internally
displaced globally at the end of last year as a result of
conflict.

This is not just theory. Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
has engaged with armed groups to address their
recruitment and use of children and has used action
plans signed by such groups to bring the practice to an
end. UNICEF and the World Health Organization have
been able to immunize millions of children by
obtaining support for “days of tranquility” from parties
to conflict, including, notably, the Taliban in
Afghanistan. In Gaza, engaging the de facto authorities
is indispensable in order to provide assistance to the
people in need, address growing human rights and
protection concerns, and guarantee the security of aid
workers. These contacts do not in any way legitimize
either the goals or the conduct of armed groups, but
they do show that engagement by humanitarian actors
with such groups can genuinely improve the treatment
of civilians.

Again, this year so far is also depressing. An
upsurge in violence in Darfur has displaced 116,000
more people in the first half of the year. Another
90,000 people fled their homes in the southern Sudan
over the same period as insecurity mounted in the runup to the referendum in early 2011. In Kyrgyzstan,
375,000 people were forced to flee their homes.
Equally worrying, new displacements continue to
far outnumber returns and the reintegration of IDPs.
Durable solutions are woefully missing for millions in
protracted displacement situations, increasing both
despair and reliance on humanitarian assistance. In this
context, the Kampala Convention adopted by the
African Union last October was a significant
milestone. IDP hosting states must now apply the
Convention on the ground to protect and assist IDPs. I
also urge that, as part of the search for durable

10-43853

I call once again on the Council and on Member
States more widely to respect and promote this
engagement and not to discourage it through, for
example, donor practices which, however well
intentioned, in reality criminalize contacts or the
unintended provision of goods in ways which limit
humanitarian assistance.
Constraints on humanitarian access remain a
major problem. For example, the World Food
Programme has been driven out of large parts of South
Central Somalia by Al-Shabaab violence and threats; in
North-East Democratic Republic of the Congo and
southern Central African Republic, lack of

5

S/PV.6354

infrastructure and violent attacks by parties to conflict
and criminal groups prevent humanitarians from
reaching many victims of atrocities perpetrated by the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). In many parts of
Afghanistan and Pakistan, humanitarian actors cannot
operate because of hostilities and insecurity.
Violent attacks on humanitarian personnel and
assets — whether politically or economically
motivated — are the biggest threat. Over 100
humanitarian workers were killed in 2008 and 2009; at
least 30 have been killed while carrying out their work
so far this year. Over 200 have been kidnapped and
injured in the past four years.
Criminally-motivated attacks on humanitarian
actors as soft targets, and in the context of wider
lawlessness, remain a particular challenge in places
such as Darfur, Chad and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. On other fronts, the mechanisms to
streamline bureaucratic requirements in Darfur and
enhance access, jointly agreed with the Government of
the Sudan, urgently need to be reinvigorated. In Gaza,
a year and half after operation Cast Lead and three
years after it was first instituted, the blockade is still in
place, despite recent welcome steps to ease it.
States legitimately demand that international
humanitarian action be fully coordinated with the
appropriate domestic authorities. But I urge all affected
States to use close cooperation with humanitarian
actors to facilitate and expedite humanitarian aid to all
who need it, and not slow it down or block it, or try to
make artificial distinctions between the provision of
goods and services and equally essential protection
work designed to prevent abuses and save lives.
Explosive weapons are of particular concern in
the protection of civilians where their use is inherently
indiscriminate. A landmine does not know whether the
person who steps on it is a combatant or civilian. For
example, in Colombia at least 50 per cent of the
territory has been declared affected by mines, and the
country has one of the highest rates of landmine
victims in the world. Like unexploded cluster
munitions, landmines remain active long after the
conflict has ended or moved on, creating deadly risks
to civilians.
But the use of “ordinary” explosive weapons in
populated areas also repeatedly causes unacceptably
high levels of harm to civilians. From air strikes and
artillery attacks in Afghanistan, Somalia, Yemen and

6

Gaza to rockets launched at Israeli civilian areas by
Palestinian militants and car bombs and suicide attacks
in Pakistan or Iraq, the use of explosive weapons and
explosives has resulted in severe civilian suffering. The
threefold increase in drone attacks in Afghanistan and
Pakistan over the past year is of concern, given the
inevitable risk of unintended civilian casualties.
In Afghanistan, suicide and improvised explosive
device attacks by armed groups now cause more
civilian casualties than any other tactic, representing
44 per cent of the total civilian casualties in 2009, or
1,054 people killed. Aerial attacks from international
military operations also caused 359 civilian deaths.
Suicide bombings elsewhere are also increasing and of
increasing concern since the victims are so often
civilians, with the attack on the Sufi temple in Lahore
only one recent, horrific example. I worry that we have
become so inured to such horrors that the international
community now scarcely notices these events.
More research is needed on the harm caused by
explosive weapons in areas where civilians are present.
However, there is already enough tragic experience to
encourage serious reflection on the military use of such
weapons in such circumstances when measured against
the enormous human suffering they cause. I urge the
Council to begin a dialogue on ways to tackle this
emerging issue.
The planned withdrawal of thousands of United
Nations peacekeepers from Chad and potentially from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has brought the
issue of the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations into the forefront of Security Council
deliberations. This part of my statement includes input
from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO).
In Chad, it is critical that the Government fully
assume its protection of civilian responsibilities and
benchmarks outlined in resolution 1923 (2010). We
wait to see whether the withdrawal of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad in the East of the country will expose refugees,
IDPs and the local population, as well as humanitarian
actors, to new security threats. We are meanwhile
working with the Government to help turn its promises
into reality.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
humanitarian situation in the Kivu provinces remains
alarming. In Orientale province, between December

10-43853

S/PV.6354

2009 and April this year, close to 500 people were
killed by the LRA and 400 abducted, of whom 168
were children. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) plays a vital role in providing
security and logistical support for humanitarians, and
any drawdown can only heighten concerns both for
humanitarians and for the populations they seek to
serve.
While it is welcome that countries are determined
to shoulder their sovereign responsibilities, including
protecting civilians, I would strongly encourage the
drawdown of United Nations peacekeeping missions to
be made contingent on the attainment of clear
protection benchmarks endorsed by the Security
Council.
The publication in January 2010 of an
independent study commissioned by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and DPKO
outlined in detail the steps needed to translate Security
Council peacekeeping mandates into effective action
on the ground to protect civilians. We are making
steady progress in addressing a number of the gaps
identified. DPKO and the Department of Field Support
(DFS) have developed an operational concept, in
consultation with troop- and police-contributing
countries and other stakeholders, to bring conceptual
clarity to the protection of civilians in the United
Nations peacekeeping context.
Comprehensive protection strategies have been
developed for MONUSCO, the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan, and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, while the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti and hopefully other
peacekeeping missions are not far behind. DPKO and
DFS have also begun to develop protection of civilians
training standards for United Nations peacekeepers,
and are outlining the resource and capability
requirements for implementing protection of civilians
mandates. We count on the support of the Member
States throughout these processes.
There can, of course, be tensions between
military operations supported by peacekeeping
missions and the protection of civilians. Military
operations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
against the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda and the LRA have often sadly been

10-43853

accompanied by serious humanitarian consequences.
The MONUSCO conditionality policy has drawn
attention to the challenges to a United Nations
peacekeeping operation when it is mandated to protect
civilians while supporting a party to an armed conflict
that is prone to abusive conduct. Measures to prevent
the United Nations from being tainted by such abuses
must also fully take into account the need for effective
protection of civilians by influencing the forces
concerned. This is a difficult balance to strike.
And, while I am extremely worried by reports
from Somalia about the number of civilians being
killed and injured by both Government forces and
armed groups like Al-Shabaab, I am also concerned
that in its response to attacks on it, the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) — whose mandate is
authorized by the Council and whose operations are
financially supported by the United Nations — is not
taking sufficient notice of the basic principles of
distinction between combatants and civilians and
proportionality in the use of force. The challenges to
AMISOM are immense and its role commendable.
However, more needs to be done to prevent harm to
civilians and to ensure the proper investigation of
alleged violations.
The final theme I would like to address is once
again that of accountability. Prevention is always better
than cure, and I believe in the power of deterrence. The
conduct of parties to conflict is inevitably affected by
their sense of susceptibility to punishment and
accountability to their victims, and by clear signals that
impunity will not be tolerated. The danger here is that
the normative framework has outpaced the enforcement
will and capacity of the international community, so I
urge the Council to take a robust approach to
accountability. National justice systems must remain
the first line of defence, but when they prove unable or
unwilling to bring perpetrators to justice and provide
remedies to victims, the international community must
explore alternative means.
I welcome the commission of inquiry launched by
the Secretary-General for crimes committed during
violence in Guinea last September. And I welcome the
panel set up by the Secretary-General to advise him on
accountability for violations of humanitarian and
human rights law in Sri Lanka, especially in the last
stages of the conflict in that country, and the
mechanism recently set up by the Government of Sri
Lanka itself.

7

S/PV.6354

Meanwhile, the calls for an inquiry into recent
events in southern Kyrgyzstan are also hard to ignore.
The point is that this scrutiny needs to become the
norm. Actual and would-be violators need to
understand that they have nowhere to hide. Politics
must not always win out where powerful States or
vocal States with powerful protection are involved.
The Security Council has important powers in
this regard. It can include accountability and remedies
within benchmarks for the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping mission mandates. It can impose
sanctions. It can establish international tribunals, and it
has choices concerning the nature of its cooperation
with the International Criminal Court. It needs to show
that it is serious, and not selective, about this power.
One idea is for a permanent mechanism to be
established somewhere in the United Nations system to
conduct inquiries on serious allegations more or less
automatically, which would prevent calls for
investigations from being politicized from the start.
The world has changed in the 10 years since the
Security Council first focused on the protection of
civilians in a thematic manner, and even in my three
and a half years as Emergency Relief Coordinator.
Positive normative developments contrast with a
deteriorating reality on the ground and call into
question the efficacy of the law and the credibility of
the institutions that struggle to uphold it. So I urge the
Security Council to work with Member States to craft
new solutions to the changing nature of protection of
civilian concerns. These new solutions must embrace
an expansive vision of protection that extends beyond
the immediate concerns of the battlefield. They must
look to prevention as well as to mitigation. Only by
focusing on consistency, credibility and a long-term
approach can we hope to reduce the current gap
between norms and reality.
The President: I thank Mr. Holmes for his
briefing. On behalf of the Council, I would like to
express our profound gratitude to Under-SecretaryGeneral John Holmes, who is today making his last
appearance before the Council. Since his appointment by
the Secretary-General in January 2007, we have
appreciated Under-Secretary-General Holmes’ leadership
as the head of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator, his forthright interaction with the
Council, and his deep compassion in handling very
important issues. We wish him all the best in his future

8

endeavours. I am sure that Council members will add
their respective voices in a special tribute to
Mr. Holmes as we bid him farewell.
I now give the floor to Ms. Navanethem Pillay.
Ms. Pillay: Madam President, allow me to
express my appreciation to you and to members of the
Security Council for giving me the opportunity to
address the Council during this high-level debate on
the vital issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Since the Council was last briefed by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on this topic in November 2009 (see
S/PV.6216), important developments pertaining to
protection and accountability have taken place, which I
will discuss today.
The Council’s initiative in developing a solid
framework to protect civilians in many countries is
most welcome. However, protection remains a dream
for victims, and the gulf between policy and practice is
still vast. If we want to make a greater difference on
the ground, human rights and humanitarian actors need
to work together in order to give effect to the United
Nations policy framework. I am sure that my colleague
John Holmes would agree with me, and I would like to
take this opportunity to salute him for championing
humanitarian action within the United Nations system.
His leadership has enabled the development of
meaningful partnerships to advance protection.
The Council has long recognized that the
maintenance of peace and security will not be achieved
or sustained without due attention being paid to
redressing grievances, ending impunity and protecting
the human rights of civilians. Monitoring human rights
conditions can serve to sound an alarm when situations
are at risk of degenerating into violence. Information
gathered by my Office as well as the United Nations
human rights mechanisms, including the special
rapporteurs, can be very helpful to the Council in this
regard. When the security environment requires the
dispatch of peacekeeping missions, a clear mandate
with robust and well-resourced human rights
components becomes essential for the effective
implementation of protection measures.
Holding perpetrators accountable is key for the
protection of civilians. Amongst the most significant
actions taken by the Council for the protection of
civilians is the establishment of commissions of
inquiry. I am pleased that, on several occasions, the

10-43853

S/PV.6354

Council and the Secretary-General have requested my
Office to assist with these commissions. More use can
be made of such mechanisms.
It is worth recalling that States bear the primary
responsibility for carrying out investigations and
prosecutions regarding genocide, war crimes, crimes
against humanity and gross human rights violations.
Several
countries
have
established
national
commissions of inquiry. These are welcome
demonstrations of a State’s willingness to seek justice.
True accountability can be achieved only if national
inquiry mechanisms are credible, independent and
impartial. Such national commissions should have the
power of access to all relevant authorities, persons and
information, as well as adequate financial and human
resources. It is these conditions that will instil
confidence and trust in these national initiatives.
The Council has acted to promote accountability.
It has explicitly made its support for military
operations of national armed forces conditional on their
observance of human rights law, humanitarian law and
refugee law. We need to ensure that United Nations and
bilateral support to military operations and security
sector reform are tied to promoting respect for human
rights.
Let me now update the Council on situations
where the protection of civilians has been, and
remains, of great concern.
In Afghanistan, the intensifying conflict has had
an intolerable impact on civilians. Many lives are being
lost, homes destroyed and livelihoods and access to
basic services threatened. Clearly, anti-Government
insurgents, with their widespread use of indiscriminate
suicide bombing and targeted assassinations, present a
fundamental challenge. I am also concerned about
civilian casualties caused by aerial attacks and ground
operations, including from search and seizure
operations, carried out by Afghan national security
forces and international military forces. Moreover,
women and girls continue to face widespread human
rights abuses including abduction, trafficking, sexual
violence, forced and underage marriage and harmful
practices justified on the basis of tradition. I am
particularly concerned about the legal framework,
which in many instances institutionalizes violence and
discrimination
against
women. Although
the
Government has taken steps to enact laws aimed at

10-43853

protecting women’s rights, those laws remain largely
unimplemented.
The corrosive effect of impunity on both human
rights and peace is evident in the case of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Few perpetrators
of serious violations of human rights and humanitarian
law have been brought to justice. Some research even
indicates that rape and violence against women have
increased despite all the attention they have received in
recent years. In that context, I wish to recall that, in
cooperation with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, my Office undertook an
exercise to map out the most serious violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law in that
country between 1993 and 2003. That exercise is a
contribution to combating impunity and supporting
transitional justice. The report will be published soon.
Following
the
recommendations
of
the
international Commission of Inquiry into the
September 2009 events in Guinea, a start-up presence
from my Office has been deployed to the country. We
expect the presence to gradually evolve into a fullyfledged office that can more effectively help the
Government to address the human rights challenges
that the country faces. In addition, my Office has
dispatched a small team to assist the authorities, in
cooperation with other United Nations bodies, in
ensuring respect for human rights throughout the
electoral process.
The serious protection concerns in the aftermath
of the earthquake in Haiti are of a magnitude that
warrants the utmost attention. Death and destruction
are compounded by displacement, and women and
children continue to be vulnerable to widespread
sexual and gender-based violence and trafficking.
Alleviating those conditions remains the priority of the
Human Rights Section of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, acting in concert with
the protection cluster led by my Office and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. With regard to accountability for continued
human rights violations, I note the establishment of the
joint investigative commission which, starting next
week, will seek to determine the facts around the
events that led to an as of yet undetermined number of
violent deaths in the Les Cayes prison on 19 January
2010.

9

S/PV.6354

Turning now to Kyrgyzstan, where a deadly wave
of violence engulfed the south of the country in June, I
am particularly concerned about the targeting and
indiscriminate killing of civilians — including
children — looting and destruction of public and
private property, displacement and sexual violence. My
Office leads the human rights sub-cluster within the
protection cluster and works closely with all
humanitarian agencies to address the most critical
protection challenges and contribute to strengthening
the rule of law. On the accountability front, I continue
to be convinced of the need for an independent
international inquiry. Meanwhile, we stand ready to
engage, should there be credible national investigations
aimed at establishing the facts and the responsibility
for the attacks.
Both Palestinian and Israeli civilians have the
right to live in peace and security. I welcome the
decision of the Government of Israel to moderate its
blockade of Gaza. Yet I stress the urgent need to ensure
the open flow of imports and exports to and from Gaza.
I urge the Council to take appropriate action to ensure
the lifting in full of the blockade. In the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, settler violence, forced
evictions, home demolitions, revocation of residency
permits, arbitrary detention and torture are taking place
with impunity. I urge the Security Council to support
the recommendations of the United Nations FactFinding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (see
A/HRC/12/48), especially those that call for
accountability for all perpetrators of violations. In
accordance with relevant resolutions of the Human
Rights Council, a follow-up mechanism is currently
monitoring and assessing domestic, legal and other
proceedings undertaken by both the Government of
Israel and the Palestinian side. The Council has also
mandated an independent fact-finding mission, which
will soon start investigating violations resulting from
the Israeli military action against the flotilla carrying
humanitarian assistance to Gaza.
Turning now to Sri Lanka, let me recall the
unacceptably high level of loss of civilian lives caused
by both sides of the conflict in that country. Since the
end of the conflict, some progress has been made in the
return and resettlement of internally displaced persons.
Concrete initiatives must now follow to provide justice
and redress to victims and to promote accountability
and longer-term reconciliation. The leadership of the
Secretary-General in establishing an expert panel to

10

advise him on those issues is a welcome step in that
direction.
With regard to the Sudan, sporadic fighting in
Darfur between armed movements and Government
forces continues to result in civilian casualties, the
destruction of civilian property and large-scale
displacement. Civilian lives are also being lost in intercommunal violence stemming from resource-related
disputes. Across southern Sudan, also, lawlessness and
inter-communal violence, compounded by the
widespread proliferation of arms and ammunition,
continue to put civilians at risk. In 2009 alone, there
were at least 2,500 violent civilian deaths and more
than 350,000 people were displaced. Given the
likelihood of more violence in the lead-up to the 2011
referendum, there continues to be an urgent need for
more proactive protection of civilians.
In the course of the past few decades, grave
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law have been a tragic common
denominator in armed conflicts, with civilian targets of
attacks by State and non-State actors. I have raised
today many situations needing serious and urgent
attention. I welcome this opportunity to strengthen the
cooperation of my Office with the Council, and I
remain at its disposal to answer any questions it may
have.
The President: I thank Ms. Pillay for her
briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this debate and the
Secretary-General for his statement here today and for
the strong commitment he has always shown in the
interest of this very important subject.
I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral John Holmes for his briefing here today. I
would like to say how greatly Austria has appreciated

10-43853

S/PV.6354

his action at the head of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) during these past
three and a half years. I remember quite a number of
situations when the Council had some difficulty
agreeing on the best political response to a crisis, and
when it was OCHA under the leadership of John
Holmes that was the first to make a difference on the
ground. We are grateful for that as well.
Let me also thank High Commissioner Pillay for
her statement. I think it is very important that she has
the chance to speak to us in this context and to make
the link to specific country situations where there is a
protection concern.
Austria associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the European Union delegation later in
this debate.
In response to last year’s report of the SecretaryGeneral on the protection of civilians (S/2009/277), the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 1894
(2009). Eight months later, we are encouraged by the
progress made in its implementation. Let me
particularly thank OCHA and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for their consistent support of
this process. Resolution 1894 (2009), the in-depth
discussion within this year’s Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, the work of the Secretariat
and many missions on the ground, as well as the
independent study on the protection of civilians in the
context of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
have contributed to a better understanding of protection
of civilians amongst the various stakeholders.
We are convinced that the next report of the
Secretary-General
will
provide
an
important
opportunity to take stock of the progress made and of
remaining challenges in implementing resolution 1894
(2009). In order to reflect the recent developments, we
also believe that a revised version of the aide-memoire
(see S/PRST/2009/1, annex) should soon be adopted.
We are closely following how the provisions of
resolution 1894 (2009) on the role of peacekeeping
missions in the protection of civilians are being
translated into the everyday work of the Secretariat and
the Council and taken into account in the renewal of
peacekeeping
mission mandates. The further
development and implementation of the operational
concept, mission-wide protection strategies and
training modules are well under way. Austria will
continue to promote the use of these tools and,

10-43853

whenever necessary, call for the prioritization of
protection tasks, such as in the course of the recent
renewals of the mandates of the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
We welcome the fact that protection mandates
increasingly include all activities aimed at ensuring the
safety and physical integrity of civilian populations,
securing humanitarian access and ensuring full respect
for the rights of individuals by all parties to a conflict
in accordance with international humanitarian and
human rights law. We also welcome United Nations
efforts to promote and protect human rights in
situations of armed conflict, as well as the inclusion of
human rights components in peacekeeping and other
relevant missions. The High Commissioner has just
very clearly shown the link between human rights and
protection concerns.
The ultimate goal of any peacekeeping mission
with a protection mandate must be to help restore an
environment in which the host State is able to fully
exercise its primary responsibility to protect its own
population. The untimely drawdown or premature
downscaling of peacekeeping missions can seriously
endanger the stability and safety of the civilian
population. Mandate adjustments or the drawdown of
missions therefore also need to be conditioned upon
the fulfilment of benchmarks relating to the protection
of civilians.
It is no secret that my country would have
preferred a stronger protection of civilians component
in the latest renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad. At the same time, we welcome the establishment
of a joint working group comprising representatives of
the Secretariat and the Government of the host country,
who will jointly review implementation of the
protection benchmarks defined by the Council. This
model can also help, from our point of view, to
strengthen ownership by the host country. If successful,
it might be considered in the context of other missions
in the future.
The Secretary-General, in his most recent report
(S/2009/277), rightly listed the enhancement of
compliance with international humanitarian and human
rights law, as well as international criminal law, by

11

S/PV.6354

State and non-State actors alike as a major persistent
challenge. And he said so again here today.
Perpetrators of serious violations against the
civilian population still go largely unpunished.
Allegations need to be thoroughly investigated and
perpetrators brought to account, not only through
prosecution, but also through the vetting of armed and
security forces. We believe that the Council must
ensure respect for its resolutions and be prepared to
take vigorous measures against perpetrators, including
through the establishment of commissions of inquiry,
referrals to the International Criminal Court and the
imposition of targeted measures.
Let me also underline the important role of
national reparation programmes for victims and
institutional reforms. In addition, provisions pertaining
to violations against the civilian population should
consistently be included in the listing criteria of
relevant sanctions committees. The interaction between
the relevant United Nations bodies and the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, on the one hand, and sanctions committees
and their expert groups, on the other, needs to be
enhanced.
The
recent
briefing
by
Special
Representative Coomaraswamy to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was an important development. This, from our
point of view, should become a standing practice.
The past two years have seen important
developments in strengthening the protection of
women and children in particular. We also hope that
the particular protection needs of persons with
disabilities and older persons, together with examples
of best practices, will be addressed in the upcoming
report of the Secretary-General. Concerning damages
caused to the civilian population, we also follow with
interest the emerging practice of making amends even
if those damages do not stem from unlawful conduct.
We finally note with satisfaction that the Security
Council expert group on the protection of civilians has
significantly contributed to a more consistent approach
of the Security Council when renewing the protection
mandates of peacekeeping operations. It is essential
that the group address all missions with a role in the
protection of civilians.

12

Let me end by saying that the improvements
achieved so far in the United Nations are also serving
as an example for efforts by the European Union in this
field. Together with its European Union partners,
Austria is working to improve implementation of the
protection of civilians in missions and operations run
by the European Union.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank you very
much indeed, Madam President, for organizing this
debate. Many thanks, too, go to the Secretary-General
and to Under-Secretary-General Holmes and High
Commissioner Pillay for their comprehensive briefings.
Let me also echo, Madam, your warm comments
marking the fact that this is probably the last
appearance of John Holmes in the Council. He has
greatly improved the Council’s understanding of the
humanitarian aspects of conflicts and crises and
thereby helped the Council to enhance its responses.
We should certainly reflect carefully on the points he
has made today about ways in which we might try
further to close the gap between norms and reality. But
above all, we thank him for the leadership and
commitment that he has shown to those who would,
but for his efforts and the efforts of his United Nations
colleagues, often be abandoned to deprivation,
devastation, depredation and, frequently, death.
Global events, many of them grimly described by
John Holmes just now, since the Council adopted
resolution 1894 (2009) have shown that the protection
of vulnerable civilian populations remains as important
as ever. The forthcoming fifteenth anniversary of the
Srebrenica tragedy is also a powerful reminder of why
this issue is so central to the Security Council’s work.
The ground is already being well covered and
time is short, but I would just like to make three brief
points.
First, United Nations peacekeepers play a vital
part in protecting civilians, and it is right that we
prioritize that task above others in certain
peacekeeping operations. But we should be clear that
the parties to an armed conflict bear the primary
responsibility for ensuring that civilians are neither
affected by that conflict nor specifically targeted.
Following the withdrawal of the United Nations
peacekeeping mission in Chad — which has already
been raised by previous speakers — the Chadian
Government has undertaken to protect its civilian
population, particularly women and children, and it

10-43853

S/PV.6354

must fully honour that commitment. The work of the
joint high-level working group between the Chadian
Government and the United Nations will be important,
and the international community should monitor its
findings carefully.
Secondly, we must ensure the robust protection of
humanitarian space so that civilians who are affected
by armed conflict can access essential goods and
services. That is primarily the responsibility of States,
but when the State is overwhelmed, humanitarian
agencies must be allowed to respond to needs for
emergency protection and assistance. That is a basic
tenet of international humanitarian law, and we must
uphold it.
That is why we have long called for an
improvement in the unacceptable and unsustainable
situation in Gaza. Resolution 1860 (2009) called for
the delivery of humanitarian aid and called on States to
alleviate the humanitarian and economic situation. As
my Foreign Secretary has said and as the SecretaryGeneral said in his statement yesterday, Israel’s
announcement on 5 July on the easing of some
restrictions on the import of goods into Gaza is
welcome and marks an important step in the right
direction. Those changes must now be implemented
swiftly.
On the same grounds, we are concerned about
poor access by humanitarian agencies to communities
in the north of Sri Lanka. Ensuring freedom of
movement for all internally displaced persons who
remain in camps and transferring camps to civilian
authority are important steps in allowing civilians to
return to normal life.
That leads me to my third point. The United
Kingdom is greatly disturbed by the continuing growth
in the number of people displaced within their own
countries as a result of conflict — a record high of over
27 million in 2009. That is an acute problem in Burma,
for example, where we remain deeply concerned about
the lack of progress towards national reconciliation.
The Burmese military regime continues to target
civilians, particularly people from ethnic minorities.
The use of rape and other forms of sexual violence
remain a serious concern, as do the use of child
soldiers and forced labour for military use. Protecting
civilians wherever and whoever they are is the best
way to prevent displacement and consequent
deprivation.

10-43853

Thus, the United Kingdom continues to attach
great importance to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. In March 2010, the United Kingdom launched
a national strategy on the protection of civilians, which
draws together for the first time our efforts to keep the
protection of civilians at the forefront of our political,
security, human rights and humanitarian work.
As Afghanistan has been mentioned by previous
speakers, I should just make the point that it is
important that the Council recognize the difference
between, on the one hand, the Afghan and international
forces, which make every effort to avoid civilian
casualties and operate under a Council mandate, and
the actions of armed groups that deliberately target
civilians as part of their attempt to undermine the
democratic process. As the Secretary-General’s recent
reports have made clear, the proportion of civilian
casualties caused by the Taliban has grown
significantly.
We have seen the valuable role played by the
Security Council’s informal expert group on the
protection of civilians. As its chair, the United
Kingdom remains committed to its work.
We welcome the appointment of Margot
Wallström as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict — an
important step in this area, as John Holmes said. We
support the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Radhika Coomaraswamy, which has led to much of the
progress we have seen on the protection of children in
the past year.
The United Kingdom believes that we have made
much progress on the protection of civilians since the
adoption of resolution 1894 (2009) in November, in
particular our discussions in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, but we still have more work
to do on this important issue.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking the Secretary-General, UnderSecretary-General Holmes and High Commissioner
Pillay for their briefings and their tremendous work on
behalf of endangered civilians around the world. Let
me also thank Mr. Holmes for his service to the United
Nations. He has been an outspoken and dedicated
leader. He has shown a rare and resolute determination
to end the suffering of civilians under threat of war or
famine. The Under-Secretary-General has my

13

S/PV.6354

Government’s abiding respect and my warm personal
thanks.
Eight months after the Council adopted resolution
1894 (2009), we still have far more work to do together
to save the lives of civilians in conflict zones. The
victims in situations are different: children forced to
take up guns, women and girls tormented by rape and
sexual abuse, refugees and internally displaced persons
longing for a home and shelter, ordinary people caught
in crossfire. But they all are innocent, and they should
all be sheltered by the rule of law and the rules of war.
Their suffering is particularly tragic because it is
so often preventable. Their voices call out to our
common conscience and remind us of the urgent need
to act.
Let me highlight briefly three critical areas today:
first, providing the safety that humanitarian efforts
need to function; secondly, moving from the ambition
to protect civilians to successful actions by
peacekeeping missions; and thirdly, enhancing the
legal capacity to support accountability.
The United States is deeply disturbed by the
increasing frequency of attacks on humanitarian
workers. Such assaults violate basic principles of law
and decency. Such violence not only obstructs the
delivery of life-saving humanitarian assistance, but
also can create an atmosphere that restricts the
movement, even the presence, of international
humanitarian actors. As we have recently seen in
Pakistan and the Sudan, workers have been attacked,
kidnapped or killed, often in cynical attempts to extend
the suffering of civilians for political gain.
Humanitarian agencies’ local staff members can be
especially vulnerable to attacks.
That is a deplorable phenomenon, but not a new
one. The Council has expressed its intentions, in the
words of resolution 1894 (2009), to “take appropriate
steps in response to deliberate attacks against
humanitarian personnel” (para. 16(c)). We have also
acted, for instance, by designating al-Shabaab last
April, under resolution 1907 (2009). We must make a
concerted effort to identify those responsible for all
attacks on humanitarian workers so that humanitarian
agencies can go about their work, protecting the
innocent.
Here, the resources of United Nations country
teams often prove invaluable, and the United States

14

strongly supports the protection mandates of UNICEF,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, as well as the International
Committee of the Red Cross. Together, they help
promote civilians’ basic rights, meet their physical
needs, respect their dignity, and work to ensure their
safety.
We respect the principles of neutrality,
impartiality and independence under which those and
other
humanitarian
groups,
including
nongovernmental organizations, operate in the field. We
encourage humanitarian organizations to strengthen
programmes to end conflict-related sexual violence,
and we urge our fellow Council members to fully
support, in terms of both finances and policy, the
efforts of such organizations to protect civilians and to
implement the commitments that we unanimously
agreed to in resolution 1888 (2009).
My second point is that peacekeeping missions
play a vital role in providing support to States in which
civilians are at risk. However, the Council’s mandates
directing peacekeeping missions to protect must be
matched by resources, guidance, training and
leadership.
We welcome innovative approaches by all
involved to identify the threats and vulnerabilities of
civilian space in the area of a mission. We applaud
efforts by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
supported by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, to develop a strategic framework for
mission-wide protection strategies. As Member States,
we must all support those efforts and back up
peacekeeping missions with political support and
capacity-building efforts. We must also pay close heed
to the challenges faced by peacekeepers in the field,
whether civilian, police or military personnel.
Serious challenges remain on the ground, such as
those today in Darfur. That is something we must bear
in mind as we approach the renewal of the mandate of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) at the end of this month. The
United States supports full and proper backing to
peacekeeping mandates, including that of UNAMID, so
that deployed peacekeepers can protect themselves and
endangered civilians, as identified in each specific
mandate. Host countries with peacekeeping missions
must shoulder the primary responsibility for the safety

10-43853

S/PV.6354

and security of their populations, as well as for
supporting those missions as they implement their
mandates.
My Government fully backs the work of United
Nations peacekeeping missions, working in concert
with United Nations country teams and host
Governments, to strengthen police and judicial
mechanisms so that respect for the rule of law can
counter those who seek to profit from lawlessness. We
undertake significant efforts to promote the rule of law
around the world, and we urge others to do the same.
Peacekeeping missions, when properly trained,
well equipped and deployed with robust mandates, are
critical to our overall efforts to protect civilians. But
today we face the question of how to ensure that
civilians are protected where strategic consent for
United Nations peacekeeping evaporates and those
forces are ultimately withdrawn. Such a situation is
now playing out in Chad, with the continued drawdown
of the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT). By the end of the
year there will be no United Nations peacekeepers in
Chad, and the United States is extremely concerned
about that situation.
The Government of Chad should protect its own
population and refugees within its territory. The
international
community
recognizes
that
the
Government of Chad is accountable for the welfare not
only of its own citizens, nearly 170,000 of whom are
internally displaced, but also for the more than 270,000
Darfuri and 74,000 Central African refugees within
Chad’s borders.
Finally, let me turn to the question of
accountability. Governments bear the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians. But other parties
to armed conflict must also comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law —
and all too often they do not. Those legal obligations
should have legal consequences. It is incumbent upon
the international community to end impunity by
helping Governments create, maintain and operate
credible and effective national courts where possible,
or by supporting international and other mechanisms
where necessary. The International Criminal Court can
also be useful in the fight against genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity.
Ongoing dialogue on this important subject is
worthwhile. But this Council will be judged by its

10-43853

actions and their impact on civilian lives. I hope that
we will take concrete action to directly challenge those
who violate their obligations to protect civilians in
armed conflict, that we will continue to craft
peacekeeping mandates that back missions with the
necessary training capability and leadership of
deployed peacekeepers, and that we — both as a
Council and in our national capacities — will help
Governments emerging from conflict to rebuild their
infrastructure and institutions to protect and provide
for their civilians.
In that regard we urge continuation of the
Secretariat’s important work to develop a strategic
framework for the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations supported by mission-wide
planning and senior leadership training. We also urge
the Secretariat to complete the assessment of resources
and capabilities required for those tasks as soon as
possible.
We look forward to the next report of the
Secretary-General on this crucially important topic.
United Nations action has saved untold lives and eased
unimaginable suffering, but in all too many places
innocents still bear the brunt of war and conflict. We
cannot yet afford to sleep easily.
Mr. Assaf (Lebanon): I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing, as
well as the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms. Pillay, for her perceptive remarks
and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator,
Mr. Holmes, for his insightful comments. We wish him
all the best in his next endeavour. Lebanon also
expresses its support for the informal group of experts
on the protection of civilians. Its diligent work,
coupled with that of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), has been instrumental
in reporting the realities on the ground.
Civilians continue to account for the majority of
casualties in armed conflicts, even after more than a
decade since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999).
Thus the prospects for building safe, peaceful and
prosperous societies are eroded, as children’s hope for
the future is shattered, women and girls continue to be
subject to endemic sexual and gender-based violence,
and able men are killed or injured.
Tolerating impunity for the armed targeting of
civilians only encourages perpetrators in their heinous

15

S/PV.6354

practices. Lebanon supports the establishment of
standing mechanisms for the timely creation of
independent fact-finding commissions in the immediate
aftermath of hostilities. That would improve the
Council’s ability to fairly assess the realities on the
ground and to take appropriate action against those
parties undermining international law and international
humanitarian law.
The use of cluster munitions as a means of
indiscriminate attacks against civilians is particularly
lethal, since its risks to civilians endure long after the
conflict has ended. The Lebanese armed forces,
assisted by the international community, are still
working on clearing vast areas from the 4 million
cluster bombs Israel dropped in the last 48 hours of the
war it waged in 2006. Hundreds of civilians — a large
proportion of whom are children — are still dying or
losing limbs, four years on, as a result of unexploded
munitions. Lebanon reiterates its demand that Israel
pay due compensation for the Lebanese children and
farmers harmed by cluster munitions, in addition to the
fishermen and others affected by the oil spill caused by
the Israeli bombing of the Jiyeh power plant in 2006.
Standing idle as human rights and international
humanitarian law are violated and civilian access to aid
is consistently impeded means abandoning the victims
twice. The people of Gaza, whose hospitals and
schools have been repeatedly bombed by the Israeli
army, should be allowed to access, without waiting
endless hours at checkpoints, the humanitarian aid that
would cater to their basic human needs. Moreover, the
blockade of Gaza should be lifted immediately and
without conditions.
The efforts to protect civilians should also tackle
the root causes hampering enduring peace and security,
in addition to dealing with imminent physical threats.
While Lebanon commends the work of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) and
OCHA in Gaza, the fact remains that unless the siege is
lifted and the people of Gaza allowed to experience
sustainable and sustained economic development, their
basic human right to freedom from want and need will
continue to be threatened. Lebanon also expresses its
appreciation for the quick-impact projects carried out
by the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, which
have made an important difference in the lives of our
citizens.

16

While there is no doubt that civilians in armed
conflict are forced into vulnerable situations, it must be
acknowledged that refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs) are generally in even more precarious
conditions. It is imperative that the international
community exert a concerted effort to ensure the return
of refugees and IDPs to safe and secure homes.
The Security Council has both a political
responsibility and a moral duty towards defenceless
civilians in situations of armed conflict, as well as
towards humanitarian aid workers and journalists who
risk their lives to help those vulnerable populations and
to report on their plight. We owe it to them all to
endow our peacekeeping operations with the necessary
resources to carry out their mandates, as well as to
embolden them with the necessary political will.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, allow me to thank you, Madam
President, for your initiative to revisit the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
In that connection, we believe that there is a clear
need to be guided by the 1949 Geneva Conventions in
labelling a situation as an armed conflict. That will
enable us to better focus our efforts and to avoid
counterproductive political interference.
We would also like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, Under-Secretary-General John Holmes
and High Commissioner for Human Rights
Navanethem Pillay for their statements. We highly
appreciate Mr. Holmes’ work in one of the most
complex areas in which the United Nations operates.
The subject under consideration today has long
been at the very centre of United Nations and Security
Council attention. At the same time, in spite of the
efforts of the international community, the world
continues to be plagued by armed conflicts that claim
the lives of thousands of persons. That is the sad reality
of our times. The majority of the victims of conflict are
civilians, most of them belonging to the most
vulnerable groups, namely, women, children and older
persons. In addition, we do not find it useful to split the
categories of civilians needing international protection
into additional sub-categories. In that connection, we
propose that we be guided strictly by the relevant
provisions of the Geneva Conventions.
We resolutely condemn both wilful attacks
against civilians and civilian loss of life as a result of

10-43853

S/PV.6354

indiscriminate or disproportionate use of force, which
constitute
serious
violations
of
international
humanitarian law. Nor is there any justification for
individual armed groups to seize hostages or carry out
terrorist attacks against civilians.
We believe that improving the system for the
collection and analysis of relevant data is necessary to
effectively combat those phenomena. We request the
Secretariat to be mindful of that in preparing future
briefings to the Security Council on the issue of the
protection of civilians.
It is clear that the protection of civilians is a
priority task for all parties to a conflict. Peacekeepers,
whose mandates increasingly include functions in that
regard, have an important role to play in that
connection. We therefore welcome the steps taken by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to train
peacekeeping personnel.
We believe that, in the current circumstances, the
efforts of the international community should be aimed
first and foremost at strengthening national efforts in
this area. In order to enhance effectiveness in that
regard, there is a need to take into account the specific
characteristics of each conflict and to take the
necessary decisions only on that basis, including with
respect to the protection of civilians.
The United Nations should of course respond
swiftly and effectively to instances of violence against
civilians. What is important in that regard is that we
work to prevent and to reduce conflicts and to disarm,
demobilize and reintegrate former combatants. It is
important that efforts in that regard be coordinated
properly, with strict division of labour and
responsibility in line with the Charter of the United
Nations and other international legal instruments and
under the leading role of the Security Council. We also
believe that revisiting the issue of establishing new,
separate Security Council mechanisms on the
protection of civilians is not useful.
In conclusion, I would emphasize that only
steadfast compliance by all parties with the norms of
international humanitarian law and Security Council
decisions, as well as the rejection of selective and
unilateral approaches in interpreting violations, can
promote improvements in conflict situations and
strengthen genuine protection for civilians in armed
conflicts.

10-43853

Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, and the delegation
of Nigeria for convening this debate. I would also like
to express my gratitude for the briefings by SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, Under-Secretary-General
Holmes and High Commissioner for Human Rights
Pillay, which have once again served to underscore the
commitment of the United Nations to strengthening
international humanitarian law in order to protect the
victims of armed conflict.
I should like to make special mention of UnderSecretary-General Holmes. In carrying out his
responsibilities in such an excellent manner, he has
been part of one of the best aspects of the Organization
on the ground — humanitarian protection.
The multiplicity and complexity of today’s
conflicts, the lack of respect for the norms of
international humanitarian law and the use of
increasingly sophisticated weapons that have
indiscriminate effects on civilian populations are all
factors that have served to increase the challenges
facing the Security Council. They have become the raw
material for determining the course that the
international community must take in addressing an
issue of such crucial importance.
Important progress has been made in fine-tuning
legislation and international norm-setting bodies.
Thanks to that progress, we have been able to more
adequately elaborate the concepts on the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts. The Council is moving in
the right direction, as evidenced by last November’s
adoption of resolution 1894 (2009), which places an
innovative focus on mandates for peacekeeping
operations to ensure that they include plans of action
and strategies for the protection of civilians that ensure
coordination between United Nations missions and
humanitarian organizations.
The Security Council has also made progress
with regard to the protection of children in armed
conflict. During the debate on that issue held a few
days ago (see S/PV.6341), the representative of
UNICEF pointed to the development of action plans
for the successful demobilization of children in the
Philippines, Nepal and the Sudan, which have resulted
in freeing thousands of children in countries where
United Nations reporting oversight mechanisms are in
place. Nevertheless, our good intentions have not yet
emerged from the realm of the abstract and we

17

S/PV.6354

continue to lament the various acts of aggression to
which civilians are subject in different regions.
Violence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo continues to take a toll on the lives of millions
of civilians. The humanitarian situation there, which is
marked primarily by forced displacement and the use
of sexual violence as a weapon of war, is among the
world’s most critical.
The deterioration of the situation in Somalia as a
result of decades of armed violence and social and
political instability is also worrying. In Darfur, the
deaths of humanitarian workers providing assistance in
conflict areas is alarming. In Chad, where half a
million people require humanitarian assistance,
preventing a restriction of the area in which
humanitarian work is being carried out is a major
challenge. Afghanistan, Gaza and Iraq are also at the
centre of our concerns in that regard.
To these examples we must also add the fact that
parties to current conflicts are making excessive use of
force and using weapons prohibited by international
law, causing indiscriminate harm to civilian
populations and damaging goods that are essential for
their survival, which are protected by international
humanitarian law.
It is therefore essential that progress be made in
the effective implementation of Security Council
sanctions regimes, in particular arms embargoes. In a
broader sense, meeting the international obligations set
forth in the Palermo Protocol and the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects is essential.
My delegation reiterates the importance of having
a balanced strategy that allows us to make progress in
defending and protecting civilians in armed conflict.
That should also include compliance with international
humanitarian law and accountability in order to put an
end to impunity as essential components in armed
conflicts.
In that regard, we support the decision of the
Secretary-General to undertake an impartial and
independent
investigation into the violations
committed against the civilian population at the end of
the armed conflict in Sri Lanka, including the
appointment of a panel of inquiry. We call upon the
authorities of the Government of Sri Lanka to

18

cooperate and facilitate the work of the panel, which
has as its sole objective the promotion of justice and
national reconciliation in that country.
The Geneva Conventions of 1949, their
Additional Protocols and other instruments of
international humanitarian law and customary
international law provide a solid foundation of
principles and standards for protecting the life and
dignity of all of those who are not participating in
hostilities or who have ceased to do so. Strict
compliance with international law should allow us to
end the suffering of civilian populations affected by
armed conflict and to provide guarantees that will
make it possible to repair the damage done to victims,
help them to rebuild their lives and restore their dignity
as human beings.
We must also bear in mind that violations of
international humanitarian law are war crimes and that
Member States have the primary obligation for
investigating and prosecuting those allegedly
responsible for committing such acts. In that regard, as
highlighted last week during
the debate on the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law, the
fight against impunity has been strengthened through
the work of the International Criminal Court, the
special and mixed tribunals and the specialized
chambers of national tribunals. Nevertheless, it is
important that States reaffirm their strong opposition to
impunity and their responsibility to meet their
obligations in order to put an end to it.
Our consideration of this issue today should
contribute to overcoming political interests that hinder
the full implementation of the obligations flowing from
international law. It should also make it possible for us
to respond quickly and decisively to any humanitarian
crisis and to ensure accountability in the face of
flagrant impunity. Let us not fall into an endless
theoretical debate while reality on the ground
overwhelms the Organization’s capacity to act. On the
contrary, let us make progress in consolidating a
culture of respect for the principles and standards of
international humanitarian law in order to eradicate
impunity and repair the damage done to civilians in
armed conflict.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I would first like to thank your delegation,
Madam President, for your initiative to convene this
debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-

10-43853

S/PV.6354

General, Mr. John Holmes and Ms. Pillay for their
dynamic leadership on the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
The topic that brings us together today lies at the
very heart of the Organization’s mission, namely, to
promote peace, security, the well-being of civilian
populations and respect for human rights. However, we
must note that, despite the strengthening of the legal
regime in the area of the protection of civilians,
including resolution 1894 (2009), the number of
civilian victims of violence in armed conflict remains,
unfortunately, too high.
In approaching today’s debate, we must keep in
mind the suffering and deep distress experienced by
millions of people, in particular women, children, the
disabled and the elderly, whose lives are brutally
plunged into horror on a daily basis. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Mission has
compiled figures proving the recruitment of 848
children in 2009. In Somalia, 110,000 people were
displaced during the first quarter of 2010. Finally, in
Afghanistan, over 2,150 communities are directly
affected, with an average of 42 persons killed or
injured by landmines and explosive devices every
month.
Ensuring the protection of civilians in armed
conflict remains a complex and multidimensional
endeavour. It involves all aspects of the Security
Council’s work in the areas of maintaining
international peace and security, humanitarian affairs,
the rule of law and matters pertaining to international
criminal law. I welcome the fact that today’s debate is
taking place directly after the Security Council
examined consecutively, under Mexico’s presidency,
the issues of international criminal tribunals and of
strengthening the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
My delegation would like to address two essential
aspects related to our debate, namely, strengthening the
mandates of peacekeeping operations and the
responsibility of the perpetrators of violence.
Concerning the first point, my delegation remains
convinced that the protection of civilians in armed
conflict falls primarily to States themselves. The
Council therefore cannot consider an effective response
to this scourge without the full cooperation of the
relevant State.

10-43853

Gabon would like to commend the progress
achieved in the past few years by the Council, in
particular with regard to incorporating into the
mandates of peacekeeping operations the urgent need
to protect civilian victims of armed conflict. Recently
adopted resolutions — including resolution 1933
(2010) on the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire, resolution 1925 (2010) on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and resolution 1919 (2010) on
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan — illustrate
this well. Indeed, the mandates of these peacekeeping
operations are unique in that they adopt a
comprehensive and integrated approach based on
realities on the ground and are adapted to the crucial
security needs of the populations concerned.
Such an approach enables us to better guarantee
the security of displaced persons and refugees, to
prevent sexual violence and to better protect children.
The success of such an approach presupposes that
peacekeeping
operations
have
the
necessary
operational, technical, financial and human resources.
Furthermore, it would be wise to improve the
information exchange mechanisms between the various
parties to, and stakeholders in, conflicts.
In that connection, my country welcomes the
measures advocated by the Secretariat in the
elaboration of the so-called New Horizon Initiative. In
that regard, special focus should be placed on the need
to strengthen cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations.
In addition, the recommendations of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations aimed at
forging a genuine partnership to improve the planning,
deployment and management of peacekeeping
operations, inter alia in Africa, must remain at the very
forefront of our concerns.
With respect to the second point, my delegation
notes that the strengthening of peacekeeping operations
will bear full fruit only if the Security Council
continues to devote all the necessary attention to the
issue of the criminal liability of the perpetrators of war
crimes, crimes against humanity, crimes of genocide
and all serious violence against civilian populations.
I am compelled to stress the need to pursue
awareness-raising work on this issue with non-State
armed groups, which too often undertake actions
beyond the pale of the law and believe that they can

19

S/PV.6354

escape justice. This issue is closely related to our
previous debate on the Security Council’s action to end
impunity. This allows us better to understand the link
between the protection of civilians and the need for a
strong State capable of upholding all the attributes of
sovereignty. Our previous debates have also
underscored the link between the need for justice and
peacebuilding. This is the right place and time to recall
the critical role played by national tribunals, ad hoc
tribunals and the International Criminal Court in the
fight against impunity.
In conclusion, I pay a personal tribute to United
Nations personnel and all humanitarian organizations
for their dedication to the worthy cause of the victims
of armed conflict. Their activities in very difficult and
dangerous circumstances have averted terrible
humanitarian disasters and assisted those in distress. I
hope it can be agreed that a more effective fight against
violence against civilians in armed conflict requires
vigorous and concerted global action to prevent
conflicts.
Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): I thank you, Madam, for
organizing this open debate. I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement and Under-Secretary-General
Holmes and High Commissioner Pillay for their
briefings. We further thank Mr. Holmes for his
dedicated service and wish him the very best in his
future endeavours.
Uganda reiterates the importance it attaches to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We are
concerned that civilians still account for the vast
majority of casualties during situations of armed
conflict. The briefings we have listened to today
indicate that there have been improvements in some
areas of the protection of civilians agenda. However,
there remains a lot of room for improvement. We
welcome the Security Council’s efforts to strengthen
peacekeeping mandates in the area of protection of
civilians, as evidenced in the recently renewed mandate
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan in this regard.
In Somalia, the Al-Shabaab and Hizbul Islam
groups, which are opposed to the peace process, have
continued to carry out indiscriminate attacks on
civilians and humanitarian workers. They use civilians
as human shields in markets and similar environments.
The African Union Mission in Somalia, consistent with

20

its mandate, has supported the Transitional Federal
Government, offered greater protection to civilians,
and supported the peace process.
It is important to continue efforts towards more
effective engagement with non-State actors and armed
groups with regard to their obligations under
international law. However, it is important for all
concerned to take into account specific conditions on
the ground, including risk assessments.
We are convinced that combating impunity and
ensuring accountability for crimes and violations of
human rights are fundamental prerequisites for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. When
potential perpetrators know that they will be brought to
account for their crimes, this serves as a deterrent.
Uganda as a State party to the Rome Statute is
committed to fighting impunity and ensuring justice for
the victims.
At the recently concluded first Review
Conference of the Parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court held in Kampala from
31 May to 11 June, States parties reiterated their
determination to put an end to impunity for
perpetrators of the most heinous crimes of international
concern. It was significant that they emphasized that
justice is a fundamental building block of sustainable
peace. They also declared their commitment to
continuing to strengthen efforts to promote victims’
rights, including their participation in judicial
proceedings and claims for reparations.
It is important for all parties to armed conflict to
emphasize the dignity of civilians by acknowledging
losses that result from lawful combat operations. In
this regard, there is a need to make meaningful amends
to affected individuals and communities, such as
financial assistance and funding for humanitarian aid
programmes. We encourage Member States to embrace
the concept of making amends, not because there is any
legal obligation to do so, but simply in the interest of
mitigating suffering.
Uganda calls for a more comprehensive
international legal framework for the promotion and
strengthening of measures to prevent, mitigate and
eliminate the root causes of internal displacement. The
African Union made significant progress in this regard
by adopting the Convention for the Protection and
Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa at
a summit held on 23 October 2009 in Kampala. The

10-43853

S/PV.6354

international community should devote more time and
resources to addressing the needs of refugees, returnees
and internally displaced persons.
There is a need for greater recognition of the
needs of persons with disabilities as a vulnerable group
arising out of the indiscriminate use of landmines and
explosive remnants of war. We call upon all
subregional, regional and civil society organizations
and Member States to support the victims and to
undertake initiatives leading to the clearance of
ordnance and the sensitization of civilian populations.
In conclusion, the primary responsibility of
protection of civilians lies with national authorities, but
regional organizations and, ultimately, the international
community, have an important role to play. We believe
that this debate will draw attention to some of the
issues that require greater focus.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express our
gratitude to the Secretary-General, Under-SecretaryGeneral John Holmes and High Commissioner for
Human Rights Pillay for their statements. I pay special
tribute to John Holmes for his service to the cause of
humanity at the helm of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs for the past three and a half
years.
The protection of civilians in conflict is a
critically important item on the Council’s agenda. Last
year, the Security Council adopted resolution 1894
(2009) after a comprehensive review of this issue. The
Secretariat also took measures to improve protection
on the ground in response to criticism against the
performance of some peacekeeping missions.
Yet, as the three briefings today testify, we still
face many challenges, and further concerted action is
essential. First of all, in consolidating the protection of
civilians, standard-setting and the universalization of
norms are important, of course, but strict compliance
with all international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law is equally important, and enforcement is at
the heart of any such action. This means that the
Government authorities of a country in which a
conflict occurs should act in accordance with
international norms and humanitarian law, and respect
the provisions of resolutions adopted by the Security
Council on this subject.
We simply cannot allow Government troops or
police forces to disregard the protection of civilians or

10-43853

even to become a threat to civilians. To that end, the
rule of law should be established through security
sector reform, and judicial reform should bring an end
to impunity. A policy of zero tolerance has very little
value unless it is enforced throughout the security
establishment without regard to rank or position.
Another serious challenge is how to address
violence against civilians and hindrances to
humanitarian work committed by non-State armed
groups. Calling for non-State armed groups to comply
with humanitarian law, as we customarily do in
Security Council resolutions, is clearly inadequate.
Effective ways should be found to cope with the
tactics of non-State armed groups, such as the Lord’s
Resistance Army. Peacekeeping missions may be able
to provide logistical support, upon request, for
Government forces fighting non-State armed groups,
but such support should be provided only when clear
and strict conditions are met so that it will not lead to
violence against civilians.
The most effective step we can take is to promote
the political process among the parties concerned
through engaging non-State groups so as to achieve
ceasefires and eventually peace agreements. If a
political solution cannot be achieved, appropriate
measures should be taken to keep the violence
committed by non-State armed groups to a minimum.
One way is targeted sanctions against those violators of
humanitarian law. That method should be considered
more strategically. Sanction regimes could also be
utilized to prevent weapons from flowing in from
outside the country. Controls over small arms should
be strengthened at the regional level.
But, obviously, military or coercive measures
alone cannot resolve conflicts. We should address root
causes such as protection of minorities and access to
natural resources, food and water. Comprehensive but
also country-specific strategies should be developed to
promote civilian protection and should involve all
actors, including regional organizations.
Half of the peacekeeping operations now in the
field have protection of civilians as a main mandate
from the Security Council. Despite some improvement
in the last 18 months, there remains a noticeable gap
between mandate and expectation, on the one hand,
and implementation and action on the ground, on the
other hand. I would like to stress three steps that

21

S/PV.6354

should be taken so that peacekeeping missions can
implement the mandate more effectively.
First, in country-specific protection strategies that
are designed to translate the Council’s mandate into
concrete actions, the mandate to protect civilians
should be reflected in more specific terms by
identifying targets and means of protecting local
populations, humanitarian workers, refugees and
internally displaced persons. Also, the strategies and
means of achieving the objective should be shared with
the Council so that there is a common understanding as
to how the mandate is to be implemented. There should
therefore be no gap between expectation and
implementation.
Secondly, it is essential to ensure that there are
adequate resources and capacity for effective
implementation. To that end, information on resource
implications should be provided to the Council at the
launch of a new mission or a revised mission. Two key
issues in the protection of civilians are, first, the
mobility and training of units and, secondly,
intelligence capacity, since troops often have to operate
in vast and geographically diverse areas.
In particular, I would like to stress the shortage of
utility helicopters, which has been emphasized so many
times by the Secretary-General and his senior
colleagues in the Secretariat. But a solution that meets
that challenge has not yet been found. I have
personally tried to address the issue through the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, which is
a subsidiary organ of the Security Council and thus
supports the Council’s work, in connection with its
consideration of the capacity gap in mandate
implementation. However, regrettably, there is no
consensus on what to do with this issue in the Working
Group.
I believe that addressing this issue is the single
most specific and concrete step the Council can take to
contribute to protection of civilians. I appeal therefore
to members of the Council to demonstrate strong
leadership by cooperating with the General Assembly
on this issue. Indeed, because responsibility is
overlapping, it is difficult to find a solution. In order to
address and find a solution on this chronic and very
critical issue as soon as possible, it would helpful if the
Secretary-General could submit a proposal to serve as a
basis for the work of the Security Council and the
General Assembly on this matter.

22

The third point is that strategies and guidance on
the implementation of protection of civilians should be
shared at different levels: the policy level, the
operational level and the tactical level.
The operational guideline, which has been
developed by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, is useful as common guidance across
missions. Any change in mandates decided by the
Council should be kept updated on a mission-bymission basis so that the concept of operations can be
immediately adjusted by the troops on the ground.
I would like to emphasize the importance of close
consultation in this connection among the Security
Council, the troop-contributing countries, policecontributing countries and the Secretariat. It is also
important to share best practices among the missions.
For example, what happened at the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo with the establishment of the joint
protection team and a temporary base and the
strengthening of communication with local populations
are all useful and could usefully be followed by the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan.
I am pleased with the recent progress regarding
women and children in conflict, the appointment of
Ms. Wallström as the Special Representative of
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
the adoption of the presidential statement last month to
strengthen measures against persistent perpetrators of
violence against children (S/PRST/2010/10).
In closing, I would like to reiterate how relevant
the human security approach can be as the basic
rationale for efforts to protect and empower those
civilians who are most vulnerable. This multisectoral
and human-centred approach focuses on both
protection and empowerment at the individual and
community levels. It is for this reason that Japan has
been providing support, including through the United
Nations Trust Fund for Human Security. Japan is
committed to extend every possible support to
protection and empowerment of civilians.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank
the
Secretary-General
and
the
High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their briefings.
I associate myself with the statement to be made
by the representative of the European Union.

10-43853

S/PV.6354

Of course I want to pay tribute to Sir John
Holmes, whose last statement to the Council in his
capacity as Under-Secretary General for Humanitarian
Affairs we have heard today. Thanks to his work, the
Council today better understands the situation on the
ground.
I will devote my statement to two points —
peacekeeping operations and the respect for
international humanitarian law.
First, with regard to peacekeeping operations, it
behooves us to continue our efforts to strengthen the
strategic control of these operations. We would like the
informal group of experts, with the Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, to
provide a follow-up on the protection of civilians. The
success of the United Nations will be measured by the
significant contribution that our actions bring to the
protection of civilians. Our credibility is at stake here.
That having been said, the responsibility for the
protection of civilians primarily falls to national
authorities. A peacekeeping operation can make up for
a State’s weaknesses or temporarily support its actions,
but that does not in any way diminish the responsibility
of host States, first of all with regard to the protection
of individuals and their rights.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT)
illustrate the challenges confronting us.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
protection of civilians remains the priority of the Blue
Helmets’ mandate. The situation remains volatile,
especially in the eastern part of the country. It is out of
the question to consider having MONUSCO leave as
long as the Congolese security forces are not in a
position to take over in good conditions. The training
of the army and police should lead to redeployment of
the forces of order in liberated areas without any
security vacuum, and to the lasting restoration of the
authority of the Congolese State, including in the
judicial field, throughout the territory.
In Chad, we are wedded to the preserving the
continuity of the protection of civilians. That is why
we have ensured that the transfer of the protection
mission of MINURCAT to the Chadian authorities will
be as gradual and coordinated as possible.

10-43853

Beyond MINURCAT and MONUSCO, civilians
remain a concern of the Council. In Darfur, attacks
against civilians do not come about by chance; they are
organized and have been deemed crimes against
humanity by the International Criminal Court. In the
climate of impunity that prevails in Darfur, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
faces repeated attacks, which prevent it from protecting
civilians in a satisfactory way. The Security Council
will have to look at ways to respond to the situation.
Peacekeeping operations are critical, but so also,
as I have said, is respect for international humanitarian
law.
All the parties to a conflict, States as well as
armed non-State groups, must respect international
humanitarian law. They must spare civilians in the
conduct of hostilities and grant special attention to
women and children. Our primary responsibility is to
ensure that they do not shirk that obligation.
Indiscriminate attacks against civilians and
attacks against humanitarian actors have become
increasingly commonplace. Humanitarian space is no
longer a sanctuary. The obstacles to access to
humanitarian aid in Sudan, for example, are of a
criminal nature. The blockade of the Gaza Strip must
be lifted. The recent decision of the Israeli Government
constitutes a first step, but nothing more that a first
step, on the path which must lead to the lifting of the
embargo.
We would like to see the Security Council better
and more regularly informed on the scale of
restrictions to humanitarian access, on a country-bycountry basis. The informal group of experts on the
protection of civilians must address those issues as
well as the other threats facing civilians in situations
we are tracking. For our part we are determined to act
against those who deliberately seek to deprive civilians
of humanitarian assistance, including by adopting
sanctions, as the relevant sanctions committee has
already done in the case of Somalia.
Violations of international humanitarian law must
not remain unpunished, which means that impartial and
independent investigations are required. In principle,
they should be conducted by national authorities and
lead to trials of those responsible. In cases where the
authorities are incapable of conducting such
investigations alone, or do not wish to, the United
Nations must act, as a support or in their place.

23

S/PV.6354

In that regard, we welcome the cooperation of the
Guinean authorities with the International Commission
of Inquiry set up by the Secretary-General following
the massacre of 28 September 2009, as well as with the
International Criminal Court in the context of its
preliminary inquiry. We welcome the appointment of
the members of the panel of experts established on
22 June to advise the Secretary-General regarding
responsibilities relative to allegations of violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law
during the final stages of the conflict in Sri Lanka. We
urge the Government of Sri Lanka to cooperate with
them and thus to fulfil the commitment it has
undertaken to fight against impunity. There will be no
lasting peace without justice. France has also called for
the establishment of a board of inquiry on the events in
Kyrgyzstan.
Beyond the crises which may draw the attention
of international public opinion, States must resolutely
commit themselves to the fight against impunity. We
call upon all States, especially the Sudan, to ratify the
Statue of Rome and to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court in conformity with Council resolution
1593 (2005).
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): We
would like to thank you, Madam President, for having
organized this debate. We also express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
and our thanks to Under-Secretary-General Holmes and
to High Commissioner Pillay for their comprehensive
briefings today. We also wish to thank the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for the study on
implementation
of
protection
mandates
in
peacekeeping operations.
In four days, on 11 July 2010, we will solemnly
commemorate the fifteenth anniversary of the genocide
committed in July 1995 in the United Nations safe area
of Srebrenica, which was established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 819 (1993). In that
resolution the Council demanded that “all parties and
others … treat Srebrenica and its surroundings as a safe
area which should be free from any armed attack or
any other hostile act”. However, the Bosnian Serb
forces attacked Srebrenica, and the United Nations
failed to deter their attack.
The International Court of Justice,
Judgement of February 26 2007, ruled that

24

in

its

“the Bosnian Serbs devised and implemented a
plan to execute as many as possible of the
military aged Bosnian Muslim men present in the
enclave” (para. 292)
and that the acts committed at Srebrenica
“were committed with the specific intent to
destroy in part the group of the Muslims of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as such; and accordingly
that these were acts of genocide, committed by
members of the VRS [Army of Republika Srpska]
in and around Srebrenica from about 13 July
1995” (para. 297).
The Srebrenica genocide has become a symbol of
the international community’s impotence to intervene
and protect the civilian population.
The United Nations, by its own admission, bears
part of the responsibility for the crimes committed at
Srebrenica. The Secretary-General’s 1999 report on
Srebrenica unequivocally states:
“Through error, misjudgment and an inability to
recognize the scope of the evil confronting us, we
failed to do our part to help save the people of
Srebrenica from the Serb campaign of mass
murder. … Srebrenica crystallized a truth
understood only too late by the United Nations
and the world at large: that Bosnia was as much a
moral cause as a military conflict. The tragedy of
Srebrenica will haunt our history forever.”
(A/54/549, para. 503)
It is therefore only appropriate to begin this
statement by paying sincere and heartfelt tribute to the
more than 8,000 boys and men killed in what has been
declared the worst atrocity committed in Europe since
the Second World War. Our heart goes to their families
along with sincere hope that all of them will find the
remains of their loved ones and that all those
responsible for the genocide in Srebrenica will be
brought to justice.
The issue of protection of civilians in armed
conflict is one to which Bosnia and Herzegovina
attaches great importance. We express our commitment
to work jointly with others to implement the study
recommendations, in consultations with all relevant
actors.
Last year we marked 10 years of the Security
Council’s activities regarding the protection of

10-43853

S/PV.6354

civilians in armed conflict, and we can freely say that
much has been achieved. Nevertheless, unfortunately,
civilians are still and too often targets of armed attacks
and atrocities as well as victims of human rights
abuses, in particular rape and sexual violence. Hence
we are of the view that even stronger efforts should be
made in the future to ensure more effective protection
of civilians in armed conflict.
To that end, Bosnia and Herzegovina urges
Member States to work on full implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1674 (2006), 1820 (2008),
1882 (2009), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and 1894
(2009), which give peacekeeping missions and all other
relevant actors the mandate to take effective measures
to protect civilians in armed conflict. We also request
all parties to armed conflicts to fully comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law
concerning the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
In that context, Bosnia and Herzegovina
underlines the need to combat impunity for
perpetrators of violence against civilians. The Security
Council should take every opportunity to send a
message that crimes committed against civilians are
unacceptable and that all perpetrators of grave
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law will be brought to justice.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is deeply concerned
about the issue of unsafe and too-often impeded
humanitarian access to populations affected by
conflict. As a result of this phenomenon, millions of
vulnerable people, particularly internally displaced
persons and refugees, are deprived of assistance and
protection. We are also troubled by attacks against
humanitarian workers, which must be strongly
condemned. We call for strengthened action in this area
and point out the importance of broadening
understanding and acceptance of independent, neutral
and impartial humanitarian actions.
We point out that peacekeeping operations
continue to make significant contributions to the safety
and security of civilians. The Security Council expert
group on the protection of civilians and aide-memoire
on the protection of civilians (see S/PRST/2009/1,
annex) have further contributed to systematic and
consistent attention to the issue in their mandates.
However, the challenge remains of determining how,
on the one hand, to maximize the impact by addressing

10-43853

gaps
between
mandates,
interpretations
and
implementation capacity, and, on the other, how to
improve the tools which already exist.
Bosnia and Herzegovina would like to take this
opportunity to urge the Secretariat to work towards
developing a strategic framework and to recognize the
importance of improving planning processes and
developing training modules by using a best practices
guide of measures taken by current peacekeeping
operations to protect civilians. We also stress the need
to launch a website of the Policy, Evaluation and
Training Division of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in order to enhance global peacekeeping
capacity by providing the peacekeeping community
with timely access to relevant training standards,
materials and tools, as well as relevant guidance
documents. In addition, increasing the number of
female peacekeepers and trained civilian personnel will
largely contribute to adapting strategies and concrete
methods to properly address sexual and gender-based
violence.
Before concluding, and in regard to current
United Nations peacekeeping missions, I would like to
reiterate Bosnia and Herzegovina’s grave concern
about the consequences which the premature
withdrawal of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad could have on the
protection and security of civilians, access to
humanitarian assistance for refugees and internally
displaced persons, and security sector reform efforts.
For that reason, we would like to see the United
Nations presence remain in Chad until clear signs of
stable humanitarian and security situations on the
ground are reported and the transfer of responsibility
for the protection of civilians to the Chadian
authorities has been carried out effectively. Assessment
of the progress in implementing standards with regard
to the protection of civilians would be useful in the
evaluation of further engagement of the United Nations
in Chad.
In conclusion, on the basis of our tragic
experience, I would like to underline that Bosnia and
Herzegovina attaches the utmost importance to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We consider
that the Security Council, Member States and the
United Nations must do everything to ensure full
respect for the principles of international humanitarian
law, human rights law and refugee law, as well as other
relevant principles related to the protection of civilians

25

S/PV.6354

in armed conflict. The mistakes made in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Rwanda should serve as constant
reminders that we must give top priority to the
protection of civilians and do our utmost to never allow
a repeat of Srebrenica.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive statement. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General
Holmes
and
High
Commissioner Pillay for their extensive briefings.
The majority of casualties in armed conflicts
continue to be civilians. We strongly condemn all
deliberate attacks on civilians and the deaths resulting
from the indiscriminate and excessive use of force. As
the Secretary-General outlined in his statement, we are
still witnessing challenges in different parts of the
world in this field. However, the recent debates in the
Council on the protection of civilians have been held
under the shadow of the tragic developments in Gaza.
Today’s debate is no exception. Needless to say, recent
incidents there have reminded us all once again of the
importance of full compliance with international law
and the principle of proportionality, and of ensuring
safe humanitarian access to civilian populations,
particularly to vulnerable groups such as women,
children and disabled persons.
The protection of civilians — all civilians — is a
moral imperative. International law has developed a
plethora of rules to protect civilians and, as the High
Commissioner for Human Rights also indicated, all
parties to armed conflict must be held accountable to
those rules. Still, even when parties fully comply with
applicable law, many civilians become victims
nonetheless. Turkey calls on parties to armed conflict
to make amends to the civilians they harm in the same
spirit and in view of their inherent human dignity. In
this context, we would like once again to bring to the
Council’s attention our expectations regarding the
investigation on the humanitarian convoy destined for
Gaza.
The primary obligation for protecting civilians
lies with States. The international community also has
a responsibility to help protect civilians in situations
where States fail to do so. We must address the actual
problems on the ground, including in our decisions on
peacekeeping mandates.
Turkey considers the adoption of resolution 1894
(2009) last November to be a turning point. We
welcome the increased attention paid by the Council to

26

protection issues. We recognize the importance of the
Security Council’s resolutions on women, peace and
security, as well as on children and armed conflict, to
further promote the protection agenda. We welcome the
recently adopted resolutions on these areas. As we have
long stressed, a stronger interaction among the
Council, troop and police contributors, special
representatives of the Secretary-General and missions
contributes to greater coherence.
The protection of civilians during peacekeeping
operations is another challenge. The commemoration
of the Srebrenica tragedy this week should be a
reminder to all of us.
We note the fruitful discussions on the protection
agenda. We fully support them. However, we have
three general observations.
First, there is the inclination to stress the
importance of dialogue with non-State armed groups.
While understanding its rationale, we believe that this
new trend requires further careful elaboration of both
its political and its legal aspects.
Secondly, calling counter-terrorist efforts armed
conflict cannot be accepted. We strongly condemn acts
of terrorism and the use of civilians as human shields,
and acknowledge the legitimate right of Governments
to combat terrorism.
Thirdly, the concepts of the protection of civilians
and the responsibility to protect should not be mixed
up with each other. In our view, they are two different
concepts that must not be confused.
We should strengthen the rule of law, human
rights, democracy and good governance for the longterm, lasting protection of civilians. We should ensure
that the perpetrators of violence against civilians are
held fully accountable for their actions. They should
know that they will eventually face justice.
I would like to conclude by thanking UnderSecretary-General John Holmes for his excellent and
tireless work for the United Nations humanitarian
cause, and I wish him all the best in his future
endeavours.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive statement. I
also thank Under-Secretary-General Holmes and High
Commissioner Navi Pillay for their briefings this
morning.

10-43853

S/PV.6354

Brazil would like to join you, Madam President,
and previous speakers in paying special tribute to
Sir John Holmes. We have greatly appreciated his
work. During his tenure, we went through numerous
humanitarian crises and his leadership and dedication
made the response of the international community
more effective and the suffering of those affected less
unbearable. We wish him every success in his future
endeavours.
Brazil attaches great importance to the protection
of civilians in all its aspects. We have sought to
actively contribute to the many dimensions of the
issue, including the questions of humanitarian access,
improving compliance with humanitarian, refugee and
human rights law, strengthening the International
Criminal Court, and promoting the well-being of
internally displaced persons, among others. Today, I
wish to focus on the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations.
This year’s report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations (A/64/19) demonstrated the
growing consensus on the importance of the protection
of civilians by peacekeepers. It encouraged the
Secretariat to continue its conceptual and operational
work in that area, including through the preparation of
training modules. We deem it very important that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations continue to
closely engage with troop- and police-contributing
countries throughout that process.
The Special Committee also requested the
Secretariat to prepare strategic frameworks for
mission-wide protection strategies. Such strategies are
particularly important inasmuch as they reinforce the
fact that the protection of civilians is a
multidimensional task. They should clarify the relevant
protection roles of all mission components, including
police, human rights, civil affairs and public
information.
The Council has been very clear with regard to
the priority that it attaches to the task of protecting
civilians. Nevertheless, we must ask ourselves if that
priority is adequately reflected in the means and
resources that are given to those responsible for
making protection a reality on the ground.
On the military side, we must continue to
consider issues such as training, guidance, oversight
mechanisms, intelligence, the dissemination of
information on international humanitarian law, and the

10-43853

use of non-lethal armaments and techniques. We must
also ensure, however, that the civilian aspects of a
mission receive equal attention, including in terms of
adequate staffing and guidance materials. The
Secretariat and the General Assembly must work
together to ensure that the civilian components of
missions are properly backstopped at Headquarters.
Civilian components play a central role in the
preventive dimension of the protection efforts of
peacekeeping missions. Missions must work together
with other actors, particularly those in the areas of
development and human rights, to create a protective
environment. In addition, establishing a positive, twoway dialogue with the local population is an important
factor in ensuring the sustainability of post-conflict
peace and stability.
The debate on the protection of civilians by
peacekeeping operations should not be read as a false
opposition between protection and other mandated
tasks. When confronted with gross violations of human
rights, peacekeepers face a moral obligation to act.
Moreover, standing by while such abuses are
committed can imperil the mission’s credibility in the
eyes of other actors and compromise its ability to fulfil
other mandated tasks. On the other hand, a mission that
protects civilians under imminent threat but makes no
progress in helping address the underlying causes of
the conflict or in peacebuilding tasks will not lead to a
sustainable peace. Helping States onto the path of
peace, stability and development is, ultimately, the best
way for the United Nations to contribute to the longterm protection of civilians.
The protection of civilians by peacekeeping
missions is one dimension of a multifaceted issue.
Many others deserve careful attention from the relevant
bodies. Among those, I would cite how to ensure
compensation for damages to civilian victims of
conflicts even when they derive from actions
committed in accordance with international law; how
to preserve cultural, collective and community rights in
situations of armed conflict; and how to strengthen
local mechanisms of justice, monitoring and
prevention.
My delegation is ready to work with other
Member States and the United Nations system in order
to address those and other central questions in our
collective strategy to ensure the adequate protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

27

S/PV.6354

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Nigeria for taking the initiative to
convene this open debate. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Under-SecretaryGeneral Holmes and High Commissioner Pillay for
their statements.
During his term of office, Sir John Holmes has
made an outstanding contribution to the work of the
United Nations in the area of humanitarian assistance. I
would like to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation and to wish him all the best in his future
endeavours.
In recent years, the Security Council has attached
great importance to the protection of civilians and
made vigorous efforts to that end. However, owing to
the changing nature of armed conflicts and various
complex factors, civilians in many regions of the world
still find themselves under threat in situations of armed
conflict. The international community faces an uphill
battle in ensuring the protection of civilians. We are
deeply concerned that, in some armed conflicts,
civilians are subject to threats and violence, and we
urge the parties to such conflicts to abide by
international humanitarian law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions and to protect the lives
and property of civilians and their legitimate rights and
interests.
China urges the Security Council to make further
efforts to strengthen the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. In that regard, I wish to underscore the
following points.
First, we must start from the source and address
the issue holistically. As the organ entrusted with the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, the Security Council is duty-bound
to address the issue of protecting civilians in armed
conflict. The Council should focus on the root causes
of the problem, invest more energy in the prevention
and monitoring of conflicts, and, at the same time,
place the protection of civilians in the overall context
of the political process for the peaceful settlement of
disputes.
Secondly, we must stress the responsibility of the
States concerned and respect their wishes. National
Governments have the primary responsibility for
protecting civilians. While the international community
can provide constructive help, it must do so in
compliance with the provisions of the Charter of the

28

United Nations and while respecting the sovereignty of
the countries concerned and refraining from
intervening by force. Dialogue between the United
Nations and non-State armed groups should be carried
out within the framework of cooperation between the
United Nations and the countries concerned, with the
consent of the Governments concerned. With regard to
combating impunity, we are in favour of letting the
domestic judicial systems of the countries concerned
play the role of principal channel.
Thirdly, progress must be made step by step and
we must concentrate on implementation. In connection
with the protection of civilians, we already have in
place a comparatively set of international legal rules.
The key now is to ensure the comprehensive, equitable
and effective implementation of those rules. The
relevant United Nations organs and international treaty
bodies should continue to play an important role to that
end. The Security Council has already adopted a
significant number of resolutions and presidential
statements on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Our task in the next phase should be to push
for the effective implementation of those documents.
Fourthly, we must proceed from the actual
situation and adapt to local specificities. Giving a
United Nations peacekeeping mission a mandate to
protect civilians is a decision to be made by the
Council on a case-by-case basis. In our view, in
designing the mandate for civilian protection, it is
necessary that we base our work on actual needs and
take into full consideration the situation on the ground
and the resources and capacities of the peacekeeping
mission concerned. It is imperative not to resort to
generalizations. We are not in favour of invariably
endowing all peacekeeping operations with mandates
to protect civilians in disregard of practical conditions.
Adhering to the three principles of the consent of the
country concerned, impartiality and the non-use of
force except in self-defence is the key to the success of
peacekeeping operations. Any deviation from those
basic principles will cause more conflicts and
problems, even to the point of jeopardizing the success
of the peacekeeping operation concerned, rather than
help to protect civilians.
Most ongoing conflicts are taking place in areas
with backward economic and social conditions. The
United Nations should actively mobilize international
resources to provide financial and technical assistance
to the countries concerned so as to help them to

10-43853

S/PV.6354

develop their economies and eradicate poverty, thereby
eliminating the source of conflict. We look forward to a
greater role in that regard to be played by the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the
United Nations Development Programme, international
institutions such as the World Bank, and regional
organizations.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Nigeria.
We are very grateful to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his very insightful statement. I also
commend Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs John Holmes and High Commissioner for
Human Rights Pillay for their very enriching briefings.
We are grateful that, together, they have kept this
subject at the forefront of our concerted efforts to bring
peace and stability to the world.
Resolution 1894 (2009) laid out important
principles related to adherence to international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law and to best
practices for implementing civilian protection
mandates. In their 2009 joint study on the protection of
civilians in peacekeeping operations, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations highlighted
that the lack of clarity in the language of civilian
protection mandates could affect the effectiveness of
resources and training to meet civilian protection
needs. It is imperative that this be addressed.
It is also important that we monitor very closely
mandate implementation in the field. That is where the
Secretary-General’s reporting capability and the work
of the Council’s informal expert group on the
protection of civilians can add the most value by
reporting on the challenges in implementing the
protection mandate alongside other mission objectives.
To address the gap in the link between the
Security Council and activities in the field, it is
essential that the Council always be fully briefed in
advance of peacekeeping deliberations. We hope that
the Secretariat will draw from lessons learned in the
meetings with troop- and police-contributing countries
in order to add to the quality of the briefings.
We should not forget that civilians may also be
caught in the crossfire in circumstances where there is
no peacekeeping force in place. In such situations, the
Council must act swiftly and with purpose. The

10-43853

updated aide-memoire (see S/PRST/2009/1, annex) is
an invaluable tool that sets out pathways for analyzing
each situation and deploying the appropriate tools at
the Council’s disposal. For that, we are grateful and
indebted to OCHA.
Nigeria reiterates the call on all parties to conflict
to respect the laws of armed conflict. Those parties
should manifest such respect by creating neutral zones
or corridors for the unimpeded delivery of
humanitarian assistance, so that civilians may be safely
evacuated or provided with assistance without threats
to their well-being.
In just over three weeks, the Convention on
Cluster Munitions will enter into force. That is an
important instrument in terms of marking consensus
against the use and stockpiling of munitions that cause
unacceptable harm to civilians. It also stigmatizes
those actors who do not adhere to its standards. It
marks a further step on the road to minimizing socalled collateral damage in armed conflict. It is hoped
that it will also enhance capacity to better serve those
whom we have a responsibility to protect. By so doing,
we might establish conditions for a just and peaceful
world in which all can live in larger freedom.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate Sir John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, on
his commendable efforts as the head of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). His
leadership and commitment have been crucial in facing
a period in which, despite scientific, moral and ethical
progress, innocent civilian populations in various parts
of the world continue to suffer from harsh ongoing
attacks, both as collateral damage and as a result of
being the direct targets of aggression.
In addition to being an ethical imperative that is
part of a long process of the development of human
conscience towards civil behaviour that places respect
for human life, integrity and human dignity at the
centre of its concerns, the protection of civilians is also
a legal imperative rooted in universally accepted norms
of international humanitarian law. In that connection,
with respect to civilian protection provided by the
United Nations in the context of peacekeeping

29

S/PV.6354

operations, we should also bear in mind the consent of
host countries and the existence of a Security Council
resolution mandating that task.
Any humanitarian response must be sustainable
and take the development perspective into account. It is
therefore essential to ensure appropriate national
capacity-building, in particular in those cases in which
constraints arise as a result of the physical
environment. We regret that, in other cases, constraints
arise as the result of Government policies or of
practices on the part of local actors that interfere with
humanitarian operations. The Secretary-General’s
reports thus continue to call for the facilitation of
timely and rapid access, given the many obstacles that
still exist, even when obligations exist under
international humanitarian law.
Uruguay would like to reiterate the urgent need
for all stakeholders in all situations to preserve,
strengthen and respect the norms of international
humanitarian law in order to ensure full respect for the
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence, and the pressing need to facilitate access
for humanitarian personnel and ensure appropriate
security conditions for the successful completion of
their tasks.
In this respect, it is important to consider the
possibility of opening dialogues with non-State armed
groups. Such dialogue should in no case imply a
legitimization of those groups; rather, it should be
aimed at achieving understanding and respect on their
part for the norms of international humanitarian law.
Among those groups that find themselves in
vulnerable situations, women and children continue to
require special protection. Despite the significant
achievements in this area, much remains to be done to
ensure their proper protection. Recognizing the
victims’ suffering and the importance of bearing in
mind the needs of the civilian population affected by
armed conflict should also receive greater attention
from the international agenda.
We reiterate the need to pay greater attention to
the reintegration of victims who have had their rights
seriously violated, in particular in cases of sexual
abuse or exploitation. It is, in our view, essential that
we continue to fight against the impunity of those
responsible for violations that are in clear
contravention of international norms in these areas.

30

We experience the complexity of protecting
civilians through peacekeeping operations on a daily
basis through our military and police personnel
deployed on the ground. In addition to material
shortcomings is the issue of political sensitivities. On
the one hand, we must avoid the premature withdrawal
of missions when true security has not yet been
established; on the other, this must go hand in hand
with the principle of consent by the host country,
which has the primary responsibility of providing this
protection. This is a crucial aspect that underpins the
legitimacy of the peacekeeping system and sets it apart
from other alternatives.
We therefore believe it essential that the various
stakeholders — the host State, the Council, the
Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries — all
work hand in hand in drafting realistic indicators that
are focused on the well-being of the population. Once
these indicators have been agreed upon, they must be
complied with. Should they not be complied with and
should the mission be withdrawn, the credibility of our
Organization will be significantly damaged.
Despite the difficulties I have just listed, we
underscore the tangible progress that has been achieved
at Headquarters and on the ground over the past year in
the protection of civilians in the context of
peacekeeping operations. The necessary rapprochement
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly in the area of peacekeeping in general and
the protection of civilians in particular is under way.
This lends greater legitimacy to such activities and
encourages less resistance to them, and gives rise to a
greater commitment among all stakeholders involved
in their implementation.
The Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations has deepened and broadened its
commitment to civilian protection through a serious
and comprehensive consideration of the matter,
including the issue of training and the essential need
for a true correlation between mandates and resources.
In this respect, it is essential that concrete efforts be
undertaken to close the material capacity gap.
Furthermore, the Secretariat has received from
the Committee a mandate to draft a strategic
framework and from the Council a mandate to draft
guidelines. We note that this is more than a merely
semantic difference. However, it invites us to focus on
those matters on which we can reach common

10-43853

S/PV.6354

agreement. In coming months, we will have in our
hands many documents of great importance, which
should be openly discussed. We will be working as
closely as possible so that when we speak of protecting
civilians, all of those involved will be speaking of the
same thing.
The President: I give
representative of Germany.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Wittig (Germany): Germany fully aligns
itself with the statement of the European Union. Let
me at the outset thank Under-Secretary-General John
Holmes for his statement and for his work at the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
and wish him all the best for the future. Let me also
extend a very warm welcome to Ms. Pillay. The voice
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights is particularly relevant in this debate.
We are pleased that the past few months have
seen relevant progress on protection issues in the
United Nations. Like many other speakers, we consider
the adoption of resolution 1894 (2009) last November
to be a landmark decision, requesting the SecretaryGeneral to develop an operational concept for the
protection of civilians in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We are looking forward to the report of the
Secretary-General in November this year.
The independent study by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and OCHA published in
January has also provided a valuable analysis of the
successes, setbacks and remaining challenges
concerning the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations. It also makes a number of concrete
proposals to remedy existing shortcomings.
We also welcome the recommendations that the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations has
provided with this year’s report (A/64/19). Clear and
achievable mandates for peacekeeping operations
remain key, providing the missions with the needed
resources and with the strategic framework to guide
senior
mission
leadership
in
elaborating
a
comprehensive protection strategy.
We recognize the important work the Security
Council has done to enhance the protection agenda on
such issues as women, peace and security and children
and armed conflict. Only last month, the Security
Council adopted a presidential statement on children
and armed conflict (S/PRST/2010/10), which called for

10-43853

an increased exchange of information between the
Security Council Working Group on children and
armed conflict and relevant sanction committees of the
Security Council. The Security Council also expressed
its willingness to adopt targeted measures against
persistent perpetrators. We believe that this is a step in
the right direction.
Despite the positive developments I mentioned,
challenges remain. In our intervention on the
protection of civilians last November (see S/PV.6216),
we highlighted a number of challenges related to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We argued
for enhanced mandating, better doctrine and
preparation, improved planning and preparedness, and
a comprehensive approach throughout peacekeeping
missions.
All these issues remain valid today. They should,
however, not obstruct our view of the specific
requirements of the protection of civilians at the
mission level. Special representatives and force
commanders are responsible for implementing the
protection agenda in the field. The international
community, humanitarian actors and, above all,
affected populations have legitimate expectations that
protection mandates will be implemented on the
ground. It is important that missions make use of all
their military, civilian and, above all, political
resources to fulfil this important task, in accordance
with respective Security Council mandates. In this,
they require and deserve the full support of the
Security Council and the international community as a
whole. The issue of the implementation of protection
of civilians measures at the mission level was
thoroughly discussed in the debate about the extension
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo/Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and should be addressed by the Security
Council when deciding about the renewal of the
mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur in a few weeks’ time.
To conclude, let me briefly stress the corrosive
effect impunity has on respect for international law.
Ensuring compliance and accountability is key to
enhancing respect for applicable international law.
States must not fail in their responsibility to thoroughly
investigate and prosecute persons suspected of war
crimes, crimes against humanity or other serious
violations of international humanitarian law.

31

S/PV.6354

The protection of civilians is an important crosscutting issue which is of particular relevance to my
country, given the contributions Germany makes to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We will
actively participate in future debates on this issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Madam President, I wish
to thank you for convening this debate. I also would
like to express my deep appreciation to UnderSecretary-General John Holmes for his briefing, which
gives us an overarching picture of the challenges we
face in the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I
seize this opportunity to commend his tireless
commitment in defending the lives of civilian victims
of conflicts worldwide and wish him all the best in his
future endeavours. I also wish to thank High
Commissioner for Human Rights Pillay for her
contributions.
Italy fully associates itself with the statement
which will be delivered by the head of the European
Union delegation on behalf of the European Union, and
we also wish to make some further remarks.
I will start by focusing on some of the main
concerns in the field of the protection of civilians.
A number of persistent violators of human rights
and humanitarian law still go unpunished.
Accountability is therefore a central issue. The Council
must be ready to take action against those who
continuously undermine the credibility of its
commitment. The International Criminal Court (ICC)
has an important role to play as well. In this respect,
Italy welcomes the outcome of the recent Review
Conference in Kampala that further strengthened the
ICC’s role.
We also share the concern about the lack of
progress in finding durable solutions to the situation of
internally displaced persons. A more comprehensive
approach is needed that looks at both the most urgent
and the long-term problems, such as land and property
issues, which are key in addressing the causes of
conflict.
As far as positive developments are concerned,
the appointment of a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Armed
Conflict was certainly a crucial step in addressing what
is one of the most serious threats to the protection of

32

civilians. We strongly support the mandate of
Ms. Wallström, and we look forward to assisting her in
this challenging task.
We also welcome the recent briefing of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The protection of civilians, particularly those
belonging to the most vulnerable categories, must be
an integral part of the work of the Committee. We hope
that such briefings will gradually become a standard
practice.
Moreover, let me express our strong support for
the work undertaken by the informal expert group on
the protection of civilians. As a former member of the
Security Council, Italy has always advocated the
creation of such a forum. The group is indeed an
important platform for discussing and monitoring
humanitarian developments and for devising effective
strategies, with the contribution of all relevant actors. I
would like to stress here that prevention should be a
pillar of any strategy aimed at protecting civilians.
Indeed, a timely preventive strategy can save more
lives than any other action.
Finally, we welcome the engagement of the
General Assembly in the protection of civilians, as
proven by the increasing references to the issue in its
resolutions. We encourage and support this important
trend.
I wish to conclude by highlighting two issues.
First, as also by in resolution 1894 (2009), the
protection of civilians is not only a military task; it is a
more inclusive challenge. Every component of a
peacekeeping mission — military, police, civilian,
gender, human rights and child protection — must
contribute to achieving the protection goals. Whenever
a peacekeeping operation is in place, civilians expect
to be protected by United Nations forces. To ensure
effective protection, peacekeepers must be adequately
trained, which makes synergies with training centres a
must. The cooperation agreement signed by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Italian
Center of Excellence for Stability Police Units last
week is a significant step forward. We must continue to
pursue such a capacity-building approach.
Lastly, the protection of civilians must also
encompass the principle of the responsibility to protect.

10-43853

S/PV.6354

This principle implies that with sovereignty come
special responsibilities. Governments must protect
their own populations, and the best way to guarantee
such protection is to promote human rights, the rule of
law and democratic governance. The responsibility to
protect should be seen as an instrument available to the
international community to overcome crises, provided
that the conditions referred to in paragraphs 138 and
139 of the Summit Outcome Document (General
Assembly resolution 60/1) are met. In this perspective,

10-43853

Italy looks forward to the upcoming informal
interactive dialogue of the General Assembly on early
warning, assessment and the responsibility to protect
with a view to further implementing the concept.
The President: There are a number of speakers
remaining on my list. I therefore intend, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

33
