S/PV.8833

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8833rd meeting

Thursday, 12 August 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Tirumurti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Lipand
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Kvalheim
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2021/723)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-22321 (E)
*2122321*

S/PV.8833

The situation in Somalia

federal member states. I am pleased to report that
significant progress has been made since then.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

The Prime Minister has demonstrated strong
leadership and initiative in moving the process forward.
The National Consultative Council, which includes the
Prime Minister and the federal member state leaders,
has held regular meetings and dialogue on key issues
related to the implementation of the agreement.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2021/723)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. James Swan,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia; Mr. Francisco Caetano José Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia and Head of the African
Union Mission in Somalia; and Ms. Batula Sheikh
Axmed Gaballe, Chairperson of the Somali National
Women’s Organization.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/723, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Swan.
Mr. Swan: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to brief the Council on the situation in Somalia.
I am pleased to do so together, once again, with the
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia, Ambassador
Francisco Madeira. This underscores the importance
of the relationship between the United Nations and
the African Union in advancing peace, security and
stability in Somalia. I am also pleased to be briefing
alongside Ambassador Abukar Osman, the Permanent
Representative of Somalia to the United Nations, and
Ms. Batula Axmed Gaballe, Chairperson of the recently
appointed advocacy committee.
My last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.8779)
took place two days before the signing of the 27 May
electoral implementation agreement between Prime
Minister Mohamed Hussein Roble and leaders of the
2/19

12/08/2021

Further, election management bodies at federal
and state levels have been established, and the
elections for seats in the Upper House of Parliament
have begun in four of the federal member states. The
mandated ministerial committee, comprised of federal
member state representatives, has held consultations
in Garbahaarrey to prepare for the Gedo elections.
The national electoral security committee has been
established and has begun preparations, and the Prime
Minister has appointed an advocacy committee, whose
Chairperson will brief the Council today, to attain the
women’s 30-per cent quota in the 2021 federal elections
of Somalia.
At the same time, more progress is needed in
certain priority areas. This includes more intensive
and detailed preparations for electoral security, and
clarity on plans to secure the quota for women. I am
particularly concerned that unless strong measures
are put in place now, the women’s quota might not be
achieved. There is also a need for greater inclusion of
youth and historically marginalized communities in the
electoral process.
The United Nations has been working closely
with the Office of the Prime Minister and the election
management committees at the federal and state levels
on the implementation of the 27 May agreement and
election preparations. This includes the provision
of technical and logistical support, as well as the
coordination of international financial assistance.
Recently, an agreement was signed with the Office
of the Prime Minister to ensure that donor funds
generously contributed by Member States are available
for use by the electoral management bodies.
As future challenges to the implementation of the
agreement and the completion of the electoral process
emerge, we urge that they continue to be addressed and
resolved through dialogue.
Beyond the electoral process, the United Nations
continues to support broader peacebuilding efforts,
21-22321

12/08/2021

The situation in Somalia

including strengthening federalism, conflict prevention
and management, and peace consolidation. In this
regard, we recall that the 27 May agreement includes
a road map for the completion of the State-building
process in Somalia, and we look forward to supporting
its implementation.
With funding from the Peacebuilding Fund, the
United Nations in Somalia will also step up its support
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
the role of women in peacebuilding through a new
programme to address systemic barriers to Somali
women’s representation and participation in public life.
Preparations for election security are key owing to
the continuing threat posed by Al-Shabaab. Al-Shabaab
continues with terrorist attacks and insurgent
operations, including by encircling communities,
especially so in South-West State.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) has so far in 2021 recorded reports of
708 Somali civilian casualties — 321 killed, 387
injured — mostly attributed to Al-Shabaab. There
are also alarming increases in sexual violence and
violations against children being recorded, which
remain priority areas of concern for the United Nations.
The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
continues to play a critical role in Somalia. I pay tribute
to all AMISOM and Somali security forces personnel,
who work together on a daily basis to bring security to
the country. Too many have made the ultimate sacrifice.
The United Nations Support Office in Somalia
(UNSOS) continues to provide vital support to
AMISOM and the Somali security forces. UNSOS
assistance to the Somali National Army and Somali
Police Force is made possible by voluntary trust fund
contributions. Additional generous contributions are
urgently needed to continue that vital support to the
Somali security forces mandated by the Council.
The Somali transition plan continues to be
implemented. However, some goals for 2021 have yet to
be achieved, including consolidation in Lower Shabelle
and further gains in Hirshabelle State. We note, however,
the recent Somali National Army operations to counter
Al-Shabaab in Hirshabelle and Galmudug States.
The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains
dire. The combined impact of conflict and climate
change, including recurrent droughts and floods, as
well as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), is likely to

S/PV. 8833

further exacerbate food insecurity. I would like to note
the leadership of the Federal Government of Somalia
in rolling out a national vaccination campaign with
the support of the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access
(COVAX) Facility initiative.
Humanitarian access and significantly more
funding are required to continue to deliver life-saving
support. The 2021 Humanitarian Response Plan is only
38 per cent funded.
Climate change is contributing to the extreme
crisis in Somalia, with potential negative effects on
stability and security as well as on the humanitarian
and development situation. The Council has recognized
the adverse effects of climate change on Somalia, and
the United Nations continues to work at the Federal
Government and federal member state levels to better
understand, mitigate and manage that situation.
In conclusion, following a prolonged period of
uncertainty and heightened tensions, the long-awaited
electoral process in Somalia is now moving forward,
albeit somewhat behind schedule. Ensuring that the
process continues to advance and is inclusive and
credible will require constant effort by all parties
involved and continued leadership by the signatories to
the 27 May Agreement.
The United Nations stands ready to continue to
support Somalia in this election process and beyond
so that the country can renew its focus on core peace,
security and development goals.
The President: I thank Mr. Swan for his very
detailed and comprehensive briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
invitation to brief the Security Council on the situation
in Somalia once again. Of course, it is with great
pleasure that I join my good friend Ambassador Swan
in this briefing.
Today I am pleased, as he is, to report that the
political stalemate that we witnessed over the past several
months has been replaced with positive developments
in Somalia. Somali leaders are enhancing their focus on
the issues that unite them and speaking with one voice
on elections. As is already history, on 27 May, after
Prime Minister Mohamed Hussein Roble convened
a weeklong National Consultative Council summit,
Somali leaders announced that they had reached an

21-223213/19

S/PV.8833

The situation in Somalia

agreement on the modalities for the implementation of
the 17 September agreement and the Baidoa technical
committee proposals.
It was with great pleasure that we witnessed the
start of the process, with the election of some of the
members of the Upper House for Jubaland, South-West,
Puntland and Galmudug federal member states. We
commend the Somali leaders on those very important
milestones.
While acknowledging the delays in kick-starting the
elections, the African Union is encouraged by the efforts
that have gone into their preparation. That includes the
work of the Federal Elections Implementation Team,
working in close cooperation with the Office of the
Prime Minister. We have also seen progress with the
federal member states ministerial committee on the
Garbahaarrey reconciliation and equally welcomed
the appointment of goodwill ambassadors to promote
the women’s 30 per cent quota, an important issue
championed by the African Union Commission.
Similarly, in a continued effort at reconciliation
and national unity, the Federal Government and
federal member states leaders have not relented on
their meetings since the 27 May agreement, regularly
convening both presential and virtual National
Consultative Council summits. I am encouraged by the
fact that those sustained discussions are contributing
to enhancing good faith. They have seen the leaders
recommit to the national agenda and to holding a
trusted electoral process without further delay.
Regarding the contribution of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to the ongoing
elections, we remain committed to supporting Somalia,
as stipulated in African Union Peace and Security
Council communiqué 978 of 2021. As such, under the
new African Union Department for Political Affairs,
Peace and Security strategic pillars, our election support
now extends beyond security to include the provision
of capacity-building, technical advisory functions and
direct budgetary support.
Since my most recent briefing (see S/PV.8779), our
civilian staff have increased their capacity-building
and advocacy engagement with local communities
and civil-society organizations, including women’s
and youth organizations across Somalia, with the aim
of ensuring their participation in the elections. At the
request of the Federal Elections Implementation Team,
we will be deploying African Union-rostered election
4/19

12/08/2021

experts in the coming days. I am also pleased to report
that in line with the African Charter on Democracy,
Elections and Governance, the African Union has
approved Somalia’s request for budgetary support for
its elections. Beyond that support, I can report that the
African Union Continental Logistics Base in Douala,
Cameroon, will be donating equipment to the Team to
complement and expand its capacity to deliver on the
elections.
African Union Peace and Security Council
communiqué 978 of this year highlights AMISOM’s
role in election security, particularly with regard to
providing support to the Federal Government and the
federal member states.
In that context, I am grateful for the contribution
of the AMISOM police and the Somali Police Force
in enhancing security around Djihunga and providing
Somali leaders with a conducive security environment
during the consultations that led to the 27 May
agreement. More recently, in Kismaayo and Baidoa, the
AMISOM police supported their Somali Police Force
colleagues in securing the elections for the initial seats
for the Upper House. Together, in June, they conducted
joint security assessment missions in Garbahaarrey
and South-West’s South Galkayo, and they returned
to Galkayo and Garbahaarrey this week to complete
urgent security measures, which will be presented
to the newly created national electoral security
committee, chaired by the Prime Minister. Elsewhere,
across Jubaland and South-West, the AMISOM police
continue to support the capacity-building of the state
police on key election-related courses, such as counterterrorism during the elections and election security
management, while in Mogadishu we have provided
training on community policing during elections.
With the elections being in the early phase, we are
in a critical period in Somalia, where our collective
focus must be to prevent Al-Shabaab from disrupting
the ongoing electoral process. In the period under
review, Al-Shabaab demonstrated continued resilience,
employing sinister tactics, both in Mogadishu and
beyond, in AMISOM’s area of operations. We continue
to observe the use of indirect fire, with Al-Shabaab
modifying its mortars for maximum deadly impact,
as seen recently in July against AMISOM’s base
in Mogadishu.
In addition, in an attempt to disrupt the
elections we have uncovered the groups carrying out
21-22321

12/08/2021

The situation in Somalia

kidnappings, public executions and assassinations. I
am also concerned over reports of Al-Shabaab using
intimidation tactics against local elders, urging them to
refrain from participating in the elections.
To mitigate and disrupt Al-Shabaab’s election
plans, AMISOM has taken urgent and immediate steps.
Some such steps include maintaining vigilance at all our
forward operating bases and enhancing the protection
of very important persons, increasing our intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance coverage, enhancing
joint operations with our mobile forces and enhancing
our main-supply-route patrols.
We continue to see some progress in the
implementation of the Somali transition plan, but
equally the continuation of joint offensive and targeted
operations. Key operations were AMISOM’s support to
the Somali security forces in Biyo-Cadale, Balad and
Bulo Burti in Juba and in Shabelle, while this August,
we have jointly conducted operations in Wajid in SouthWest. In addition. AMISOM’s presence across its sectors
has allowed for the prioritization of the main population
centres. That has resulted in the Somali security forces
being free and able to conduct independent operations.
I commend and encourage such operations, as they
demonstrate the increase in capacity of the Somali
security forces to take over security responsibilities
and to effectively strike Al-Shabaab.
With regard to mentoring in Mogadishu, the Somali
National Army (SNA) deployed a SNA liaison officer
to act as an adviser to AMISOM’s Force Commander.
Recently, a team of SNA staff officers completed a
mentoring programme facilitated by AMISOM, with
the focus on intelligence collection and communication.
In line with resolution 2568 (2021), together with the
SNA, we are making progress on our reconfiguration
plans. To implement that key task, both AMISOM
and the SNA harmonized their operational plans,
with increasing results. I can report that we have now
established joint operations coordination centres across
all AMISOM sectors. Those Joint Operations Centres
are now in the process of being equipped and will soon
be fully operational.
The African Union remains committed to
contributing to the strengthening of the capacity of
Somalia’s security institutions. We view that as the
only way for Somalia to sustainably take control of the
security of its own country. It is for that reason that we
have actively supported and continue to implement the

S/PV. 8833

revised Somali transition plan. In that regard, we take
note of the Federal Government’s Somali transition
plan progress report, shared with the international
partners in July. Although the Somali transition plan
progress report identifies the key achievements and
outputs recorded from January to June, we would have
liked the report to include more details on the activities
and achievements of AMISOM’s uniformed personnel
in implementing the Somali transition plan.
I want to note that such an inclusion would highlight
the spirit of cooperation that exists between the Somali
security forces and the AMISOM uniformed personnel.
As we continue to update the Somali transition plan
progress report through consultations ahead of its final
submission to the Security Council in October, we look
forward to the upcoming high-level Security and Justice
Committee meeting. It is our belief that that highlevel meeting will allow us to share our harmonized
plans on how to continue to support the Somali forces
to extend security control across the country and the
resources and assistance that would be required from
key partners, including the African Union itself.
Over the past 14 years, Somalia has witnessed
significant progress in the establishment of security
and other State institutions throughout the country.
That has been achieved thanks to the Somali-led
efforts, combined with the courage and sacrifice of
AMISOM personnel, supported by its international
partners. Those joint efforts have led to two successive
peaceful transfers of power in the elections of 2012 and
2016 — a task that we are now repeating this year. We
have also continued to degrade Al-Shabaab since 2007,
creating the necessary political space for progress on
reconciliation, State-building and peacebuilding to
take place.
However, with those achievements and, more
importantly, the growing capacity of the Somali
security institutions to take the lead, we must now build
a consensus on the African Union’s future engagement
in Somalia post-2021. In that context, the African Union
undertook an independent assessment. Its conclusions
have been considered by both AMISOM itself and
some troop-contributing countries, the African Union
Commission and, on 30 July, the African Union
Peace and Security Council. They have all looked
into that report by those independent assessors. The
overriding consensus was in favour of a joint African
Union-United Nations multidimensional stabilization
mission or hybrid mission as the model that would be

21-223215/19

S/PV.8833

The situation in Somalia

best placed to address the challenges that a new African
Union mission would encounter post-2021.
We at AMISOM further believe that while the
United Nations-led independent assessment calls
for a reconfigured AMISOM post-2021, any final
consideration must consider three key issues.
The first is ownership. Any future mission in
Somalia must continue to operate with full respect for
Somali sovereignty and leadership in all spheres, more
specifically in the areas of stabilization, peacebuilding
and State-building. That remains important, as it
will allow the African Union to continue working
in partnership with Somali stakeholders to support
nationally owned strategies and frameworks as Somalia
begins to plan for its next election cycle, in 2025-2026.
While over the years we have seen many gains,
both political and security challenges lie ahead for
Somalia. Addressing those challenges will require
continued leadership, outreach and reconciliation. One
of the most important conclusions emerging from the
seminal report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations of 2015 (see S/2015/446) was its
emphasis on the primacy of politics in the ultimate
success of peace operations. That is no less the case in
relation to AMISOM. In supporting Somalia to meet its
challenges, including in the successful implementation
of the Somali transition plan, the African Union
must be able to ensure that its security efforts are
buttressed by a meaningful role in delivering the
necessary political processes that underpin the security
architecture necessary for the full takeover of security
responsibilities by the Somali security forces. To that
end, any African Union mission must retain a flexible
posture, allowing it to deliver on new and emerging
priorities. That will also require an African Union
presence, in particular its civilian component, in order
to have more specialized experts deployed across
Somalia, reflecting Somalia’s federal nature.
The second is partnership. As the African
Union seeks to move to a new phase of its presence
in Somalia, focusing on support for stabilization,
institution-building, deradicalization and post-conflict
reconstruction and a more defined political role, it
will be seeking to renew its strategic partnerships. In
that regard, there can be no stronger partners than the
European Union and the United Nations.
We recognize and appreciate the European Union’s
continued financial support for AMISOM since its
6/19

12/08/2021

deployment in Somalia, and we also acknowledge
the constraints to continued support occasioned by
competing priorities for funds in a global economy
depressed by the coronavirus disease pandemic and
the attendant economic downturns. Despite those
constraints, the African Union is clear that any future
African Union presence in Somalia must be assured of
sustainable and predictable funding.
Regarding the United Nations, our partnership must
remain at the centre of international engagement with
Somalia. For that reason, as the African Union’s presence
begins to evolve, the renewal of resolution 2540 (2020)
should benefit from a radical reassessment undertaken
jointly by the Federal Government, the African Union,
the United Nations and key international partners.
Additionally, an appraisal should be considered of the
prioritization and sequencing of its mandated tasks
that must be aligned with the new realities emerging in
Somalia beginning in 2022.
Let me conclude on another positive note and
welcome the series of important measures that we
have witnessed being taken by Kenya and Somalia
since June. Those developments remain significant in
strengthening the relations of the two neighbours and
will continue to create the conditions for the building
of a regional political consensus originally forged after
the deployment of AMISOM, in 2007.
The President: I thank Mr. Madeira for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Gaballe.
Ms. Gaballe: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the invitation to provide an update on the political
and electoral development in Somalia from a
civil-society perspective.
My name is Batula Axmed. I am an advocate of
women’s rights and empowerment, peace and political
participation. Today I am speaking in my capacity
as the Chairperson of the Somali National Women’s
Organization, as well as the Chairperson of the recently
appointed advocacy committee for the attainment of the
women’s 30 per cent quota in the 2021 federal elections
of Somalia, commonly known as goodwill ambassadors.
In addition to a general update, my statement
will address the interconnectedness and the impact
of the political crisis on women’s participation and
representation in decision-making and leadership,
including the electoral process; the role of Somali
women in the current elections and the challenges
21-22321

12/08/2021

The situation in Somalia

facing aspiring women candidates; the aspirations of
Somali women and ways to realize them; the role of the
Federal Government of Somalia and its international
partners, including the United Nations, in advancing
women’s political participation and representation; and
the women and peace and security agenda in general.
With regard to the Houses of Parliament, the
17 September 2020 agreement provided no details on
how the commitment to safeguarding the 30 per cent
quota would be implemented. It provided women leaders
and candidates no guarantee of their representation and
participation in the elections and in the eleventh session
of Parliament. We remain deeply concerned over the
uncertainty in that respect while continuing advocacy
campaigns for a clear mechanism to deliver on the
30 per cent quota.
The political stalemate in the electoral process
continued to affect the concerns of women. The delays
in the implementation of the electoral processes, due
mainly to political disagreements among the Federal
Government of Somalia and federal member state
leaders, also increased women’s anxiety that women’s
issues and concerns would no longer remain a priority.
The 30 per cent quota seemed to have disappeared
from the agenda of political leaders who make decisions
on the electoral process. Due to political uncertainties
and the fear of escalation of political crisis, even we,
women leaders, got engaged in campaigning for peace
and reconciliation. We took on our peacemakers’ role,
leaving the demand for the 30 per cent quota to the
side. We realized that without agreement between the
Federal Government of Somali and federal member
state leaders and without political stability, there will
be no elections; and without elections, there will be no
30 per cent quota.
Women leaders across the country were further
concerned about the fact that political solutions needed
to be found to overcome political differences between
the Federal Government of Somalia and federal member
state leaders in order to avoid a further escalation of
the situation, which would lead the country towards
the path of instability. If that were to happen, peace
would remain an ever elusive agenda. Women therefore
prioritized peace and stability over the 30 per cent quota.
During the May National Consultative Council,
women leaders, led by the untiring Federal Minister
of Women and Human Rights Development, engaged
the political leadership separately to secure their

S/PV. 8833

commitment to attaining the 30 per cent quota. Our
demands were clear: first, the issuance of a concrete
mechanism to implement the 30 per cent quota;
secondly, the reduction of candidate registration fees for
women; and, thirdly, reserving seats for women only,
to guarantee a minimum of 30 per cent representation
of women in the new Parliament. At the May Council,
political leaders assured us of their commitment and
support for the 30 per cent quota.
Although women secured a 50 per cent reduction
in fees, in the absence of a clear mechanism, the most
critical of all demands, the path to the attainment of
the 30 per cent quota, remains elusive and challenging.
Moreover, Somali women leaders and civil society
organizations have advocated for the 30 per cent quota
with very little or no resources. There is an urgent need
to engage federal member state leaders and clan elders
to reach an understanding to set aside 30 per cent of the
seats to be contested only by women.
The establishment of the advocacy committee by
the Prime Minister on 25 July, of which I have been
made Chairperson, is a development we welcome. The
appointment of the Committee provides new impetus to
women’s advocacy for the 30 per cent quota.
The election in the Upper House is under way. As of
now, no State has delivered 30 per cent in the elections.
Women’s representation varies between 25 per cent to
27 per cent, and Jubaland is yet to elect women. We are
mindful of the challenges and remain clear in our resolve
to fulfil our mandate. The members of the Committee
are fully engaged. I would like to take this moment to
extend our sincere thanks and appreciation to the Office
of the Prime Minister and the international community,
in particular the United Kingdom, the European Union
and the United Nations, for facilitating our work.
We are confident that our international partners will
accompany us on this journey.
Besides financial constraints, women candidates
face challenges of insecurity and fear of intimidation.
Strengthening protection is critical to ensuring
women’s participation in the electoral process. As we
continue our efforts to realize a minimum of 30 per
cent representation of women in the new Parliament,
we are looking ahead and beyond the 2021 election. To
avoid a repeat of what Somali women are experiencing
today and to secure Somali women’s rightful place in
the political arena, we demand a level playing field.

21-223217/19

S/PV.8833

The situation in Somalia

The new Government and the new Parliament must
work together to amend the federal electoral law and
political party laws, thereby ensuring clear provisions
for women’s full participation. The constitutional
review must provide clear provisions on women’s
participation in politics and public offices. Resources
must be provided to strengthen women’s leadership
role and protection. Support must be extended to newly
elected women Members of Parliament and Senators to
be effective in their legislative role.
Somali women represent more than 50 per cent of the
population and they cannot be excluded from political
and decision-making roles. In other words, women’s
meaningful participation is vital for the attainment of
durable peace, security and political stability in Somalia.
Alongside the Somali authorities, the international
community, particularly the United Nations, has a
major responsibility to ensure that political dialogues,
reconciliation efforts and development efforts are
inclusive. Women’s participation and protection from
all forms of violence, including sexual violence in
conflict and discrimination, must be a priority.
In conclusion, we demand concrete measures and
full accountability for the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda. On behalf my fellow
Somali women and on my personal behalf, I would like
to extend to you, Mr. President and the Council, Special
Representative James Swan, Special Representative
Francisco Madeira, our sincere thanks and appreciation
for this opportunity and continued support to Somalia
and the Somali women’s cause.
The President: I thank Ms. Gaballe for her briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I would like to thank Special Representative Swan,
Special Representative Madeira and Ms. Batula Axmed
Gaballe for their briefings.
I would like to make three points in response to
what we have heard today. The first thing to say is that
the United Kingdom welcomes the electoral agreement
reached between the Somali Federal Government and
Somalia’s federated member states on 27 May. Prime
Minister Roble has our full support as he works with the
federal member states to implement the agreement and
conclude the electoral process as planned. It follows that
8/19

12/08/2021

we welcome the beginning of Upper House elections as
a milestone in the process agreed on 27 May.
But we also endorse what we have heard from
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Swan,
namely, the importance of the engagement of Somalia’s
leaders to keep this process on track and to ensure
that the 30 per cent quota for women is met. We also
encourage the Somali authorities, in close coordination
with the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
to accelerate preparations for election security. We
say this because we know, as we heard from Special
Representative Madeira, delays and deviation from
this process risk further political division and benefit
to Al-Shabaab, which continues to launch frequent
attacks to regain ground, extort income and increase
their political influence.
Secondly, with regard to security, the electoral
process is a key part of sustaining the security gains
that the African Union and AMISOM have helped to
achieve. In support of the transition to a Somali-led
security arrangement as laid out in the Somali transition
plan and called for in resolution 2568 (2021), we support
and encourage collaboration and consultation between
the Federal Government of Somalia, the United
Nations, the African Union (AU) and donors. Further,
we look forward to the joint United Nations-African
Union proposal on the successor mission to AMISOM,
which we expect to see in September, and to working
with Somalia, the AU and Security Council members
to translate this proposal into a mandate in December.
Thirdly, as we have heard, Somalia continues to
face deep challenges brought about by coronavirus
disease and climate change, including flooding, drought
and locust swarms, which have put Somali lives and
livelihoods at further risk. The United Kingdom will
continue to support Somalia in mitigating the impacts
of these events and in building resilience, and we call
on other members of the international community to do
the same.
In conclusion, delivering on the 27 May agreement
and completing the electoral process will present
Somalia with an opportunity to address the challenges
facing Somali people and for regional and international
partners to renew their support to Somalia,
particularly on its path to development, security and
climate resilience.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I would like to thank Special
Representative James Swan, Special Representative
21-22321

12/08/2021

The situation in Somalia

Francisco Madeira and Ms. Batula Axmed Gaballe
for their insightful briefings and for their work on the
ground. I would like also to welcome the participation
of Ambassador Abukar Dahir Osman, Permanent
Representative of Somalia, at today’s meeting.
We are encouraged by recent positive developments
in Somalia, particularly by the agreement reached in
late May by the National Consultative Council (NCC)
and the continued dialogue between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federated member
states on the implementation of the electoral process
with a view to ending the political impasse that has been
in place since 2018. Against this backdrop, I would like
to highlight the following points.
First, the agreement reached by the NCC on the main
issues in relation to the election process is an important
milestone. It not only removed a major roadblock to
elections, but also showed that all parties could work
together in the interests of the country. We hope that the
election will be implemented in a secure and peaceful
manner, based on an agreed timetable. Furthermore,
the implementation of a Somali-owned and Somali-led
political process should take into account the legitimate
aspiration of all Somali stakeholders. Adequate
representation of women, minorities and youth should
also be ensured.
We would also like to reiterate the need for
continued international support in financial and
technical assistance and in State-building efforts,
including the strengthening of State institutions. Longterm peace and prosperity in Somalia depend on it. It
is also important to create a favourable environment
and step up protection measures for civilians, including
in electoral preparation and polls, especially for
vulnerable groups, women and children.
Secondly, the continuing volatile security situation
remains a concern. Terrorist groups, including
Al-Shabaab, continue to demonstrate their ability to
conduct attacks, including through using improvised
explosive devices and high-profile suicide attacks. We
strongly condemn the violence and terrorist attacks
against civilians, Government officials, the Somali
security forces, United Nations personnel and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
We support the operations carried out by the
Somali security forces, AMISOM and international
partners against Al-Shabaab and urge the Government
of Somalia to redouble its efforts aimed at carrying

S/PV. 8833

out security measures for civilian protection and
accelerating investigation into the violence against
and killings of civilians. In this regard, support for the
Somali army and security forces remains critical through
training, provision of equipment, capacity-building and
implementing operations against Al-Shabaab.
Thirdly, the coronavirus disease pandemic, desert
locusts, flood and drought have resulted in increased
displacement and negatively affected large segments
of the population that were already vulnerable and
in need of humanitarian assistance owing to chronic
poverty and conflict. We cannot emphasize enough the
need to address these challenges and economic issues
facing Somalia, especially in terms of agricultural
development. In this regard, it is concerning to note
the low level of funding that there has been for the
2021 Humanitarian Response Plan for Somalia. We
call on international partners to galvanize further
support to assist the Federal Government of Somalia
in alleviating socioeconomic hardships. At the same
time, only through a comprehensive approach can
the Government and the people of Somalia overcome
long-term challenges and achieve sustained stability
and development.
Last but not least, we would like to reiterate the
importance of assistance from and coordination with
regional and international partners working on the
ground. We commend the recent efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, AMISOM,
the United Nations country team and the Special
Representative in their continued assistance to Somalia
with a view to ensuring lasting peace, stability and
development for the country and its people.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the three African members of the
Security Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as
well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), Mr. James
Swan, the Special Representative of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
Mr. Francisco Madeira, and the Chairperson of the
Somali National Women’s Organization, Ms. Batula
Axmed Gaballe, for their briefings. We would also
like to welcome participation of the Permanent
Representative of Somalia in today’s meeting.

21-223219/19

S/PV.8833

The situation in Somalia

The A3+1 welcomes the commencement of the
election process following the agreement reached
between the Federal Government of Somalia and
the federated member states on the remaining
organizational issues. We underline again the vital
importance of holding free, fair, inclusive and timely
elections to realize the Somali people’s legitimate
aspirations to security, stability, democracy, good
governance and development.
The A3+1 welcomes continued efforts aimed
at realizing the agreed 30 per cent quota for
women, including the reduction of nomination
fees for women candidates and the appointment of
goodwill ambassadors. We also reiterate our support for
the objective of holding one-person one-vote universal
elections in 2024-2025 and encourage the continuation
of efforts to that end.
The A3+1 remains concerned about the security
situation in Somalia with Al-Shabaab and other terrorist
groups still representing the major threat to peace,
security and stability in the country. We reiterate our call
for continued international support to the Government
of Somalia in its fight against Al-Shabaab and for
capacity-building in order to enable the Government to
take full responsibility for its security, in line with the
Somalia transition plan.
The A3+1 takes note of the options proposed by the
African Union independent assessment on post-2021
engagement in Somalia and of the preference expressed
for an African Union/United Nations joint mission.
While renewing our tribute to the dedication, courage
and sacrifice of AMISOM in the promotion of peace,
security and stability in Somalia, we invite the United
Nations, the African Union and all international partners
to continue working closely with the Government of
Somalia to agree on the best way forward.
The A3+1 deplores the civilian casualties
recorded in the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/723), the large majority of which are attributed
to Al-Shabaab. We are deeply concerned about the
continued reports of arbitrary detentions, including
of journalists, sexual and gender-based violence, and
abuses against children. We encourage the Somali
authorities to take the necessary steps to prevent these
violations and further promote and protect human
rights, in particular those of women and children, as
well as freedom of speech and access to information.
10/19

12/08/2021

The humanitarian situation in Somalia also
remains deeply concerning, and we reiterate our call
to all international partners to scale up funding for the
humanitarian response plans for Somalia.
The A3+1 appreciates the efforts of UNSOM< and
other relevant stakeholders in discharging the Mission’s
mandate of supporting Somalia through the provision of
policy advice on peacebuilding and State-building and
the coordination of international donor support. Those
efforts must be buttressed by strong relations between
the Federal Government of Somalia, the United Nations
and the African Union. The A3+1 therefore reaffirms its
readiness to engage constructively in the forthcoming
negotiations for the renewal of UNSOM’s mandate
in order to enhance its role in Somalia following the
2021 elections.
In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm our
unwavering commitment to the sovereignty, unity,
political independence and territorial integrity of
Somalia, as well as our support for all efforts to secure
its peace, political stability and socioeconomic progress.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I want to thank this
morning’s briefers for their invaluable insights. It is
great to see the Special Representative Madeira in the
Chamber this morning, and I thank him for his insights.
I was particularly struck by the heartfelt and sincere
presentation of Ms. Batula Sheikh Axmed Gaballe.
It is also a pleasure, as always, to see our colleague,
Ambassador Swan, here today.
Since our last meeting, I have been encouraged by
the step-by-step progress we are seeing now in Somalia
towards the implementation of an agreed electoral
model. I want to commend the leadership of the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states
in setting aside their past differences and working
to put the country and the Somali people’s interests
first. This is the cooperation that we wanted to see,
and it is essential for long-term stability in Somalia.
It is now critical that Somalia’s leaders maintain this
positive momentum, resolve outstanding issues in a
spirit of consensus and compromise, and move to hold
inclusive elections without further delay. This is vital
to delivering the demands of the people of Somalia
for democracy and to tackle the major challenges the
country faces. Time is of the essence.
At this crucial moment for Somalia’s political
future, it is all the more critical that we see the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women in the
21-22321

12/08/2021

The situation in Somalia

electoral process. As we heard in the briefings this
morning, there are reports that women candidates have
been intimidated, harassed, abducted and killed in
the past. It is therefore imperative that we all work to
ensure the safety and security of women running for
office and that we plan for the protection of women
during the upcoming elections.
I am very concerned that there is still no established
concrete mechanism to ensure the minimum 30 per cent
quota for women in the electoral process. I have spoken
many times with Foreign Minister Mohamud about this
quota; it is not rhetorical. I very much appreciate the
Somalian Ambassador’s personal commitment in that
regard, and I know that it was discussed between our
Foreign Minister and Minister Mohamud at their recent
meeting in Mogadishu. The appointment of goodwill
ambassadors, of course, is very welcome, but more is
needed to see this commitment translated into practice.
It is very disappointing to hear Ms. Gaballe today, when
speaking of the mechanism, characterize the situation
as elusive and challenging. I reiterate her urgent call for
a concrete mechanism to be put in place without further
delays. We need to see this commitment translated
into practice.
I am also alarmed by the reports of increased
conflict-related sexual violence, especially against
women and girls, as outlined recently by Special
Representatives Patten and Gamba. I have read and
listened to those reports in detail and — to put it
frankly — they are horrifying. During his recent visit
to Mogadishu, Irish Foreign Minister Simon Coveney
heard direct searing testimony from women activists in
that regard. The tragic impact of conflict-related sexual
violence on these women simply must be addressed.
Ms. Gaballe reminded us of that in detail today.
These acts are utterly unacceptable and must cease
immediately, whomever the perpetrators. I echo the call
by Special Representatives Patten and Gamba for swift
adoption of a new national action plan on ending sexual
violence in conflict. I welcome the adoption in May of
the human rights policy for the Somali National Armed
Forces. Even so, I call on all Somali authorities to take
immediate steps to protect women and girls from all
forms of sexual and gender-based violence including
enacting the original 2018 Sexual Offences Bill.
It is also shocking that vulnerable children
continue to be killed, abducted and recruited with
apparent impunity. The Secretary General’s report

S/PV. 8833

(S/2021/723) highlights the alarming scale of ongoing
grave violations against the children of Somalia by all
parties, including Al-Shabaab, clan militias and Federal
Government and federal member state armed forces. I
call on all parties to prevent and end all grave violations
against children and to hold perpetrators accountable.
The recent political impasse has diverted attention
from tackling the serious threat of Al-Shabaab, but we
have not looked away. The reality is that Al-Shabaab
are the only ones to have gained from this electoral
impasse. I condemn in the strongest possible terms their
continued attacks on civilians, government officials
and security forces.
The distraction of the political impasse has also
aggravated the effects of a dire humanitarian crisis in
Somalia. The negative impact of climate change and the
coronavirus disease pandemic are further exacerbating
the serious humanitarian situation and having a
disproportionate impact on the vulnerable — as always,
women and girls. While international partners need to
step up funding and support in Somalia — and in that
context it is regrettable to see contributions to the 2021
Humanitarian Response Plan for Somalia at the lowest
level in six years — the Government must also refocus
on addressing humanitarian access constraints and the
fundamental challenges facing the people of Somalia.
In concluding, I wish to touch on the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). As we heard
in great detail today in a comprehensive update from
Mr. Madeira, the African Union, through AMISOM,
plays a major role in promoting peace and security in
Somalia. I sincerely commend the bravery and sacrifices
made by both AMISOM and the Somali security
forces to promote peace in Somalia. As a member of
the European Union, which has proudly contributed
to AMISOM and Somali security over decades, I want
to encourage the Federal Government of Somalia, the
United Nations and the African Union to work to follow
the timeline set out in resolution 2568 (2021).
For the future security of the people of Somalia, it
is absolutely vital to continue to work together towards
the progressive transfer of security responsibilities
from AMISOM to the Somali security forces. That
must happen as soon the security and political situation
allows and in a manner that prioritizes the safety and
security of all Somali citizens. Finding consensus
among all of Somalia’s partners and Somali leaders on
how best to achieve that is now critical and urgent.

21-2232111/19

S/PV.8833

The situation in Somalia

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. James Swan,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), for their traditionally
informative briefings.
We also listened carefully to the information
provided by the representative of Somali civil society,
Ms. Batula Sheikh Axmed Gaballe. We welcome the
participation of the Permanent Representative of
Somalia, Abukar Dahir Osman, in this meeting.
We studied the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/723) very carefully. We note that since
the previous meeting of the Security Council on this
issue (see S/PV.8779), the political forces in Somalia
have managed to move forward significantly on a whole
slew of issues relating to general elections. The new
timetable for the elections has been approved, and the
process of Senate elections has begun.
Overall, the easing of political tensions has become
possible thanks to the constructive position taken by
the central authorities, including the fact that President
Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed declined to extend his
mandate by two years and the reversion to the agreement
of 17 September 2020 between the Federal Government
and the states on the modalities of the electoral process.
We also take note of the contribution to the achieving of
mutually acceptable solutions made by Prime Minister
Mohamed Hussein Roble.
We call on all political forces in Somalia to continue
constructive work so as to implement the 29 June
agreements, with the goal of conducting presidential
and parliamentary elections as soon as possible and
the creation in the country of a resilient federative
framework.
We also welcome the contacts between Somalia
and Kenya. Like the Secretary-General, we, too,
expect that they will result in the full resumption of
friendly relations between those two countries, which
play a pivotal role in maintaining peace and stability in
the region.
The security situation in Somalia remains tense.
Al-Shabaab continues to exert increasing pressure on
the federal authorities and AMISOM, in the centre of the
country as well as in the outlying regions. The fighters
12/19

12/08/2021

openly threaten those who intend to participate in the
elections. We call upon the Government of Somalia and
African Union peacekeepers not to relent in their fight
against extremists.
In that context, we note the particular importance
of the initiative of the federal Security and Justice
Committee. The initiative is aimed at implementing the
May agreements on preparing, through the efforts of
the Federal Government and AMISOM, special police
units to ensure safety and security at polling stations.
We continue to believe that the African Union
peacekeeping mission remains a key element in Somali
security. We expect that the African Union and the
federal authorities will work out a mutually acceptable
configuration for the future mission and the parameters
needed to transfer responsibility for security in the
country from AMISOM to the Somali National Army.
We are convinced that all decisions in that respect need
to be very carefully considered and that a security
vacuum must be averted at all costs.
This month the Security Council will be asked to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM). We advocate the
constructive inclusion of UNSOM in the process
of State-building in the country on the basis of the
agreements reached between the federal authorities and
the regions. We see the goal of the draft resolution as
sending signals to all key Somali actors that the electoral
process needs to be completed, that State-building
needs to be intensified and that the fight against the
extremist threat needs to continue.
We call upon the United Nations and international
and regional partners to continue assisting Somalia
while strictly respecting its sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence, without any
interference in its internal affairs.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like at the outset to thank all the briefers
for their enlightening presentations, and I welcome
the presence here of the Permanent Representative
of Somalia.
I wish first to stress the importance of elections.
France hails all efforts made in that regard by the
Government of Somalia and the federated states,
particularly the mobilization of Prime Minister Roble
in those efforts. It encourages the Somali parties to
21-22321

12/08/2021

The situation in Somalia

immediately implement all the commitments that they
undertook in September 2020 and May 2021.
I wish also to stress the importance of the inclusivity
of the electoral process. The full participation of women
as both voters and candidates must remain a priority.
The 30 per cent quota must be respected, as noted by
Ms. Batula Axmed Gaballe. We also call for young
people to participate, in accordance with resolution
2535 (2020), on the youth, peace and security agenda.
Secondly, on security, we deplore the lack
of progress in the implementation of the Somali
transition process, as Al-Shabaab continues with its
deadly attacks. France condemns the acts of violence
committed by that group and denounces in particular
the resort to sexual violence and forced marriage,
which is increasing continually.
We cannot wait. We must today begin the process
of a security transition and the handover to the Somali
forces. France calls on all parties, particularly Somalia,
the African Union and the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and its troop-contributing
countries to fully implement resolution 2568 (2021) and
respect its timetable.
A decision must be taken this year on the evolution
of the role and the financing of AMISOM. I would recall
that the European Union has spent almost €2 billion
on the Mission since 2007. That should translate into
greater effectiveness in the work of the Mission and
should induce other partners to make early contributions
to that joint effort. In that respect, France understands
that the European Union will review its contribution
to the financing of AMISOM while ensuring a better
coordination of the operation with its Common Security
and Defence Policy missions deployed in Somalia.
Our duty is also to assist the Somali population.
As all are aware, its situation has been aggravated by
the coronavirus disease pandemic and extreme climate
conditions, be it the impact of climate change or desert
locusts. France calls for the ensuring of safe and
unhindered humanitarian access and firmly condemns
the attacks on humanitarian and health personnel, as
well as obstacles to humanitarian access. Those crimes
will not remain unpunished and respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights is non-negotiable.
France shares the concerns expressed jointly by
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and on Sexual

S/PV. 8833

Violence in Conflict. We encourage Somalia to
implement its international and regional commitments
by adopting appropriate legislation for the protection
of children and for the condemnation of sexual and
gender-based violence.
On the eve of the renewal of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia, I would like to reiterate
our full support for this Mission and its leader, Mr. James
Swan, whom I thank for all his efforts and commitment.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. James Swan, and the Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia, Mr. Madeira, for their briefings. I also
listened carefully to the statement of the civil society
representative, Ms. Gaballe. I welcome the Somali
representative to today’s meeting.
Recently, the political situation in Somalia has in
general moved in a positive direction. China welcomes
the agreement reached by the Somali parties on
electoral arrangements and the official launch of the
first round of the Upper House elections. We hope
that all parties will commit themselves to maintaining
national stability, rebuilding peace, strengthening
dialogue and consultation on advancing the electoral
process and holding the elections as based on an agreed
timetable. The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia has played an important role in supporting
peace and reconstruction in Somalia. China supports
the renewal of its mandate and the continuation of its
technical advice and support to Somalia for the smooth
conduct of the elections.
China commends the efforts by Somalia and
Kenya to improve bilateral relations and hopes that
they will continue their contribution to regional peace
and stability.
Somalia’s security situation is fraught with
challenges. It is of concern that Al-Shabaab continues
to launch frequent attacks against innocent civilians,
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
the Somali security forces. China supports AMISOM
in its continued coordination and collaboration with
the Somali security forces on joint counter-terrorism
operations. We hope that the international community
will strongly support the Somali Government in security
capacity-building, in line with the Somali transition
plan. China calls on donors to provide financial support
for AMISOM to deliver on its mandate. The United

21-2232113/19

S/PV.8833

The situation in Somalia

Nations and the African Union need to strengthen
communication and coordination with Somalia in
order to reach consensus on the future configuration
of AMISOM.
The current humanitarian situation has further
deteriorated, compounded by the factors, including the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19), the extreme weather
and the locust plague. One fifth of its population are
food insecure. Humanitarian needs are increasing.
The United Nations humanitarian response plan is
drastically underfunded. The international community
should step up efforts to give full support to Somalia
in fighting the pandemic, improve disaster response
capacities, provide greater assistance in terms of
development aid and debt relief and encourage Somalia
to explore a development path that suits its national
conditions and enhance its own developing capacity.
China has always supported peace and
reconstruction in Somalia. We have helped the
country in building infrastructure and economic
development capacity and provided multiple batches
of anti-pandemic supplies and vaccines. Last week,
China held the first meeting of the International Forum
on COVID-19 Vaccine Cooperation and announced
that China would provide 2 billion COVID-19 vaccine
doses to the world this year and donate $100 million
to the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility. We
stand ready to work with the international community
to make a positive contribution to lasting peace and
sustainable development in Somalia.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Swan and to
our two virtual briefers for their useful, informative
presentations. The United States welcomes, as other
speakers have, the considerable progress on Somalia’s
electoral process over the past three months. When the
Security Council last convened to discuss Somalia in
May (see S/PV.8779), the country was facing its most
serious bout of political instability in over 20 years.
Since that time, the United States has been very pleased
to see the electoral process moving forward.
I want to commend the spirit of cooperation among
the Somali Federal Government and the federal member
states’ leaders on the implementation of the 17 September
electoral model that led to the 27 May agreement and the
subsequent progress on implementation. In particular,
the United States commends Prime Minister Mohamed
Hussein Roble for his leadership of the process.
14/19

12/08/2021

However, notwithstanding the progress achieved
thus far, there remain aspects of the process that
require continued focus and attention, as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Swan pointed
out and our briefers highlighted. For example, when
the Upper House elections conclude, stakeholders
should expeditiously conduct Lower House elections
with a view to carrying out the country’s longdelayed presidential election on the announced date of
10 October. That includes completing election security
preparations to ensure that voting can take place in a
safe and secure environment.
It is also critical to finalize arrangements for meeting
the quota pursuant to Somali political agreements of
30 per cent female representation in Parliament. Others
have spoken about that; I will not go on at length but
let me emphasize that, in Somalia, where women have
often been the victims of discrimination and oppression,
it is vital that their voices be included in the highest
chambers of the Somali Government. The United
States wants to commend the work of the goodwill
ambassadors and their efforts to further that goal.
The United States remains committed to ensuring
that both the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and the African Union Mission in Somalia
are mandated to provide tailored, appropriate support
to the Somali people during this time of political
transition. This is a moment of tremendous opportunity
for Somalia, and we would urge the Government to
do its utmost to adhere to the established electoral
timelines, to continue promoting cooperation between
the Federal Government and the federal member states
and to closely coordinate with all partners to ensure
that those two missions remain fit for purpose.
In conclusion, recent weeks have shown
encouraging progress for Somalia’s electoral process.
The United States commends the work of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Swan and that
of the Somali Government, Somali stakeholders and the
Somali people, which have brought this about. Despite
those encouraging signs, much more work needs to be
done, as our briefers emphasized. The United States
Government will continue to work with the Council
members and Somali leaders to achieve a peaceful,
prosperous and democratic Somalia.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I am grateful for the briefings by Special
Representatives Swan and Madeira, as well as for the
21-22321

12/08/2021

The situation in Somalia

information provided by Ms. Batula Axmed Gaballe.
We also welcome the Permanent Representative of
Somalia to this meeting.
While noting the delays in the implementation of
the electoral agreement, Mexico welcomes the many
efforts to address the reluctance of some political
actors and to move towards an achievable and realistic
electoral timetable. We stress the importance of an
inclusive, credible and transparent process, and we
acknowledge in particular Prime Minister Roble’s direct
involvement in high-level contacts and reconciling
relations. Despite the challenges, my country believes
it particularly positive that the 17 September electoral
agreement and the benchmarks of the Baidoa technical
committee continue to prevail.
In that context, Mexico emphasizes the importance
of meeting the quota of at least 30 per cent women’s
representation in the electoral process, and we would
like to learn more details on the specific mechanisms
for its implementation. Ensuring the full involvement
of women is about ensuring Somalia’s future. It also
means ensuring their security in the context of the
electoral process.
With regard to the security situation, we reiterate
our concern about the threat posed by Al-Shabaab to
the Government’s control over the entire territory of
Somalia, the strengthening of Government institutions
and the transition plan.
My country recognizes the progress made in
the implementation of the arms-and-ammunition
management policy. However, Mexico considers it
important to stress that, in addition to the management
of weapons already present on Somali territory, a truly
effective strategy must take into account the entire life
cycle of weapons. This implies shared responsibility
among the various actors in the chains of transfer,
from producers and exporters to recipients and
intermediaries. Only with a comprehensive approach
can the proliferation of weapons, which continues to
fuel the power of Al-Shabaab, be addressed.
We are also alarmed by the increase in cases of
grave violations against children and the high incidence
of sexual violence. We echo the call of the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representatives for the Somali
authorities to urgently implement necessary stronger
legislation, in particular the 2018 Sexual Offences bill
and the action plan against child recruitment, to prevent
such violations and ensure that justice is served. We

S/PV. 8833

further call on the parties to the conflict in Somalia to
immediately put an end to these violations and comply
with their obligations and responsibilities under
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
In addition to the complex security context, the
impacts of recurrent climate crises, the coronavirus
disease pandemic, the locust infestation and growing
food insecurity are creating great need for humanitarian
assistance. Mexico calls on the entire international
community to provide the financial, material and
political resources needed to avoid a catastrophe in a
country where almost half of the population is in need
of humanitarian assistance. While Somalia received its
second batch of vaccines through the COVAX facility
on 8 August, a sustained and predictable supply is more
needed than ever.
In view of the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia,
Mexico, my country, considers fundamental provisions
therein on, first, support for national authorities in
the implementation of the transition plan; secondly,
protection of human rights, in particular the protection
of women and girls from sexual and gender-based
violence and the protection of children in armed conflict;
thirdly, participation of women in political processes;
and fourthly, the adverse effects of climate change and
the need to develop measures to mitigate them.
Lastly, we welcome the re-establishment of relations
between Kenya and Somalia, whose relationship is
vital for the stability of the region. Kenya’s support
is undoubtedly crucial to the political process and the
maintenance of security in Somalia.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I join others in thanking the
briefers for their insightful overviews. I would also like
to welcome the Permanent Representative of Somalia in
today’s discussion.
Estonia warmly welcomes the recent political
developments in Somalia, including the 27 May
agreement, and the continued dialogue between the
leaders of the Federal Government and the federal
member states on the electoral process. We sincerely
hope that this positive momentum continues and that it
will enable credible, transparent and inclusive elections
to be held without further delays.
Equally important are robust electoral security
arrangements, which would ensure that the elections
proceed smoothly. Looking ahead to the next election

21-2232115/19

S/PV.8833

The situation in Somalia

cycle, in order to ensure that Somalia is making progress
in its democratization process, Estonia strongly
supports the development of an agreed pathway to
one-person-one-vote elections in 2025.
Since the elections lay the foundation for Somalia’s
next chapter, the importance of women’s participation
cannot be over-emphasized, and in that I welcome
Ms. Gaballe’s message at today’s meeting. We therefore
call on Somali leaders to urgently identify a mechanism
that would ensure the implementation of the 30 per
cent women quota in the upcoming elections in order
to safeguard their political representation. We also
see the need to do more to advance women’s rights in
society more broadly. It is crucial that women’s rights
are codified in the revised constitution and other
legal frameworks.
Estonia is alarmed by the increase of sexual and
gender-based violence and the number of Somali women
and children who remain trapped in a cycle of violence.
This matter requires urgent attention by Somali
authorities. Estonia calls on the Federal Government to
accelerate the adoption of the new national action plan
for ending sexual violence in conflict.
The security situation remains a major challenge.
We condemn in the strongest terms the continuing
attacks by Al-Shabaab, and we express our condolences
to the victims and their families. The security sector can
only improve if all stakeholders work together towards
this important goal. Therefore, in the planning for the
post-2021 mission, it is of paramount importance that
the key players, including the Federal Government of
Somalia, the United Nations, the African Union and the
European Union, develop a common approach that is
realistic in its timelines, tasks and goals.
Finally, Estonia is deeply concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation. Routine spikes in humanitarian
needs call for a more strategic approach. Climatic
shocks continue to severely affect Somalia and require
comprehensive solutions that offer prevention and threat
mitigation. Estonia encourages further efforts that will
proactively address those challenges, including in the
upcoming the mandate renewal of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate Estonia’s full
support for Somalia and its people.
Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Swan, Special
16/19

12/08/2021

Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia Madeira and Ms. Batula
Axmed Gaballe for their insightful briefings.
While the electoral process faces new delays, we
welcome the continued, constructive, atmosphere
between Somali leaders under the leadership of Prime
Minister Mohamed Hussein Roble. Regular, constructive
and inclusive dialogue in the National Consultative
Council format is key to progress in implementing
the electoral model, and timely, credible and inclusive
elections are of utmost importance to bringing Somalia
back to the promising reform track of the recent past
and to ensuring democratic development. The economy
and security of the Somali people have for too long
suffered from the political impasse. Furthermore, we
encourage Somali leaders to make full use of the good
offices of the United Nations to find solutions to the
outstanding electoral issues.
Somalia cannot afford an electoral process that
excludes half of the population. We are therefore deeply
concerned that Somali leaders have yet to define a clear
mechanism for implementing the 30 per cent quota for
electing women. While the appointment of the advocacy
committee is a positive step — and we particularly
welcome the presence of Ms. Batula Axmed Gaballe
in today’s meeting — Somali women deserve concrete
results. And so far, the Upper House elections are
not delivering.
The call for a 30 per cent quota for women is not
imposed from the outside. It could not be stated more
clearly than in the Somali Women’s Charter itself,
which reads, in its first operative paragraph:
“We, the Somali women, resolve to realize
equal participation in all political and peacebuilding
processes and accountability from the highest
officials of the [S]tate. Without women’s political
participation there can be no sustained peace
and development.”
This call from the women of Somalia must be heeded.
The message we heard today from Ms. Gaballe was
clear. It is possible to find a mechanism. Among other
measures, seats can be reserved for women in the Upper
House and the Lower House.
Norway condemns the worrisome high levels
of the six grave violations against children. While
Al-Shabaab remains the main perpetrator, we also note
that a significant number of violations continues to be
21-22321

12/08/2021

The situation in Somalia

attributed to Government security forces, including the
Somali Police Force. We urge all parties to immediately
end and prevent all violations against children and
to comply with international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
The humanitarian situation in Somalia also remains
dire. The rapid shifts from severe droughts to flooding
is a reminder that Somalia is increasingly vulnerable
to the effects of climate change. It is therefore critical
to support the Federal Government of Somalia to
strengthen its capacity to integrate responses to
climate-related security risks across Government.
Additionally, we are approaching the renewal of
the mandate of United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia (UNSOM). We believe that the Council
should consider the need for UNSOM to also improve
its climate-related security risk analysis and reporting,
including on how issues of climate security affect
its mandate.
We note the report of the independent assessment
team on the engagement of the African Union (AU) in
and with Somalia post-2021, as well as the discussion
in the AU Peace and Security Council on 30 July.
However, considering the timelines in resolution 2568
(2021) for transferring responsibility for security to
Somali authorities and for the reconfiguration of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), we also
strongly encourage constructive dialogue on the way
forward among the AU, the United Nations, the Somali
Government and other key actors. The success or failure
of a future, reconfigured AMISOM depends on the
timeliness and quality of such a collective discussion.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.
I thank Special Representative James Swan for
his update on the situation in Somalia. We appreciate
his continuous and close engagement on this very
important issue. I also thank Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), Ambassador Francisco Madeira,
for his briefing. I express my gratitude to Ms. Batula
Axmed Gaballe, Chairperson of the Somali National
Women’s Organization, for sharing her insights with
us today.

S/PV. 8833

I would like to welcome the presence of His
Excellency the Permanent Representative of Somalia at
today’s meeting.
We welcome the recent political developments
in Somalia and hope that the Somali leadership and
stakeholders will move ahead with the convening of
elections. The 27 May agreement among the Federal
Government of Somalia and federal member states’
leaders and the revised electoral timetable issued by the
National Consultative Council on 29 June are positive
developments in that direction. We also note that the
Senate elections, although delayed, are being held in
federal member states. The next step is the holding of
elections for the House of People. The process was to
begin on 10 August. We hope that the agreed timeline
will be broadly adhered to and that presidential elections
will take place as scheduled. We also hope that the
agreement to have 30 per cent women’s representation
in the Parliament will be a reality soon. We therefore
hope that we will continue to move forward in this spirit
of consensus, which all parties have displayed so far.
A peaceful, free and fair democratic election is
extremely important for the future of Somalia, even
as the Council continues to discuss the important
security transition. Democratic institutions cannot
have legitimacy without elections. A representative
democracy will have larger influence in State-building,
which, in turn, will positively impact the security
situation. We encourage greater cooperation between
the Somali National Army and AMISOM, for ensuring
stability and smooth elections in the country. It is
important to bridge the gap between the African Union
and Somali authorities on AMISOM’s reconfiguration
for the success of the elections.
Nonetheless, the prevailing security situation,
as mentioned by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, continues to be a matter of concern.
Al-Shabaab has stepped up its attacks and continues to
try to disrupt the electoral process. Nearly 100 people
have been killed in attacks by Al-Shabaab in the last
few months. Al-Shabaab has also persisted with the
recruitment of children and committing crimes against
them. We strongly condemn such terrorist attacks and
extend our full support to the operations conducted by
the Somali forces and AMISOM against Al-Shabaab.
We cannot afford to lose sight of our fight against
terrorism, while we focus on elections.

21-2232117/19

S/PV.8833

The situation in Somalia

The role of AMISOM in providing an enabling
security environment for Somalia’s progress cannot be
overstated. AMISOM has played a key role in containing
Al-Shabaab in Somalia for several years now. That is
important not just for Somalia but for the wider Horn
of Africa region. We support a phased handover of
security responsibilities to Somali security forces
commencing in 2021, with a view to transferring full
responsibility by 2023, as the situation on the ground
allows. The situation on the ground should guide the
reconfiguration process, while taking into account
the Secretary-General’s proposal on the strategic
objectives, size and composition of a reconfigured
African Union Mission, by the end of September. In
that context, we look forward to the AU assessment
report being finalized.
The humanitarian situation in Somalia continues to
be a matter of concern. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has reported that the
current funding for the humanitarian response plan in
Somalia is facing a shortfall of 60 per cent. The triple
threat of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), desert
locusts and flooding persists. Some 2.8 million people
are projected to suffer from food insecurity this year.
The international community should help OCHA
bridge the shortfall and meet the humanitarian needs.
India has been supportive of Somalia by various
means, including through the provision of medical
facilities and capacity-building programmes and
scholarships, despite the challenges posed by the
COVID-19 pandemic. India also participated in the
International Monetary Fund’s debt relief package
for Somalia, by agreeing to contribute special
drawing rights.
In conclusion, as Somalia passes through a critical
phase, India will continue to support Somalia and
its people and their desire for a stable, secure and
peaceful future.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August. I wish you all the best in
fulfilling your mandate this month.
18/19

12/08/2021

I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ambassador Swan, and Special Representative
of the African Union Commission for Somalia,
Ambassador Madeira, for their briefings on recent
development in the country. I welcome Ms. Batula
Axmed Gaballe, Chairperson of the Somali National
Women’s Organization, and express my appreciation for
her valuable briefing and tireless efforts in promoting
women’s rights in all areas and at all times.
After the signing of the 27 May political agreement
between the Federal Government of Somalia and federal
member states’ leaders, Prime Minister Mohamed
Hussein Roble was tasked with managing the elections
process, with the goal of building trust and legitimacy.
Over the past few months, he has worked hard on
reconciliation efforts, capacity-building in electoral
bodies, the management of the elections budget, election
security and on ensuring broad-based participation
from all sectors of society. The Federal Government of
Somalia has engaged regularly with the leaders of the
federal member states and key political stakeholders
to ensure consensus around the electoral process. The
National Consultative Council met in Mogadishu in late
June and reached an agreement on key issues related to
security arrangements, the safeguarding of the 30 per
cent women’s quota, electoral integrity modalities and
election timelines.
With regard to election finance management, the
Somali Government has developed an indicative election
budget of $18.7 million that reflects the requirement of
implementing an indirect election process based on the
17 September agreement. The Federal Government of
Somalia has set up a single treasury account for receipt
of $1.9 million from the Government budget and an
estimated $8 million in support for candidates’ fees and
other election expenditures. Furthermore, the Federal
Government of Somalia signed an agreement with the
United Nations to facilitate donor funds in the amount
of $7.7 million in support of the elections.
Pursuant to the 27 May agreement, the Federal
Government of Somalia appointed a reconciliation
committee of political figures from all the federal
member states to mediate the dispute between
Jubaland state authorities and the community leaders
from the Gedo region over the implementation of the
election within the state. Prime Minister Mohamed
Hussein Roble travelled to Kismayo and the town of
Garbahaarrey in the Gedo region, where he met with
elders, political leaders and civil society representatives
21-22321

12/08/2021

The situation in Somalia

to lay the groundwork for the reconciliation committee
effort. After his visit, a follow-up committee travelled
to Gedo and lower Juba and successfully facilitated
an agreement in which the Gedo region will select
four candidates for the district commissioner and
deputy district commissioner positions. Furthermore,
an election management committee will be charged
with holding elections in Garbahaarrey, while the
police force of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) will provide security support.
On the security of the election, the Federal
Government of Somalia established the National Election
Security Committee (NESC), which consists of nine
members, including the Federal Police Commissioner,
state police commissioners, the AMISOM Police
Commissioner and the United Nations, and is chaired
by Prime Minister Mohamed Hussein Roble. All federal
member states are represented and are being consulted
in the preparation of the plan to ensure the security of
the election process. The NESC developed an election
security budget and operational plan to be reviewed and
approved at the next National Consultative Committee
meeting in mid-August 2021. The NESC carried out
an assessment of the election venues in the towns of
Galkayo, Dhusamareb and Garbahaarrey, with further
assessments to be completed in the coming weeks.
Progress in security sector reform remains ongoing,
as comprehensive security sector reform continues to
gain momentum. With streamlined and standardized
Somali national armed forces, we have generated and
integrated new forces, enabling our brave young men
and women to continue their effort to defeat the terrorist
groups and liberate more areas.
The Federal Government of Somalia pays tribute
to the bravery and sacrifice made by the personnel
of AMISOM and the police- and troop-contributing
countries who have fought for a lasting peace and
stability in Somalia over the last 14 years. We are
cognizant of the fact that AMISOM cannot stay in

S/PV. 8833

Somalia forever. Therefore, AMISOM must continue
to transfer security responsibilities to Somali security
forces in the post-2021 era, and all agreed security
arrangements must be in line with Federal Government
policies and priorities.
The European Union Training Mission in Somalia
should be able to work effectively with the Somali
leadership to achieve our common objectives of
defeating Al-Shabaab, rebuilding recovered areas and
providing public services to the population. In order
to win the hearts of minds of the Somali people, our
revised Somali transition plan not only articulates the
process of the security transition but also guides any
future agreed reconfiguration of AMISOM’s ability to
support Somalia under the new political governance
and security disposition. Through this perspective,
Somalia will assess the viability of any mission going
forward; this is the view of that Somalia expects from
all its partners.
In conclusion, the Federal Government of Somalia
is on an upward trajectory and has made significant
strides in a number of critical areas. Nevertheless,
extraordinary challenges remain in the country,
and we continue to strive at critical junctures to
defeat Al-Shabaab and engage in State-building
and federalization, as well as in democratization.
The Federal Government of Somalia would like to
reiterate its commitment to maintaining accelerated
progress in the processes involved in implementing
agreed roadmaps. We welcome the commitment of
AMISOM and the United Nations to supporting the
Federal Government of Somalia in its efforts aimed at
achieving peace, stability and sustainable development
for all Somalis.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to closed consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

21-2232119/19
