UNITED NA TlONS

SECURITY ,COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
THIRTIETH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

21 &~~RUARY 1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l814) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 17 February 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1625) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
L.tJ

Ii
F
C

SlPV.1814

1

1

N

O

T

E

Symbols of United Nations ‘documents are composed of capital letters com.y$&$t@ wi hAigures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
$fatio’r& k&&ment.
.1. * ,’
I:‘;:,.
Do&iments of the Security Council (symbol Sl . . .) are normally published in
&arterly Supplements of the Officid Records of tha Security Council. The date
I..il”‘; J .--iI:of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which infost
: b *i ~&&&&Us; \&f$‘&ven.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions und
Drcisions of the Security Corrncil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before -1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

!

1
1
1
II
1
1

’
i
1

,

lQ4th MEETING
@eld in Mew York on Fridtiy? 21 Febj-uary 1975, at 3 p-n~
president: Mr, HUANG Hua (China).
Present: The repreqentatives 6f the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, Franqe, Guyana, Irrqq, Italy,‘Japan, Mauritania;
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, -United Republic
of Tanzania: -and Unit&States of America.
Proyisional
1.

agea$a (S/Agenda/Ml)

Adoption of the agenda

2. The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 17 February 1975 from the Perma\ nent Representative. of Cyprus to the United
Nations addressed30 the President of the Security
C o u n c i l (S/l 1 6 2 5 )

Rents ‘which led to the announcement, on 13 February
1975, by the Turkish Cypriot leadership.
4: .As members of the Council are aware, I had the
opportupity to discuss the current Cyprus situation
wit! Turkish and Greek leaders in Ankara and Athens
on 19 February.
5 . The object of these visits was to get a first-hand
impression of the views of the two Governments on
the present state of affairs and to examine ways in
which progress might be made out of the present
impasse towards a peaceful and lasting settlement.
In particular, I took the opportunity to discuss the
possibility of new approaches to the negotiating
process and the conditions required for such approaches to have a chance of success. Needless to
say, the positions of the Government of Cyprus and
of the two communities in the island were foremost
in my mind during my talks in Ankara and Athens.

The meeting wus culkd~to orh-~r ut 4 p.m.
‘+daption .of. the agenda

The #u&ion jn Cypyus!
Letter dated 17 February 1976 from the Permanent
representative of Cyprus tD the United Nations
addressed to fhe Prqfdent of the Security Councjl
(S/11625)
1? The PRESIDENT (trgnskution from Chinese): In
accordance with the decisiop taken at the 1813th
meeting, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite the represerltatives of Cyprus, Turkey and
Greece to p@icipate in the debate without the right
to vote!
At the invitutiop pf ?he ‘President. Mr. C/e+ies
(Cyprus), Mr: Q/cuy {Turkey) und Mr. Curuyunnis
(Greece) took plcqs u! the Council ruble,
2. The PpESIDEMT ftrunsiution
from, Ch@wse):
I call on the Secretary&General, who wishes to make
a statement.
3. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The Council
has before it my specisl report on recent events in
Cyprus [S/11624], which deals in particular tiith the
talks between Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktas on the,
substance pf the Cyprus problem and with the develop-

6, Qe leaders in both capitals gave me a comprehensive statement of their views on the current situation in Cyprus, grid their representatives here in the
meetings of the Security Council have given the
members a full account of these views. I shall therefqre confine Fyseif in this statement to my own
general conclusions.
7. In the first place, I wi?h to emphasize the great
seriousness of the risk to peace and security in the
eastern Mediterranean which the Cyprus situation
represents 9s long as no progress is made in resolving
it along the lines laid down in the relevant United
Nations resolutions, especially General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX), which was endorsed by the
S,ecurity Csuncii in its resolution 365 (1974). The
suffering of the people of Cyprus can only increase
the gravity of this situation. It is the duty of the
Council, therefore, as well as of the parties directly
conceme+I, to exert all possible efforts to ensure that
real and timely progress is made towards a lasting
settlement,
_
’
8. In all fpnkness one of the main impressions
I have gained in recent days is the expectation of the
parties concerned and of the world in general that
the United Nations can and should shoulder its
responsibilities in this matter. Indeed, the Cyprus
problem represents a cticial test of the effectiveness
and credibility of the Organization. It is, of course,
up to the Council to decide how best to deal with

the present situation, to regain momentum towards
a peaceful settlement and to decide on the procedures
required to achieve these aims. Needless to say; the
good offices of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative are available, as they have always
been, to assist the efforts of the parties .themselves
and of the Councfl.
9 . As members of the Council know; I have attached
great importance to the talks between Mr. Cierides
and Mr. Denktas, the negotiators ‘for the two communities in Cyprus. These talks began during my
visit to Cyprus last August, dealing first with humanitarian questions and later’ also taking tip ,political
questions. As a result of the recent developments
described in my report, these talks are now suspended,
The developments have created a new and tense
situation, because there is now a vacuum which can
all too easily be filled by renewed violence.
10. I still believe that talks between Mr. Cl&-ides
and Mr. Denktag, in the presence of my Special
Representative, could provide a basis, for progress;
although I fully tecognize the need for a new and
fresh approach to the negotiating process. The success
of such a new approach inevitably depends on the
creation and maintenance of conditions in which all
parties are prepared to agree to participate. I discussed
this problem in some detail during my talks in Ankara
and Athens and suggested some new possibilities
which might make the resumption of the negotiating
process possible.
11. As members of the Council are well aware;
there are very great differences between the parties
on matters of substance, which are reflected in
disagreements over procedure. It is obvious that
flexibility and a willingness to make concessions and
to avoid unilateral actions are of the utmost importance, if any progress is to be made. I have done
my best in my recent talks to urge the necessity
of such an attitude on all. sides and to suggest ways
in which a better atmosphere for serious negotiation
might be created. With the same end in view, I have
conveyed to the leaders in each capital the main
points made to me in the other, in the hope of
reducing at least some of the differences between
them.
12. Despite their basic differences,’ I believe that
there is a desire in both capitals to find peaceful
solutions to their respective difficulties, and ‘a keen
realization of the dangers of a failure to do so, dangers
that are not confined to Cyprus alone. I do not have’
to stress here what a further deterioration of the
situation in Cyprus could mean for international
peace and security. I am Sure that the desire for a
peaceful solution is shared by the leaders and the
people of Cyprus. It is on this basis that we must
build. Peaceful settlement is an urgent necessity if
we are to avoid further tragedies and disasters, and it
is to that end that our best efforts must be made.

It seems to me that the best way to attain tbis end is
for the parties to make renewed and sincere efforts
for the full and speedy implementation of General
Assembly resolution 3212. (XXIX) and 1 Security
Council resolution 365 (1974) and, as a part of that
endeavour, to find ways of reactivating the negotiating
process on a new agreed basis. Obviously $my .solution must be based on the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and non-alignment of the ~Republic
of Cyprus, as stipulated ;in the General Assembly
1
resolution. ’
13: I do not .believe that .*it would be appropriate
for me to enter into greater detail at this stage;‘ I
would merely wish to repeat that it is vitally important
to, create as soon as possible conditions in which
meaningful negotiations for a settlement can iproceed.
I earnestly hope that the deliberations of the Council
will, be ‘helpful in attaining this objective.
~
.’
.‘. :.
14. j ‘The PRESIDENT (trundution from L-; hinese):
I now call on the representative of Greece.
13. ,Mr. ,CARAYANNIS (Greece): The SecretaryGenera! has just,returned from a very long and possibly
very tiring trip, which he unfortunately had to shorten
in order to be here for these discussions. $1 should
like to thank. him very much, for doing that, and I
wish to express the appreciation of my Government.
During his trip the Secretary-General staykd for a
night .in Athens. We have always been very happy
to receive him in Athens and this time we had special
reasons to appreciate greatly, his efforts with respect
!,
to the question of Cyprus. :
16. Since I have been called- on to speak and in
order not to take the time of the Council on another
occasion, I should like to refer to the statement
made yesterday [1813th meeting] by the representative of the Soviet Union. Mr., Malik referred in his
statement to what the Foreign Minister of Greece
had said at the twenty-ninth session of the General
Assembly about the position of Greece on the question
of the union of Cyprus with Greece. In referring to
that, I believe that the representative of the Soviet
Union implies a desire-to hear that position’again, if
possible. I have no difficulty at all in reiterkting the
position of my Government, .,which is against the
union of Cyprus with Greece and against partition.
I

17.. The PRESIDENT (trun.&tion from Chinese):
I now call on the representative. of Cyprus. /
18. Mr,. CLERIDES (Cyprus): I have found it
necessary to ask to’be allowed to speak in [order to
correct some inaccurate statements made by
Mr., Celik;. who I believe waa,not correctly briefed
on a number of facts. Before, going to that part of my
s,tatement, I should like to comment upon the/remarks
made by i Mr. Celik to the ‘effect. that the
delegation here does not represent Cyprus
that is.the’ reason why he was- allowed to

should like to remind renresentatives that Mr. Celik
was allowed to speak under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, which gives any person the right
to speak if invited by the Security Council, a rule
which existed long before the Cyprus problem arose.
1
1 9 . Mr. Celik immediately ,asked why,it was necessary to bring this matter before the Security Council.
He went on to give a most inaccurate description of
the intentions of the Cyprus Government in bringing
this matter before the Council. ‘1 shall answer
Mr. Celik’s question why it was necessary, although
I did so extensively in my last statement.
3.
20. The reason why it *was necessary to bring this
matter before the Council was, first, because there
has been no implementation of General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX) or of the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council.. The only real fact that
Mr. Celik contributed in his statement yesterday was
the frank admission, for ivhich I am grateful to him,
that indeed there has been no implementation of
those resolutions: he gave an interpretation to the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council to the effect that the withdrawal of the Turkish
forces from Cyprus and the return of the refugees to
their homes were intended to take place after a
peaceful solution of the Cyprus problem had been
reached. I do not agree with that interpretation, but
I am sure that the Council .is in a better position
than I to determine whether resolution 3212 (XXIX)
and the relevant resoiutions of the Council, while
speaking of respect for ‘the independence, sovereignty
territorial integrity and non-alignment of the Republic
of Cyprus,’ were intended to convey that foreign
forces of occupation were to remain on the island
until a solution of the ‘Cyprus problem was found.
21. Mr. Celik stated that if the Turkish forces were
to be withdrawn from Cyprus there would be no
security for the Turkish .Cypriots. In my statement
of yesterday I said that, long before the’ second invasion of Cyprus,-after the first invasion had established a short beach-head in July-I had proposed
that the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus’
(UNFICYP), enlarged .as necessary, could undertake
the protection of the Turkish Cypriots, and all Govern-’
ment forces could be withdrawn from areas in which
Turkish Cypriots werevliving. I am very happy’ the
Secretary-General is here at thi,s meeting, because
I will refer to a conversation I had with him during
the second Geneva conference. Not only did I make’
the afore mentioned statement; when I was told
that, because UNFICYP contained troops only from
non-Moslem countries; it might be helpful if I accept
the principle that contiugents from Moslem countries
be included in it and’that areas inhabited by’Turkish
Cypriots be placed utider the protection ,of. Moslem
contingents in Cyprus, I immediately answered
affirmatively, and I s&l that because we were a nonaligned country, because we believed in nonialignment, we would very ,much like to see contingents
‘

African,
from -non-aligned countries-Moslem,
Asian-join UNFICYP. And yet that proposal was
not accepted, and immediately upon the failure of
the second Geneva conference the Turkish forces
advanced and occupied 40 per cent of the territory
of the Republic and furthermore devasted that area,
expelled its Greek inhabitants and looted and destroyed
their properties. That is the operation that the Turkish
side and the.Turkish Government call a peace-keeping
operation to save the independence of Cyprus.
22. I now state that I am willing and propose, if
the Turkish forces withdraw from Cyprus, to dismantle
the National Guard, to hand over its arms to an
enlarged peace-keeping force, agreeing also to the
expansion of that force by the addition of nonaligned contingents, Moslem and others. At the same
time I also propose to begin serious negotiations in
Cyprus or to continue the intercommunal negotiations
in Cyprus for the purpose of arriving at a solution
freely-but not at gun-point.
23. Mr. Celik alleged that in 1963, we had expelled
the Turkish members from the Government. That is
far from the true situation. In 1963 there was regrettable
intercommunal violence. As a result of that violence,
the Turkish members of the Government, including
the then Vice-President, Mr. Kii@k, left the Government. Mr. Kii$k himself publicly proclaimed that he
was no longer Vice-President of the Republic of
Cyprus but the President of the Turkish Cypriot
community and its administration. Therefore it is
quite clear that .Mr. KiiQik, the Vice-President, and
his. ministers were not expelled by the Cyprus
Government.
24. Furthermore, it has been alleged that the Greek
Cypriot members of the House of Representatives
expelled the Turkish members and that they had laid
down conditions for their return that were unacceptable
because the Turkish members were in fact expected
to ignore the 1960 Constitution. The fact is that the
Turkish members of the House of Representatives
left it of their own free will. As soon as the fighting
ceased and a peace-keeping force was established, one
of the first things I did as President of the House of
Representatives was to invite the Turkish members
to a meeting in the presence of the Commander of
the Force, the late General Thimayya, and ‘at that
meeting the following arrangement was arrived at.
First, the Turkish members would for safety reasons
be escorted to the House of Representatives by
UNFICYP. Secondly, while they were within the
precincts of the House of Representatives, I and the
Greek members of the House of Representatives
would accept full responsibility and take the necessary
measures for their protection. Thirdly, I explained to
the Turkish members that as long as Mr. KiiGiik,
the then Vice-President of the Republic, maintained
the position that he was not the Vice-President of the
Republic, I would not send him any laws enacted by
the House for promulgation by him, as provided in
3

the 1960 Constitution, because I could not accent
promulgation of laws of the House of Representatives
by a person who had abandoned the title of the office
of Vice-President of the Republic.
25. Those were the facts, and to show, that they
were the facts I wish to state now, and have it noted,
that since 1963, despite repeated elections in the
House of Representatives, we have kept the places
of the Turkish Cypriots vacant and have not taken
unilateral action to fill those vacancies by electing
Greek Cypriots. That is the reality of the situation.
-__-_-_
._--.
26. Mr. Celik objected also that even now,. at this
moment, there are no Turkish Cypriots in the Govemment of Cyprus. Again I am happy the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. WeckmannMuiioz, is in this chamber; he can correct me if what
I say does not correspond to the truth.
27. As soon as the Sampson Government was forced
to resign I asked Mr. Weckmann-Muiioz, together
with General Prem Chand, to accompany me to the
house of Mr. Denktas, which they very kindly did,
while firing was still continuing in the Nicosia area.
28. What was the object of my visit? Inthe presence
of Mr, Weckmann-Muiioz and of General Prem Chand,
I saw Mr. Denktas-at that time I was the Acting
President of the Republic-and made the following
offer to him: that, together, we should form a Govern-’
ment, consisting of Greek Cypriots and Turkish
Cypriots, to occupy ministries in accordance with
the provisions of the 1960 Constitution. Mr. Denktag,
I must confess, showed interest in my proposal, but
he informed me then and there that this was a matter
on which he would have to consult with Turkey. He
told me that he was flying to Turkey by helicopter
next morning and that I would have the reply on his
return. And indeed I got the reply on his return,
which was that what I was proposing was not possible
for the time being.
29. So why does Mr. Ceiik complain that there,are
no Turkish members in the Government of Cyprus,
when the fact is that the offer was made but was not
accepted and we were told that it was not the time to
do what we were proposing?
30. Mr. Celik attempted to convince us that the
Turkish Cypriots were the co-founders of the independence of Cyprus and that in fact they are the
defenders of that independence now. Let me refresh
his memory.
31. It is a fact-and I shall not deny it, because I do
not wish to state anything before the Security Council
that is not accurate-that the struggle of the Cypriot
people in 1955, which is known as the EOKA struggle,
was waged for the purpose of obtaining independence
and the union of Cyprus with Greece. It is a fact
also-and Mr. Celik cannot deny it-that the Turkish

position was that the colonial status should
tamed or that if the British were to ileave, Cyprus must
be partitioned. So I fail to see the!differenci between
our .position .regarding union with Greece jand their
position regarding partition or, as t e best alternative,
remaining under colonial rule..
P
.I
1
32:: It has been said that the Turkish side is defending
the independence and the non-alignment. of the
Republic. I do not think I shall be misstating’ the facts
if I say that the Turkish side has never been ?in favour
of non-alignemeni. Indeed,.! can establish that that
is ‘the position by referring to the concre’ i e action
taken by’ the then Vice-President of the Republic,
Mr. KiiQik, when the Archbishop Idecided, b President of the Republic of Cyprus, to participate in the
First Conference of Heads of States or Government
of Non-Aligned Countries, which took “place at
Belgrade. Mr. Kiisiik threatened to use, and he actually
did use, his right of veto on foreign policy td prevent
the participation 6f Cyprus ‘in the non-aligned group.
33. With regard to Mr. Celik’s allegation that the
Turkish side has been the defender of the r ndependence and territorial integrity ef the Republit, let me
refer to certain statements made by important Turkish
politicians while they were ” in o&e as, \ Foreign
Ministers or Prime Ministers ofthe
: Republic of;rurkey.
34. As long ago as 1955 the then Foreign ‘Minister
of Turkey, the late Mr. Zorlulunfortunately he was
executed, for crimes ,he had not committed-made
no secret, at the Tripartite Conference on the Eastern
Mediterranean and Cyprus held in London in August
and September 1955, of the fact that Turkey had
claims on Cyprus. Mr. KemalSatii; a former Minister of Turkey, said in a public statement n 1964:
“Cyprus will be divided into two sections i one of
which will join Turkey’*. In June 1964, Mrr Erkin,
then Foreign Minister of Turkey, spelled it out clearly
when he said during an interview with a newspaper:
“The radical solution would be to cede one” part of
Cyprus to Greece and the other, closest to the Turkish
Asiatic coast, to Turkey”. Hardly three months later,
on 8 September 1964, the ,former Prime Minister of
Turkey, the late Ismet Iniinii; addressing !no less
august a body than the Turkish National Assembly,
said the following with reference to the Geneva talks
of that year: “Officially we promoted the federation
concept rather than the partition thesis so as td remain
within the provisions of the Treaty”. On 18 April
1964, a secret document was issued by the then Prime
Minister, the same Mr. InGnii, in which the pattitionist
plan of Turkey, the well-known Attila Plan which
we know has now been applied; was set out. )
35, It w&Id be strange if eithk;Turkey or themb urkish
Cypriots, who have been committed to a policy of
partition-which means that one tiart of Cyp.ru$ would
become. Greek territory and another part of Cyprus
would ,become Turkish territory-were to j I be the
defenders of either the independence of Cyprus or
the no&aligned policy.
‘,‘i
4
4
“’

:

36. I should now like to deal briefly with some minor
points made by Mr. Celik. Before I do so, I should
like to repeat what I said in my statement yesterday:
that my purpose here is neither to apportion blame
nor to be sidetracked from the main issue that is
before the Security Council and must remain before
the Council; that is, the non-implementation ..by
Turkey of resolution 3212 {XXIX). I stated yesterday
that I would not be sidetracked from that issue.
Despite Mr. Celik’s attempts to sidetrack me, I shall
stick to my original statement that, if necessary,L I
would reply briefly to Mr: Ceiik and that I would
be brief not because of lack’of proven facts or because
of lack of convincing arguments but because I intend
to try to maintain the crucial issue before the Council
-that is, whether resolution 3212 (XXIX) has been
implemented or whether ‘new procedures are needed.
37. I’ would add at this point that my statement
yesterday that the situation in Cyprus has been
aggravated, that there has been no implementation of
resolution 3212 (XXIX);and that new procedures are
needed has been borne, out by the statement made
today by the Secretary-General.
-38. Mr. Celik, referring ‘to a recent statement- by
Archbishop Makarios, said,that the latter had publicly
stated that he would not lower the standards of the
struggle. It is the easiest thing in the world to take
statements out of context and pretend to make
something out of them. He omitted the first part of
the statement in which. Archbishop Makarios said
that we would not accept faits accomplis nor agree
to solutions at gun-point, and that we would not lower
the standards but would continue to fight until it
was possible freely to reach a solution.
39. Mr. Celik also complained that-a national council
had been set up! and he thought that was another
piece of Greek Cypriot i chauvi&tic patriotism. The
council which has been-set up, and of which I am an
ex officio member, is a council on which all the leaders
of political parties in Cyprus are represented. And I
must say that all thosewho were invited ‘and have
agreed to participate were,given the terms of reference
for the solution of the:Cyprus problem, which are
these: we accept independence, we accept non-alignment, we accept a federal solution of the problem of
Cyprus, and we accept a bicommunal federation. And
that is another answer to Mr. C&k’s allegation that
all we intend to do is ytreat the Turkish community
as a mere minority:
:;.
yI
40. Offering 18 per cent of the population of Cyprus
a national community, offering them participation in
the Government in a tfederal system, offering them
a substantial area in.‘the north which would be
predominantly Turkish,i:to be governed by them,
offering them other areas-1 ask you, is that the way
in which minorities have been treated? Or have we
gone beyond that and ‘reached the point where we
are no longer taking into consideration the actual
-.5

size of the Turkish minority-which is only 18 per cent
of the population of Cyprus-but, for the sake of good
faith, of peace, of security and of stability in our
area, are offering far beyond what an 18 per cent
minority deserves?
41. Mr. Celik complained that I have not been
honest in not disclosing that I had contacts with
Athens. Every time I have contacts with Athens a
public statement is made, and I have no objection
if Mr. Denktas has contacts with Ankara. I consider
it natural, just as I consider it natural for me to have
contacts with the Greek Government. What I consider
unnatural, what I would never permit, is Greece
dictating the solution to me or dictating what I am to
do on each item-something that is happening on
the Turkish side. I could give examples here that
can be borne out not only by my own statements but
by statements of other independent personalities.
42. An agreement was reached between Mr. Denktag
and myself on the release of all prisoners of war; the
agreement was concluded, it was being implemented, when, suddenly, the implementation of the
agreement stopped. Mr. Denktas was very embarrassed, because when I asked him about it during
the Cyprus talks in the presence of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, he said that
he wanted to stick by the agreement he made with me,
that he had difficulties, with Ankara and that he was
trying to clear the matter with Ankara. It took him
one whole month before he could clear that matter.
43. Mr. Celik referred to another inaccuracy: to
the “fact” that since we started the intercommunal
talks in Cyprus on the substance of the Cyprus
problem .the following priorities had been on the
agenda: first, airport; secondly, seaports; thirdly,
discussion of the powers and functions of the federal
Government in a federated State. I did not prepare
the agenda; the agendas were always prepared by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Weckmann-Mufioz. -There are many copies of
those agendas. The agendas were agreed to by
Mr. Denktas and me, and the order of discussion
was: first, powers and functions of the central Government; secondly, airport; and at a later stage seaports
were also added. So his statement is completely
inaccurate. The reason why powers and functions
were not discussed was Mr. Denktas’s repeated
refusal to discuss them, on the ground that- he was
not ready for such discussion. Because of that we dealt
- - _ as_ the
_ _airport, and at this
- with
7-. such other- problems
point I wish to state what the Turkish position was
with regard to even the temporary reopening of the
airport.
-44.
The Turkish position was this: first, it did not
-.-.-___
want the airport to operate under United-Nations
control or supervision. Why? Because, in their opinion,
the airport should be controlled and supervised by the
three guarantor Powers, or at* least-as Mr. Denktas

.

stated-by two of the guarantors, Greece and Turkey.
He then went on to propose that there should be two
managers of the airport, one Greek Cypriot and one
Turkish Cypriot, and that there should be a board on
which there would be equal representation of both
communities; any decision taken by the board, though
it had equal representation, would have to be ratified
by -the two managers, one Greek Cypriot and one
Turkish Cypriot, and in case of disagreement the
matter had ,to be referred to the guarantors to be
decided.‘. Furthermore, they demanded that the
entrance to the terminal building be controlled by
the guarantor ,powers. Two separate entrances would
have. to be made, one .from the Greek area and one
from the Turkish area, to be controlled separately
by’the Greek Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots. And,
as .ifl that were not ‘enough, there was the most
peculiar proposal regarding the FIR (Flight Information
Region) system, by. which aircraft are guided to the
airport, helped,to land and to take off.
.
.
,’
45.‘; -That proposal really shows the true facts of the
situation. The FIR was to be under two managers,.
one Greek and one Turkish. If planes came to land
at the Lamaca airport, which was under the control
of the Greek Cypriots, the Greek staff of the FIR
would ,.deal with them. If aircraft came to the Turkish
airport, which the military had established in the area
c:ontrolled by the. Turkish forces, the Turkish members
would deal with such aircraft. If there was an interriational aircraft landing at the airport, there would be
a’joint staff, and in the event of disagreement, while
the aircraft was flying around the airfield we would
have to ask the guara tor Powers to tell us what to do.
..,,
46, how .that..lwas ,i the proposal which I had to
reject. But., furthermore, there was this point-a very
interesting point. If there were not sufficient Turkish
Cypriots ‘expert in the work of the FIR, we could
not use Greemriots
_ .._. but
- should
.__~ allow
__. a number of
experts from Turkey to come and work’at%sox
That was. the proposal which was put before me in
all seriousness, and I was expected to accept it.

49. But what surprised me most was that’ when
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
proposed that at least, until a solution was to.be found,
there was preliminary works that had to be done; such
as searching the airport for explosives, clearing debris,
repairing the electricity system of the airport and
repairing the runways-a suggestion which I welcomed
and accepted immediately-Mr. Denktag 1 said: .“I
cannot answer. I must get ‘instructions”. hnd after
getting instructions, whether from ‘Mr.. {Celik or
somebody else, he came back and said: “No, I cannot
agree to this”. It is not’my purpose. to answer every
point that Mr. Celik made, but there is one point
which, despite my. desire to .be brief, I cannot resist
replying to. And that is his statement; in the: presence
of so many experts from the United Nations in this
hall, that 13,000 Greek Cypriot refugees have- been
allowed to return to their+homes:
!
50. That is a figment: bf,:his imagination. What
actually happened is this. The small town of Athienou
was abandoned by the Greek:Cypriots as the Turkish
forces were approaching. There was then a de facto
cease-fire. The United Nations had plackd posts
between the small town or&-village and the Turkish
forces. And the inhabitants-encouraged, they return.
Athienou is in the area under the control of the
Government.
,’
.
!
,
/
51. The Turkish generosity’& this: They say: “Yes
they are in your area, tiut they4are within range of ou;
guns. And because we are not :tiring our-/guns we
have allowed you to go ,back, to your homes”. That
is the fact of the’matter on the’question of the so called
return of 13,000 Greek Cypriots .to their homes. In
fact it is not 13,000; .it is simply 5,000 inhabitants
of a town which has been spared the catastrophe of
being looted because of a de facto cease-fire; because
of the generosity of UNFICYPfn placing posts between
the Turkish line and this village. And if we .are back
-and I must ‘say that I am grateful-it ,is because
the Turks are not firing their guns. If, on the basis of
that philosophy, anything which is within irange of
their guns is really under their’c&trol, then we should
evacuate the whole town of Nicasia. Indeed, we should
evacuate the’whole of Cyprus, because Cyprus is a
small island and heavy <calibre artillery could easily
hit targets from one- side almos,t to the other:

47. Bout that Proposal was not the original four
pr%rciples,which
Mr. Weckmann-Muiioz had submitted
to .us, and which both-and I say it in front df himMr.. Denktas and I accepted as a basis for negotiation.
It .was ‘a completely new situation after Mr. Denktas
had’asked for an adjournment- to discuss the matter
further because, as he informed us, he was.expecting
an
‘;, *expert from Turkey to advise him on this issue.

//

52. Now 1 come to what I h&e to say with regard to
Mr. Celik’s questioning why we speak of Greek Cypriot
missing persons, and-how we ‘know that they- were
not killed during the coup: My answer is this. We
know the persons who were kiIIed in the coup; because
they were killed fighting. There were other people
near them. We have statements.from them. Those we
want are the people who have not been killed in the
colap and about whom there’&’
positive evidence thaty-they have been arrested or ,takeniner$ by the.
Turkish side and have never81$n found since.
_- .-.I:_- ---- --. --.-- - - - -1_.
53. ,I Shall give only three examples. The first example
is the following. One hundred,and forty people from

48. At the second meeting, after his exnert arrived.
he put before us the propos%ls which I habe explained
to the Council. It is true that subsequently Mr. Denktas
said that.though he would not accept United Nations
supervision of the airport, he was prepared to agree
that a manager from .abroad-neither Greek nor
.Tuikish nor British--could be brought in, but that,
again,:he would have to, work under the supervision
of the guarantor Powers.1 again rejected that proposal.
4..

6

the small village of Achna, mostly old men and young
boys, .not in military uniform, either too old, or too
young to be soldiers, were forcibly removed by the
Turkish ,forces and brought to the Nicosia garage of
Pavhdes, which was the centre where all prisoners
were brought..This fact can ‘be established by indisputable evidence. They ‘were seen there. In some
cases, the International Committee of the Red Cross
even has their names. \ :
.i

persons were moved. They were ‘finally .found after“I
months of captivity and turned over to me.
.>
*. .,-;
59. This is the kind of missing persons I arh after;
this is the kind of missing persons. concerning whom
I want freedom of movement for UNFICYP.‘.~’
: ‘,
,; :.: ‘.‘:
60. Now. Mr. Celik has told us that we want’ to
internationalize the Cyprus problem,, that we want ‘a
committee of the Security Cotmcil to go ,there to
establish the realities, the true facts.’ He says that
we are campaigning-as if we. were committing a
crime-to internationalize the Cyprus problem.
Mr. Celik’s statement suggested that the Turkish side
are the angels and that we are the devils. If we’ are
the devils, why does he object to having a fact-fin&Q
commission of the Council go there and establish
the facts and report to the Council? What do- they
have to hide that they do not permit the Red Cross
to move freely, as we have allowed it to move freely
on our side? Why do they not permit UNFICYP to
have the same freedom of movement as that._which.I
we have given on our side?

54. Then one good morning Turkish lorries came.
Forty names were called out. Those ‘so named were
taken to an unknown destination, and the Turkish
side has not been able to:give an account of where
they are or where they’can be found.
Ii,
55. I shall give another small example. In the village
of Yidoussa, ‘13 people. were arrested. The fact that
they were arrested has been admitted by Mr. Denktag,
and there is other independent evidence. Amongst
them there was a Greek’.Cypriot judge who was
holidaying in that area. “From there they were moved,
under escort of Turkish police; to a nearby Turkish
village. Up to that point‘there is ample evidence that
they were in the hands;of the Turks., But now, when
I ask for them, I am told: “We do not have them”.
1,,,
56. And then let me refer to ,one most pathetic and
regrettable incident-if incident is the right word for
it. A family of Greek”Cypriots-that
is to say, a
father, a mother and three daughters, one of whom
was married and had -a. 12-month-old baby in her
arms-were shot in cold,,blood.‘The child was killed;
the mother is now. an: invalid for life because her
spine was injured. Althuugh the girl and one of the
others who was wounded were in a Turkish military
hospitalfor months, theirnames were never given to
us. I must say here frankly that I am grateful to
Mr. DenktaS, who found them &nd returned at’
least the crippled ydunglady, *ho is now in hospital
abroad undergoing treatment.
.~...
:
f,
57. Finally, one more incident, that of a young boy
who has been missin$,’ like many young boys, and
who we were told recently
,. is in a Turkish hospital.

61. These are questions that can only lead ,,to ‘one
conclusion-that those who fear not the light-of day,
that those who are in favour of a fact-finding
commission,, have nothing to hide, or very little to
hide, and that those who try to oppose it have a lot
to hide.
.,
62. I should like now to deal briefly with. another
contention of Mr: Celik’s. He complains that we want
to internationalize the Cyprus problem., Do we .not
believe in the United Nations? Do we not believe
in the Security Council? Why is internationalizing
the Cyprus problem by bringing it to the ,world
Organization such a crime that it annoys Mr. Celik
or offends Turkey? Why is’ there such objection to
coming before the Security Council and informing ,it
that General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) has not
been implemented, that it will be necessary for a factfinding commission to go there and see “for itself
whether it has been implemented or. not&who ‘has
implemented it and who has not? /
I
;
‘:

58. Whether the Turkishside has honestly declared
all the prisoners it hab’and not only those it freed
-because between the, number of those they took and
those they freed there is a ‘very wide gap-can be
established by another fact. On one occasion I received
information that in a police station near Mr. Denktas’s
office there ‘were five undeclared prisoners of :warGreek Cypriots. I immediately telephone+ the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative and,
accompanied by him, I went to Mr. Denktag’s offIce.
I gave him the ‘inforr&tion and he went, to the
Turkish police station, Although the Red Cross had
repeatedly visited the pojice station, no trace had ever
been found of the per&s concerned-because the
Red Cross cannot move.freely. It has to give 48 hours’
notice in advance, and sduring those 48 hours the

63. And then, finally, why -does Mr. Celik want
the talks in Cyprus to continue without the resolutions
of the Security Council and the General: Assemblji
being implemented? The reason to me is obviousl
It is because with the presence’ of the ;Turkish
forces in Cyprus holding 40 per cent &the territory
of the Republic, he and the Turkish side have the
ability to create faits accomplis which would prejudge
the final outcome of the solution of the Cyprus problem:
And, again, could the Turkish side afford to’permit a
fact-finding mission to visit Cyprus? I say no, it could
not afford it, because the’picture which it is prese’nting
to the world-a picture of Turkey having undertaken
a peace-keeping operation-would be destroyed
immediately when, it was. established ,beyopd reasonable doubt by an independent inquiry from, this
7

Security Council that this peace-keeping operation in
Cyprus, this Turkish peace-keeping force in Cyprus,
has looted 200,000 Greek homes, and has not even
respected the summer residences of ambassadors in
Cyprus. I am glad that there are so many representatives at this meeting of the Council whose countries
have ambassadors in Cyprus, and I would request them
to telegraph their embassies in Cyprus and ask them
whether or not their residences in Kyrenia have been
looted. Of course the Turkish Cypriots cannot afford
to permit an independent inquiry, because an independent inquiry would establish not only that
200,000 Greek Cypriots have been turned into refugees
but also that their properties have been grabbed-and
there is no other word to describe it-illegally by a
force purporting to be a peace-keeping operation
force, and given to Turkish Cypriots. Not only their
homes but their places of work, their shops, their
offices, their clinics-everything has been taken over.
In fact, such a commission of inquiry would establish
beyond doubt the rape of Cyprus.

Greek Cypriots, Mr. Clerides, has proved
the strange duality of his words and deeds. Having
insisted since yesterday that he would noi be sidetracked into apportioning blame, he made two
remarkable statements, one, yesterday and one today,
in which he did nothing but viciously attack Turkey
and the Turkish community in Cyprus, ‘which he
generously, at the end of his statement 1 ust now,
called his compatriots. So much for that double talk.
68. On the other hand, I should like to a dhere to
the policy of my delegation of answering only representatives of Governments whose legitimacy we
recognize. It gives me pleasure to be able to say that
1 could repeat word for word what my co!league of
Greece said a few moments ago, even those remarks
made in response to the representative of the Soviet
Union. But that is a matterthat I shall deal with when
I have the opportunity to make my statement on
matters of substance.
I
69. I should Iike it to be recorded that m Government attaches the greatest importance to the rnvaluable
efforts undertaken once more by the Secretary-General
in the course of this week to hJp the parties &oncerned
on the Cyprus issue. His visit to Ankara is donsidered
most fruitful by my Government and I wish to thank
him publicly for it.
i
70. Many revelations of off-the-record, on-therecord, secret, confidential, private and public conversations regarding many issues made by Mr. Clerides
in reply to what the representative of the Turkish
Federated State of Cyprus, Mr. Celik, said,yesterday
will no doubt have to be answered by Mr. Celik,
When the time comes, Mr. President, I hope that you
will kindly give him an opportunity to do so.
1
71. I had hoped that the Security Council would deal
with matters of a loftier nature than gossip-type
statements. Unfortunately, Mr. Clerides’ appearance
here has not changed, as I had hoped it would, the
form in which the Greek Cypriot side conducts the
debates in the Council, and.1 am the first to regret
it.

64. I am a man who has committed himself to the
independence of Cyprus, to its territorial integrity,
to its non-alignment and to the principle of peaceful
coexistence on the island of Cyprus. Not only because
that is the only way that Cyprus can survive but
also because, bearing in mind the tremendous risks of
further tension in Cyprus for the peace of the eastern
Mediterranean and in fact for the whole Mediterranean,
I believe that there is an urgent need for the Security
Council to take steps so that a reasonably early
solution of the Cyprus problem may be found, a
solution freely negotiated and freely accepted. I do
not consider that our responsibilities concern Cyprus
only; they also concern the peace of the world.
65. Even at this tragic period through which my
country is going-and my country includes Greek
Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots-I am willing to
stretch out my hand and take the hand of Mr. Celik
and say: “Let us, without gun-point diplomacy and
without armies of occupation, place our Greek Cypriots
and Turkish Cypriots under the protection of a peacekeeping force-remove the national contingents,
remove the armies, remove the foreign interference,
and let us, as true Cypriots, find that solution to
the Cyprus problem that will bring about harmony,
prosperity, peace and co-operation between my
compatriots the Turkish Cypriots and my compatriots
the Greek Cypriots’“.

72. Despite all provocations, which unfortunately
these days extend also to an unbelievably &rude antiTurkish publicity campaign that I am tolb is going
on in the’press in Greece, my delegation wi I continue
all its efforts to maintain a dignified level o1 debate in
this chamber. I hope to be able to maintain! this stand
up to the end of this series of meetings of th!e Council.
1
73. The, PRESIDENT (tnrnsltrtion
jkwt j/Chirwse):
I call on the representative of Cyprus.
1
74. Mr. CLERIDES (Cyprus): It was not$my intention, and it is not my intention now, to reply to the
comments made by Mr. Olcay. However I should
like to inform him that if his difficulty in ans 1 ering me
stems from the fact that he does not wish t$ recognize

66. The PRESIDENT (tr-trmlntion Jionr Chitww):
The next speaker is --the representative of Turkey,
on whom I now call.
67. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I asked to speak after
I had seen the representative of Greece ask to speak
in order to make a statement that would not be longer
than the one he made. It will be only slightly longer
now as a result of the fact that one more Greek
statement has been made. The representative of the
8

me as the reoresentative of the Government ofCvorus.
I should be very happy, since I dislike prev&ing
anyone from answering me, if he could answer my
points by treating me as an individual. That might
facilitate the matter and Mr. Olcay could reply to the

substantive points that I have m&z--not to the gossip,
as he has described it-without halving any inhibitions
concerning his recognition of me.
The meeting rose ut 5.20 p.m.

9

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les Iibrairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous auprk de votre libraire ou adressez-vous g : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Genive.
KAK lIO.IY’IZITh

ZI3AAHFifI

OPI-AHH3A4BfW

-COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

OG%EAHHEHHhIX

HAIWH

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras en
todas partes del mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, &cc&n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

82-61202-September

I

3-2,200
