VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Commitlee

consultation with the Governments concerned, ways to involve
youth organizations in development activities of the United
Nations at the national leve!.
2. The Office of Public lnformation of the Secretariat
should continue to work in close co-operation with the Joint
United Nations Information Committee to provide information
on the issues on which the United Nations is working in a
way as to attract young people, at the national leve!, and
interest them in the ideals and principies of the Charter of
the United Nations.
3. Bearing in mind proposals contained in his note on
the role of youth in the promotion and protection of human
rights,84 the Secretary-General should explore, _in consult~tion
with Governments, the feasibility of identifymg a natJonal
liaison and focal point on youth within each country, taking
into consideration the networks of national correspondents
which have been set up to faci!itate communication between
countries and with the United Nations in allied fields of social
development.

B.

REGIONAL

4. The regional commissions should be requested to pay
special attention to the question of active participation_ of
youth in the process of national development and to cons1der
at their forthcoming sessions appropriate forms in which
regional commissions can assist Governments in this field and
establish contacts with youth and youth organizations.

C.

JNTERNATIONAL

5. Toe scope of the quarterly Youth Jnformation Bulletin
should be extended and it should be published in French and
Spanish in addition to English, within the existing budgetary
allocations. Both governmental and non-governmental bodies
dealing with youth should be encouraged to provide material
for dissemination through the Bulletin and to assist in its
distribution so that it may be made available to as many
young people and youth organizations as possible.
6. The work of the Office of Public Information and the
Center for Economic and Social Information of the Secretaria!, in the creation of suitable radio and television programmes about the United Nations and its activities, should
be intensified within their existing budgetary allocations.
7. The Secretary-General should continue to utilize the
existing channels of communication between the United Nations
and international and regional non-governmental youth organizations.

32/136.

Draft Convention on the Elirnination of
Discrirnination against W ornen

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31 / 136 of 16 December
1976, in which the General Assembly, ínter alía, approved the Programme for the United Nations Decade
for Women, 8 " which entails the adoption by thc Assembly of the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and its entry into force during the
first half of the Decade, between 1976 and 1980,
Convinced that the adoption of that Convention and
its entry into force will contribute to thc implementation of the principal objectives of the United Nations
Decade for Womcn: Equality, Developmcnt and Peacc,
and to the realization of the principies of equality bctween men and women,
Noting the work done in 1976 by the Commission
on the Status of Women at its twenty-sixth session with
84 E/CN.5/528 and Corr.l.
85 Official Records of the Economic

and Social Council,
Sixty-second Session, Supp/ement No. 3 (E/5909), annex V.

155

a view to the elaboration of the draft Convcntion on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women, 86
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
2058 (LXII) of 12 May 1977, in which the Council
requestcd the General Assembly to take up consideration of the draft Convcntion as a mattcr of urgcncy
at the outset of its thirty-second session with a view to
its adoption at that session,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Working Group of the Third Committee on the Drafting of thc Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Womcn; 8 •
2. Recommends that a working group should be
established at the beginning of the thirty-third scssion
to continue consideration of the articles which have
not becn completed during the current session;
3. Expresses the hope that thc draft Convention
will be adopted during its thirty-third session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third scssion, as a matter of high priority, an
item entitled "Draft Convention on thc Elimination of
Discrimination against Women".
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/137.

lnternational Research and Training Institute for the Aclvancement of W ornen

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 31/135 of 16 December
1976, in which it cndorsed the establishment of an
Intcrnational Research and Training Institute for thc
Advancement of Women, and Economic and Social
Council resolution 1998 (LX) of 12 Mav 1976 concerning the same question,
·
Recal/ing f urther thc reports of the Secretary-General on the progress achicved towards the establishment of the lnstitute, submitted to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session 88 and to the Economic
and Social Council at its sixtieth and sixty-second
scssions, 8n
Convinced that thc early establishment of the Institute
will contributc substantially to the realization of the
objectives of the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women 's Yearno and the Programme for the United Nations
Dccade for Women,u 1
Noting the preparations alrcady undertaken by the
Secretary-General for the establishment of the J nstitutc,
Considering that those preparations should be actively
continued and that a preliminary draft document describing the structure and composition of thc Institutc
should be prepared not later than April 1978,
~n A/32/218, annex IV.

'• A/C.3/32/L.59.
"' A/31/310.
S!J E/5772, E/5926.
!Hl Report of the World Conference on the lnternational
Women's Year (United Nations publication., Sales No.
E.76.IV.1 ), chap. 11, sect. A.
!ll O/ficial Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-second Session, Supp/ement No. 3 (E/5909), annex V.
