S/2003/1141

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 December 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 1 December 2003 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo covering
the period from 1 to 31 October 2003 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-63810 (E)

041203

*
0
3
6
3
8
1
0
*

S/2003/1141

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
Kosovo Force
1.
During the reporting period (1-31 October 2003) there were just under 20,400
Kosovo Force (KFOR) troops in-theatre.
Status of partner/non-NATO contributing nations
2.
On 3 October, command of KFOR was handed over from Lieutenant General
Mini to Lieutenant General Kammerhoff.
3.
On 3 October, two German military police soldiers were killed near Macitevo,
when their Wolf vehicle left the road and rolled over down a slope.
Security
4.
Although the general situation in Kosovo remained generally stable from
September through October, several violent intra- and inter-ethnic events occurred
that highlighted the current fragility of Kosovo society. While the number of interethnic violent acts decreased, serious crimes, including murder and kidnapping,
increased. A total of 30 murder or attempted murder cases were reported and 11
people were killed. Tensions throughout this period remained relatively high.
Particular events that drew strong local reaction were the launching of PristinaBelgrade technical talks, the brief detention of the chief of the Kosovo Protection
Corps (KPC), Lieutenant General Agim Ceku, in Slovenia on a Serbian arrest
warrant, a harassment incident against KFOR troops at the Jashari family
compound, anti-Serb harassment in Obilic and the arrest by the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) police of five Kosovo
Albanians for war crimes in Kacanik.
5.
On 7 October, the Kosovo Supreme Court in Pristina extended the detention of
Shefket Musliu for 3 months, 1 until January 2004.
6.
On 4 October, in the town of Gnjilanje, a Kosovo Albanian man shot at a 75year-old Kosovo Serb woman. She was sent to the Pristina hospital in critical
condition. 2 The suspect was arrested by UNMIK police and detained. The reason for
the shooting incident was a dispute over the house that is illegally occupied by the
Kosovo Albanian man, but owned by the Kosovo Serb woman.
7.
On 26 October, in two separate incidents in the village of Obilic, Kosovo Serb
houses in the vicinity of the Stolic family home were fired upon. No injuries were
reported. KFOR ordered Multinational Specialized Unit (MSU) patrols into the
village to further survey the damage and investigate the incident fully.
8.
On 29 October, in Istok, a bomb exploded under the car of a KPC officer. The
quantity and type of explosive (100 grams of TNT) was not enough to destroy the
__________________
1 Musliu remains in the Dubrava detention centre in Pristina under the jurisdiction of UNMIK. He

was transferred from the Bondsteel Detention Facility on 7 July 2003. The previous extension
was confirmed on 8 August for 60 days.
2 Recent report indicates that this 75-year-old Serb woman died on 5 November in Belgrade’s
Military Medical Academy.

2

S/2003/1141

car. This explosion was probably a warning to the owner of the car not to extend his
operations beyond his own area of responsibility.
Attacks against KFOR and KFOR operational activities
9.
During October 2003, there was one violent act directed against KFOR
personnel. On 25 October, two French light armoured vehicles on patrol stopped
behind a house east of Srbica, belonging to the Jashari family, where they were
approached by six Kosovo Albanian men. The patrol withdrew after one of the
Kosovo Albanians unleashed a dog at the vehicles. Shortly afterwards, two light
armoured vehicles stopped near the house for the second time. During the halt, 20
Kosovo Albanian men approached them with pistols and bats, behaving
aggressively. Four of them climbed on top of one of the vehicles with bats and
physically threatened the patrol leader. The patrol immediately withdrew from the
area and reported the incident to the UNMIK police. A meeting was arranged
between a representative from KFOR and the Kosovo Albanian family. KFOR’s
representative stressed KFOR’s right to execute its mission. Following the incident
and extensive press coverage, the Jashari family sent a written apology to the
Commander of the Force, who accepted it and now considers the incident closed.
10. KFOR continues to show its determination to improve the security in the
theatre and to support UNMIK in reducing crimes that threaten Kosovo’s safe and
secure environment.
11. On 28 October, UNMIK police, alongside KFOR troops, arrested five former
Kosovo Albanian rebels charged with war crimes in Kacanic. A local United
Nations-run court charged the five with the illegal detention, torture and killing of
four ethnic Albanians suspected of collaborating with Serbs during 1998 and 1999.
They are also charged with torturing a fifth victim, who survived. All five were lowranking members of the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA).
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
12. The armed forces of Serbia and Montenegro and the Ministry of Internal
Affairs Special Police continued to remain in compliance with the terms and
conditions of the Military Technical Agreement.
Kosovo Protection Corps
13. The Commander of the Force has appointed the Deputy Commander, Major
General Gay, as the KFOR Inspector General of KPC.
14. On 22 October, Lieutenant General Agim Ceku, KPC Commander, was
arrested by the border police at Ljubljana airport just as he was about to fly back to
Kosovo. General Ceku was detained for 12 hours on an Interpol arrest warrant
issued by the Serbian authorities during the Milosevic era. The international
community applied substantial diplomatic pressure on the Slovenian authorities and
General Ceku was released on 23 October. General Ceku arrived back in Pristina
late that day and was met by several hundred Kosovo Albanian supporters.
15. During October, 33 roll-calls were made at KPC units. The results continue to
show a low rate of absenteeism without permission, that is, out of the 1,125 persons
involved in the musters, 10 were absent without permission (0.9 per cent). The

3

S/2003/1141

results also show that the number of individuals on leave is at an acceptable level of
12 per cent (the minimum required presence at any one time is set at 75 per cent).
Outlook
16. Although the situation in Kosovo is generally stable, the intra- and inter-ethnic
incidents that occurred at the end of the month highlight the fact that stability
remains fragile.

4
