Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Volunteers
programme23 and expresses satisfaction with the progress
of the programme;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme for
the measures being taken by him in providing volunteers
through United Nations-assisted projects to the least
developed countries free and without charge against
their indicative planning figures;
3. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Prngramme and the Governing Council of
the Programme to continue to provide the United
Nations Volunteers programme with every possible
assistance to ensure its progressive integration into
United Nations-assisted projects in order to make the
programme fully operational;
4. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and the specialized agencies
and organizations of the United Nations concerned, as
well as the resident representatives of the United
Nations Development Programme, to promote with the
agreement of the countries concerned the use of United
Nations volunteers in United Nations-assisted projects
and to co-ordinate all voluntary activities within United
Nations-assisted projects with the Co-ordinator of the
United Nations Volunteers programme;
5. Requests Governments, international organizations and individuals to contribute in every way possible to the Special Voluntary Fund for the United
Nations Volunteers;
6. Requests the Co-ordinator of the United Nations
Volunteers programme to make renewed efforts for
recruitment of a larger proportion of volunteers from
developing countries;
7. Requests the Secretary-General and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme to report, through the Governing Council of
the Programme and the Economic and Social Council,
to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session
on the progress made in implementing the provisions
of the present resolution.
1109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2971 (XXVII). Special measures related to the
particular needs of the land-locked developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 63 (III) of 19 May 1972,
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its third session, 24 concerning
special measures related to the particular needs of
the land-locked developing countries,
Recognizing that the position of the land-locked
developing countries, in particular owing to the high
costs of transportation, the poor development of their
infrastructure, inadequate and inconvenient transport,
storage and port facilities in most transit countries and
the unfavourable trend of transport tariffs and charges,
23 E/5146.
24 See Proceedings

of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.11.D.4),
annex I.A.

39

is a factor seriously inhibiting the expansion of their
t•rade and economic development,
Recognizing the need for the international community and the international organizations concerned
to take co-ordinated action in order to secure more
rational treatment< for the land~lockced developing
countries,
Recognizing that investments in the field of transport
often affect investment decisions in other fields,
Conscious of the urgent need for national and international financial institutions to accord appropriate
attention to the special needs of the land-locked developing countries by extending adequate financial and
technical assistance to projects designed for the development or improvement and maintenance of the
transport and communications infrastructure needed
by these countries,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade 25 recommending financial and/ or
technical assistance for these countries, particularly
with respect to infrastructure of all kinds,
1. Invites the developed countries, the United
Nations Development Programme and other competent
international organizations to provide technical and/ or
financial assistance to the land-locked developing countries for feasibility studies and investment to assist them,
at their request, in their economic development, so as to
adapt it to their particular geographical situation, and
requests the Secretary-General to report periodically
to the General Assembly through the Economic and
Social Council;
2. Further invites the United Nations Development
Programme, in close collaboration with the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, to undertake operational activities in the field of industrial
surveys to help these countries, at their request, on a
national, subregional or regional basis to evaluate
structure, operation, development possibilities and their
future needs in the field of industrial development,
with particular attention to the specific industries
outlined in paragraph 3 of resolution 63 (III) of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
3. Invites the Economic and Social Council, in consultation with the appropriate organizations of the
United Nations system, to study the desirability and
feasibility, including possible ways and means, of establishing a special fund for defraying the additional
transport costs of land-locked developing countries and
to report its findings to the General Assembly at its
twenty-eighth session.
2109th plenary meetinf?
14 December 1972
2972 (XXVII).

Review of criteria for calculating

indicativP planning figures

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
on its fourteenth session, 26
Noting the report of the Governing Council's Working Group on Review of Criteria to be Followed in
~5 Resolution 2626
26 Official Records

(XXV).

of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 2A (E/5185/Rev.1 ).
