S/2003/125

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 January 2003
English
Original: French

Letter dated 27 January 2003 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
As you are aware, my Adviser for Special Assignments in Africa, Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari, is participating actively in promoting the peace process in Angola. The
efforts he has made have had a positive impact on the relationship between the
Angolan Government and the United Nations. On 14 September 2002, I appointed
Mr. Gambari as my Special Representative for the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1433 (2002), of 15 August 2002.
Mr. Gambari successfully chaired the Joint Commission, an instrument for
expanded dialogue between the Government and the União Nacional para a
Independência Total de Angola (UNITA), with the participation of the Troika of
observers (Portugal, the Russian Federation and the United States of America),
designed to find a solution to issues relating to national reconciliation and the
accomplishment of the tasks remaining under the Lusaka Protocol (S/1994/1441,
annex). The Joint Commission completed its work on 21 November 2002 and
Mr. Gambari returned to Headquarters, where he is continuing to perform his
functions as non-resident Special Representative, and is helping the Angolan
authorities and UNITA to overcome the difficulties associated with the social
reintegration of demobilized persons, encouraging respect for human rights and
working for national reconciliation.
In addition, Mr. Gambari regularly gives me advice on other issues relating to
Africa and on the work of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on the Causes of
Conflict and the Promotion of Durable Peace and Sustainable Development in
Africa. In the context of the proposals I have submitted to the General Assembly
with a view to carrying forward the reform process, I have decided to entrust to Mr.
Gambari additionally the task of coordinating and guiding the preparation of special
reports on Africa in the Secretariat and to place under his responsibility the
resources allocated to the Office of the Special Coordinator for Africa and the Least
Developed Countries.
Mr. Gambari will continue to give me advice on certain issues relating to
Africa, at my request, and is still associated with the initiatives to strengthen peace
in Angola, harmonizes the support of the Secretariat for the Ad Hoc Open-ended
Working Group of the General Assembly, and coordinates and guides the
preparation of reports relating to Africa in the Secretariat.

03-23370 (E)

030203

*0323370*

030203

S/2003/125

For the reasons set forth above, I have therefore decided to extend until 28
February 2004 the mandate of Mr. Gambari in his capacity as Adviser for Special
Assignments in Africa.
I should be grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2
