UNITED

NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

MEETING:

23 FEBRUARY

1982

CONTENTS

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/233 1) . , , . . , . . . . , . , , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . .
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President , . . . . , . . . . . , , . . . , . , . . . . , . . .
Adoption of the agenda , , , . . . . . , . , , , , . . . , . . , . , , , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
(n) Resolution 498 (1981);
(b) Special report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (S/14869);
(c) Letter dated 16 February 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/14875). . . . . . , , . , , , , . . . , , , , #.. . . . . , . , . . . . . , , . . , . . +. . . . . . . .

SiPV.233 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Suppleuwnts of the @ffkk~l Records of tkc Seccrrity Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
bl.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcsolrrtiorzs
trrd
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2331st MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 23 February 1982, at 3.30 p.m.
President

: Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

P,?r.ssrzt: The representatives of the following States:
China,
France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama,
Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America %Zaire.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2331)

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Resolution 498 (198 1);
Special report of the Secretary-General
on
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(S/ 14869);
Letter dated 16 February 1982 from the Permanent Representative
of Lebanon to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/14875)
The meeting

Expression

of the agenda

nm called to order- at 4 pm.

of thanks to the outgoing President

I. The PRESIDENT:
As this is the first formal
meeting
of the Security Council for the month of
February,
I should like, on behalf of the Council, to
express our thanks to the President for the month of
January,
Mr. Oleg Troyanovsky,
the Permanent
Representative
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the .United Nations, for the great skill, wisdom
and courtesy with which he conducted our affairs
last month.
Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Resolution 498 (1981);
-(b) Special report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/14869);
(c) Letter dated 16 February 1982 from the Permanent Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/14875)
2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter from

the representative of Lebanon in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite him to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitbtion of the President, Mr. Tm’ni (Lebanon) took n place at the Council table.

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should also like to inform
the Council that I have received a letter dated 23 February 1982 from the representative of Jordan [S/14878]
which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request the Security Council to extend an invitation to the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate
in the Council’s consideration of the item ‘The situation in the Middle East’, in accordance with the
Council’s usual practice.”
4. The proposal by the representative of Jordan is
not made pursuant to rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure but, if approved by the
Council, the invitation to participate in the discussion
would confer on the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) the same rights of participation as those
conferred on a Member State pursuant to rule 37.
5. Does any member
on this proposal?

of the Council wish to speak

6. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): First, I should like to take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Sir, on your accession to the office
of President of the Council and to thank the representative of the Soviet Union for his service during the
past month.
7. The United States delegation has on many occasions explained the reasons why we oppose the special
procedure that appears to give the PLO the same
rights of participation in the proceedings of the Council as if it represented a State. The PLO is not a
State; it is a political movement which presents its
claims in the name of a collectivity whose members
live under various political jurisdictions. No formula
justifies this departure from the rules of procedure
of the Council. The formula proposed seems to us to

‘P

seek without basis to enhance the prestige, and indeed
to falsify the status, of those to whom it is directed.
8. We have always stressed that we have no objection to the Council’s hearing the PLO representatives;
indeed, we have no objection to the Council’s hearing
the representatives of any political group with a stake
in questions discussed here. But we consider that this
can be accomplished legally only on the traditional
basis of rule 39, which empowers the Council to grant
hearings to persons speaking on behalf of non-governmental entities.
9. Accordingly, we ask, Mr. President, that you
put to the vote the terms of this proposed invitation.
The United States will vote no.
IO. The PRESIDENT:
If no other member of the
Council wishes to speak at this stage, I shall take it
that the Council is ready to vote on the proposal by
Jordan.
A Ivtc II’~.Staken by show of hands.

of the Secretary-Gened

Cln Ihe Unifd

Force in Lebanon (LJNIFILl, ~HMI
document S/14875, which contains the text Of a lettel
dated 16 February from the repl-e%XltZltiVe
Of
Let,anon to the President of the Council.
Nations

Interim

14.

first

The

speaker

is

the

repl‘CSeIlkltiVe

of IXll-

anon, on whom I now call.
15. Mr. TUBNI (Lebanon): Of the now innurner:~hlc
debates held by the Council on South Lebanon in the
past few years,
none
resembles the present one: it is
unique
in that there is no mandate of UNIFIL
to
renew, no breach of a cease-fire, no attacks on Beirut.
or even on the “area of operations”,
no sudden fitireup of violence. And yet the stage is set, aS if WC Wel‘L:
nearing a major showdown.
16. The Council, when it met on 18 December- 11)8I
meeting],
ruled in its resolution 498 (198 1) thltt
it would
[232&h

‘&review, within two months, the situation :IS iI
whole in the light of the letter of the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the Secretary-C&neral, dated 14 December 1981” [S/147021.

I/l.fil~*orlr: China, Guyana, Ireland, Jordan, Panama,
Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zaire

17. Hence, our debate today should take place in the
atmosphere of intellectual
serenity
and politieul
wisdom which we were denied in the past.

d,qairzst: United States of America

Ahstaining: France, Japan, United
Great Britain and Northern Ireland

cia] report

Kingdom

of

18. This, Mr. President,
is, we believe,
whirt
prompted you to give us all, since you started your
consultations on 16 February, time to reflect und
exchange views on the best possible course to follow
if we are to avoid another crisis and enable UNIFII.
to perform the peace-keeping mission entrusted to it
by the Council nearly four years ago Irrsolrrtio~r
~2.5
(1978)];

At the in\Vitrrtiorl of the President, Mr. Terzi (Palesti,ic Libcrotion Organizntion) took a place at the side
qf thr Corrmil chmher.

19. We have indeed been reassured not only by the
style and perceptive spirit with which you conducted
those consultations, but, more generally,
by your
presence in the Chair this month. While congratulatiJlg
You, therefore, as is the custom, on the assumption of
Your responsibilities, I would add that your intimate
and profound knowledge of Middle
Eastern questions, not to mention Your long record of objectivity
and wisdom in the Council, is a guarantee-if
any
were needed-of
enlightened
leadership
and, WC
dare hope, a successful conclusion as well.

11. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 23 February
1982 from the representative of Jordan [S/14883], which
reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request the Security Council to invite Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States, to participate
in the consideration by the Council of the question
entitled ‘The situation in the Middle East’, in accordance with rule 39 of the provisional rules of pro-’
cedure.”

20. May 1 also say, since it is now publicly known
that Your are about to retire from the United Nations
that your contributioil to the constant concern of tdi
Council with my country’s plight has been more
dramatic than appeared on the surface of things. 1;0r
this, and for everything else, the known and the
unknown, please accept Lebanon’s
sincere al-,preciation.

12. If I hear no objection I shall take it that the Council agrees to accede to this request.

13. The PRESIDENT:
The Council is meeting today
in accordance with paragraph 10 of resolution 498
(1981). Members of the Council have before them
document S/l4869 , w h’ICh contains the text of a spe-

21. Mr. President, as soon as the Secretary-Gener>i]
issued his special report to the Council on 16 Februa1.y
2

[.S/14869], my Government
found it necessary to
write to you [S/14875] and reiterate our requests of
last December [S/14792]. I need not, therefore, at this
stage, elaborate on them again.

standing the present context of crisis escalation- in
Lebanon and the Middle East, we strongly believe that
the Council has within its powers the capability of
reversing what otherwise appears to be an irreversible
process towards conflagration and war.

22. You have. further, received, as has the SecretaryGeneral, a delegation of Lebanese parliamentarians
who have expressed the legislative power’s sentiment
on the stand taken by this Government.

31. In the face of Israeli threats to re-invade Lebanon-often
expressed with a unique genius fol
inventive scenario-writing-the
Council is indeed
called upon, and expected, by the peace-loving nations
to reinforce the already existing conflict-control
mechanisms and undertake the necessary actions to
prevent a frail and volatile cease-fire from becoming
yet another prelude to death and destruction.

23, I am instructed, however, to emphasize that the
increase in UNIFIL
numbers recommended
by the
Secretary-Genera1
must clearly and unequivocally
be related to the full implementation
of resolution 425
(1978), and so must the notion of the “joint phased
programme of activities”.

32. The requests presented to the Council on 14 December 1981, and repeated last week, are very moderate when measured against the tremendous dangers
the world is confronting. We are not falling prey to
blackmail by terror. But the Council should not be
pressured into accepting as a fact that the situation in
South Lebanon will continue, spellbound by Israel’s
paranoiac obsessions, its grandiose designs, its apocalyptic war games and, last but not least, its capricious
reading of history, geography and the law of nations.

24. This basic principle has, in fact, been stated in
the Secretary-General’s
report, and we beg to insist
that it should be reflected in the resolution which the
Council will, we hope, find it possible to agree upon
unanimously.
25. The prospective increase will then be not merely
quantitative,
but also qualitative. It will be an expression of confidence and determination,
a renewed
act of faith in peace and the necessity-and
possibility,
we hope-of “peace-keeping”
Lebanon. It will also be
R source of added strength and credibility to UNIFIL,
and an encouragement to use, fully unhindered, all its
prerogatives as a deterrent to adverse military action
and all acts of violence that prevent it from carrying
out its mandate forcefully and with determination,
in the totality of its area of operations, up to the internationally recognized boundaries.

33. We count on you, Sir, and on the Council to
put an end to such an insane situation. We are confident that friendly Governments that are in a position
to influence events will respond, as they have in the
past, to the Council’s call. For Lebanon cannot be
allowed to drift as the one major casualty of a war
that others have chosen to wage on its territory, with
no hope for the Lebanese but to become’the casualties of peace, as well.

26. Over and over again, the Council has been called
upon to assess the possibilities of ever fulfilling the
objectives of resolution 425 (1978). In the light of
those objectives and of the results reported by the
Secretary-General
over the years, it appears pertinent
to us that the Council should ask itself the following
three questions, which literally restate the terms of
the mandate of UNIFIL.

34. What did we-what do we-request of the Council? To the three questions which we submitted earlier
in our statement, here are our proposed answers.
35. First, an injunction to ensure Israel’s total and
unconditional withdrawal so that the Genera1 Armistice Agreement of 1949’ may be reinstated.
36. Secondly, an enhancement of UNIFIL’s
bilities, qualitatively and quantitatively.

27. First, how, and when, is Israel going to “cease
its military action against Lebanese territorial integrity and withdraw its forces from all Lebanese territory”?

capa-

37. Thirdly, a strict and forceful implementation
of
a joint phased programme of action, agreed upon
between the Lebanese Government and the SecretaryGeneral, to ensure the gradual transition of the responsibilities for peace and security from UNIFIL
to the
Lebanese army, thereby restoring Lebanese sovereignty and territorial integrity.

28. Secondly, how, and when, is UNIFIL
going to
be enabled to achieve its purpose of “restoring international peace and security” in the area?
29. Thirdly, how, and when, is UNIFIL
going to be
allowed to complete its mandate successfully, by
“assisting the Government of Lebanon in ensuring the
return of its effective authority in the area”?

38. In previous debates, in the Council and in the
General Assembly, when the nature of UNIFIL
as
a peace-keeping force was discussed, we suggested
that rarely could such a dynamic mission be performed
successfully by a force that would be restricted to only
a static role. May we reaffirm here our strong conviction that if UNIFIL’s
dynamic character is not given

30. We cannot be so unrealistic as to be unaware
that there are no simple answers to such complex
questions. But, from past experience, and notwith3

a new lease on life, the Force will remain a helpless
hostage caught in the quicksands of the ever-expanding
cycle of turmoil and violence.

44. ‘That wanton Israeli devastation,
committed
under the very eyes and nose of UNIFIL-whose
courage, fortitude
and patience deserve deepest
appreciation-has
rendered it exceedingly
difficult
for the Force to fulfil the basic function for which it
was established four years ago, namely, to confirm
the total withdrawal of all Israeli forces from Lebanese
soil as provided for in Council resolutions 425 (19781
and 426 (1978), with a view to achieving full respect
for the territorial
integrity and sovereign indepep
dence of Lebanon within its internationally
recognized
boundaries,

39. The dynamics of war which hold my country
hostage have also captured the peace-makers. The
Council is left with no alternative but to save both:
UNIFIL
and Lebanon. We know of no greater service
to the cause of peace in the Middle East,.and probably
in the entire world, today.
40. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I should like, Sir, to
extend to you my most sincere congratulations
on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month of February 1982. Sir Anthony Parsons has,
over the years, rightfully earned the esteem, the affection and the recognition of all his colleagues because
of his outstanding and most knowledgeable grasp of
international
issues, not the least those pertaining to
the tragic turn of events in the Middle East, an area
in which he had a long and meritorious service, and
those people, including their afflictions, he understands
with deep insight and sympathy, as not too many do.
The constraints of diplomacy occasionally impel a
delicate agonizing between one’s powers of discerning
and unpalatable
situations over which control is
inherently circumscribed.
None the less, it is propitious that it is under Sir Anthony’s presidency and
guidance that the Council is seized of the unparalleled
tragedy and ordeal of victimized sisterly Lebanon.

45. UNIFIL
was never intended to be more than
interim in nature, because perpetuating it without
enabling it to overcome, in co-operation
with the
legitimate
Government
of Lebanon,
the present
totally unacceptable stcrtcrs ql~l would lead to an ever
expanding situation of war-which looms so ominously
and persistently
that it has been acquiesced in as
virtually
inevitable.
It is no longer a question of
“whether”,
but of “when”.
46. Lebanon was not a party to the war triggered
by Israel in 1967 with its sneak air attack on Cairo,
which resulted in massive occupation and annexation
of adjacent Arab and Palestinian lands, which continue to this day. Yet Lebanon has been added to the
list of occupied Arab and Palestinian territories. The
Israeli so-called de facto enclave, established deliberately by Israel in 1978 to circumvent and thwart
the implementation
of Council resolution 425 (19781,
has effectively prevented both UNIFIL
and the Lebanese army from carrying out their assigned task of
restoring the Lebanese Government’s authority in the
totality of the area assigned to UNIFIL
up to the internationally recognized boundaries, so that UNIFIL
and the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) might resume unhindered their normal
functions under the provisions of the General Armistice Agreement of 1949.1

41. I wish to pay the highest and most heartfelt tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Oleg Troyanovsky of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, who presided over’
the Council last month with great distinction, dedication and integrity and with consummate wisdom. His
presidency shone the more brightly as the Council
found itself seized of another fateful, unique and
grotesque act of aggression, when expansionist Israel
committed a blatant and audacious annexation of the
occupied territory of a sovereign, independent State,
the Syrian Arab RepubIic, with astounding disregard
of the Charter of the United Nations, the Hague and
Geneva Conventions,
all norms of international
law
and the very foundations of the intern?tional system,
42. I wish to express the deep appreciation of my delegation to the Secretary-General for his objective and
incisive special report of 16 February 1982 [S/14869]
on the tragic agony of Lebanon. That agony, I should
add, is manifested in the close to one million inhabitants of the south of Lebanon whose homes, farms,
industries, lands and infrastructure have been ravaged
by years of savage and incessant Israeli bombardment
from the land, from the sea and from the air.

47. It would be almost cumbersome to recall all
the resolutions
on this matter which the Council
adopted between 1978 and 1981, the last one being ’
resolution 498 (1981). Suffice it here to state that their
final objective of restoring Lebanon’s sovereign independence and territorial integrity has largely remained
ink on paper. There is not a flicker of light at the end
of the tunnel. It is for that reason that the Lebanese
Government
and almost all other GovernmenTs-ineluding those that met at the Twelfth Arab Summit
Conference held at Fez, Morocco, on 25 November
1981-are now asking for a fundamental reappraisal
by the Council.

43. A well-earned tribute should also be paid to the
indomitable
Under-Secretary-General
for Special
Political Affairs, Mr. Brian Urquhart, for his strenuous efforts in assisting the Secretary-General
in
working towards implementation
of the Council’s
repeated injunctions for withdrawal of Israeli forces of
occupation from the hallowed soil of Lebanon.

48. All the members of the League of Arab States,
while giving their regional commitment
to resolution
490 (1981) regarding the maintenance of the ceasefire, reiterated their collective view that the ceasefire was never to be considered as an end in itself but
only as a step towards the full implementation
of resolution 425 (1978) and towards the deployment
of
4

i
1
i
1
t
i

b

UNIFIL
in the totality of the area of operations
assigned to it in resolution 426 (1978). They further
stipulated that southern Lebanon should be under the
exclusive
authority of the Lebanese State, which
would help the Lebanese Government to deploy the
Lebanese army in the south and to carry out its national
responsibilities.

52. The glaring comparison between a tolerant and
enlightened
Lebanon and a bigoted and militaristic
Israel-camouflaged
of course with pretenses and
appurtenances
of democracy-was
too much for
Israel to take. A decade ago a retired senior United
Nations official was invited by an old friend to visit
Israel. He spoke glowingly about some of the major
projects which the latter had achieved. I told him to
concretize his impressions to enable me to gauge
in real terms the size of those achievements,
and
I followed that up by asking how he compared them
with those of Lebanon. He immediately
responded,
“Well, Lebanon is a different story, and Israel could
not withstand any comparison, except of course in its
military pursuits.”

49. The Israeli forces of aggression and occupation
manifestly think otherwise and plan otherwise, and do
got even attempt to mince words to beguile us about
iheir real objectives and aims, which are generic and
yet tailored in each instance to explain away their
inherent nature of unalterable aggression. In the case
of Palestine they invoke a distorted reading of heavenly dispensation even though it is blatantly untenable. In their annexation of the Golan Heights, they
expressed their tender concern for regularizing the
lives of the 13,000 remnants of what are in fact 200,000
full-fledged
Syrian citizens, at present uprooted.
These, incidentally, included 18,000 Palestinian refugees-perhaps
refugees for the third time-from
the
demilitarized
areas which Israel had usurped much
earlier, even earlier than 1967.

53. Thus the process of destabilization,
espionage
and the sowing of the seeds of dissension was set in
motion.
Every country has dynamic tensions and
differing venues, and Israel was determined to exploit
them in full measure in its determination to destroy
the fabric of Lebanese society and indeed of Lebanon
itself.
54. At the close of 1968 I attended a dinner party in
the mansion of the late and great co-founder of modern
Lebanon, Riad as-Sulh, a mile or two from Beirut’s
international airport. At about 9 p.m., as we were about
to be ushered in to dinner, the house reverberated from
a barrage of heavy explosions which, as could be
seen from the verandas, was occurring at the international
airport,
the famous Beirut international
airport, where Israeli war planes had systematically
destroyed 14 Boeings and other aircraft and maintenance facilities of Middle East Airlines, the national
airline of Lebanon. In addition, low-flying helicopters
were roaming the skies and firing their .500-calibre
machine-guns
indiscriminately
into civilian houses,
including the house w.here I was. In our host’s house
were gathered just a few distinguished ladies and
gentlemen. It is needless to add that in their hunting
spree the helicopters showered their deadly bullets
on huts and fragile Palestinian refugee encampments,
none of which had any arms, and not a bullet was
fired at the raiding vultures. The Israelis then justified
that murderous act by saying that it was carried out in
retaliation
for something done by one, two or more
Palestinian
resistance fighters who had allegedly
departed from Beirut international airport.

50. Even in the Sinai, from which they are scheduled
to withdraw with an exorbitant profit, the recalcitrant
settlers expressed their opposition to withdrawal on
grounds of love, tender love, for the scenic beauty,
the birds, the sea reefs and even the environment,
which they shudder to think the Egyptian people are
not qualified to preserve. I am sure many around this
table read an article in The Nelv York Tirnes in this
regard less than a month ago.
Why is it that Lebanon is such a target, such an
obsession for them? Quite apart from the irresistible
penchant for additional acquisitions, I am convinced
that the reason is subjective as well as objective.
Lebanon has posed to the Israeli militaristic rigime the
deadly challenge of a highly dynamic and enlightened
and truly democratic State in which adherents of all
faiths, creeds and ideological affiliations have achieved
miracles since the national accord of 1943 which culminated in Lebanon’s independence. It became the
recognized
centre-piece of the cultural, financial,
commercial
and developmental
accomplishments
which civilized tolerance and dynamic energy had
bestowed. It was a haven for figures of renown, regardless of their political affiliations or ideologies, when
political
or ideological adversity in a troubled Middle
East whose serenity had been disrupted by Zionist
aggression and exclusivity necessitated such a haven.
AI1 this was achieved without turning Lebanon into a
military barracks and without racist oppressive exclusivity and intolerance,
Hundreds of thousands of
Palestinian
refugees were welcomed and given haven
in a civilized Lebanon while Israeli bigotry and intolerance denied them their birthright to return to their
homes in Palestine, where their ancestors had lived for
thousands of years.
51.

55. Which other country in the world would destroy
the entire national airline of another country and play
havoc with the civilian population of that country on
such flimsy grounds? The Lebanese Government-and
the Israelis certainly know this-has absolutely nothing
to do with who arrives at or leaves from the international airport of Beirut. I am sure that the only
country that would do such a thing is Israel, whose
supporters are angered because the General Assembly
has described it as a non-peace-loving Member. That
act was followed by a systematic campaign of destabilization,
espionage, daylight bombings and assassi5

almost one million Lebanese citizens, including the
Palestinian refugees, and to use it as a springboard for
the seizure and annexation of south Lebanon with the
determination of stealing the waters of the Litani River,
which can produce 500 to 700 million cubic metres.
According to an authoritative
research paper by
Mr. Stouffer, a research associate at the Harvard
Center of Middle East Studies, published in Tile
Christinn
Science Monitor
of 20 January 1982, a
maximization
of the massive water robbery would
require annexation of south Lebanon to the north
beyond the Litani River in order to seize the Lebanese
Qarun Dam. A second projected Lebanese dam in the
early 1970s to irrigate the Central Bekaa Valley, the
researcher asserts, was blocked by Israeli intervention with the United States Government and international financial institutions.

nations of Palestinians and their Lebanese brethren,
including my own classmate at the American Univer-’
sity of Beirut, Kamal Nasser, a highly gifted poet who
had never carried a gun in his life, only a pen to write
poetry, and whose family founded the Bir Zeit University near Ramallah decades ago. The victims are too
many to enumerate. They include that late man of
letters Mr. Kanafani and scholars that were doing
research at the Palestine Research Institute, research
which, as I am sure everyone is aware, involved datagathering and the monitoring and compilation of Israeli
violations in the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories; it did not do any atomic or other scientific
research.
56. The carnage continued until everybody in Lebanon was forced to scramble for a minimum
of arms
to ward off that dastardly Israeli inhuman intellecthunting. Eventually the civilian population
of Lebanon was compelled to buy and carry arms to defend
itself. This is turn created a tense situation which led
to the tragic strife of 1975 even though the Lebanese
people are essentially one homogeneous family regardless of creed or denomination:
they have been so for
decades, for centuries. Furthermore,
every citizen of
Lebanon was totally convinced that the Palestinians
in Lebanon were involuntary
guests and refugees
whose only day of liberation would be the day when
they could. return to Palestine, and nowhere else.
They wanted to go back to their land, their farms and
their homes.

60. The Golan Heights annexed by Israeli occupation, are-according
to the Harvard researchereven more important, in the context of Israel’s future
policy, as, quite literally,
a stepping-stone for the
occupation of the south-eastern part of Lebanon and
physical control of the Litani River. The researchel
adds that, while estimates of the available flow from
the Litani River differ considerably, Israeli sources
argue that a minimum
of 400 million cubic metres
yearly could be diverted into Israel quite easily, or as
much as 700 million if the Lebanese dam upstream
could be destroyed or its spillways open.
61.

57: What I have just described was the genesis of
sisterly Lebanon’s
seven-year tragedy and ordeal,
which is virtually unparalleled in its magnitude and
human suffering. More than 150,000 have lost their
lives or been incapacitated as a result of those seven
years of turmoil. But again we find Lebanon’s agony
continuing
unabated because of objective
designs
which, even before its inception, Israel laid down
against Lebanon’s ‘sovereignty and territorial integrity. It was presented to the VersaiIles Conference
in 19 19 and debated officially in the Israeli Cabinet in
1954 and 1955, as excerpts from the diaries of the late
Moshe Sharett disclose. Ben Gurion had received the
plan of Mr. Sasson, an Arabist then acting as the
Israeli Ambassador to Ankara. Ben Gurion approved
the plan but had reservations on the timetable for
implementation
as premature. He told him that when
the time came it would be implemented.

The Harvard

researcher explains:

“Control
of the Golan is the necessary predicate
for the final move into Lebanon to acquire the Litani
River. Conversely, any return of the Golan area not
merely compromises
that longer-term
objective
but also threatens Israel’s pre-emption of the entire
flow of fresh water from the upper Jordan Rive]
basin.”
62. Members might recall the earlier phases, when in
1963 Israel diverted substantial amounts of the Jordan
River to the Negev-which
does not belong to that
area, it is a different area; when after 1967 Israel
destroyed the Khaled Dam at Mukhaiba, in Jordan,
and large parts of the East Ghor Canal, the sole irrigation artery to the east bank of the Jordan River;
the unabashed threat that, when implemented,
would
destroy Jordan’s al-Maqarin Dam well upstream on the
Yarmuk River; and the seizure of 95 per cent of the
occupied West Bank’s water resources and, finally, of
the upstream waters of the Hasbani, Banias and Litani
rivers.

58. It is amazing to find the similaritieh between that
scenario and the one which, as envisaged in the plan,
is at present being implemented by a Lebanese major,
that outlawed Major Sa’d Haddad who, at the instructions of his Israeli masters-and
he is of course on their
payroll-has
prevented
UNIFIL
from operating
unhindered
up to the internationally
recognized
boundaries.

63. Israel’s determination
to exact the last drop of
blood as well as the last drop of water from the millions
of people in the area is an integral and inseparable
part of Israeli strategy to cannibalize and depopulate
these historic and great lands and their peoples. It
should make it easier to understand the turmoil, the
wars, the annexations and the savagery which those

59, The ol$ective of the Israeli occupation of an
enclave-so-called
CI<J,fircro--is to use it to uproot
6

invaders
continue

have directly and indirectly inflicted
to inflict on the adjacent States.

and

Island”.
But if I may be permitted to make a very
brief response to that rambling and incoherent statement, it would be this. The tragedy of Lebanon can
be telescoped into one short phrase: Lebanon is paying
the price for the fact that it did not follow the example
set by Mr. Nuseibeh’s King in 1970. King Hussein
knew how to deal with the terrorist PLO in September
1970. The Government of Lebanon, for reasons of its
own, did not choose the same path. Therein lie the
seeds of Lebanon’s tragedy.

64. All the talk about*military
build-ups and missile
sites and the long litany of Israeli pretexts should be
left to Israel’s propaganda apparatus. The Council
is not the. appropriate forum for deceitful and ndive
excuses. For the Lebanese army itself has been denied
access to the south to help fulfil the Council’s basic
mandate as categorically provided for in its resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978) and all the subsequent
relevant resolutions. The fact that the Lebanese people
and their Palestinian refugee guests are determined to
prevent a free ride into Lebanon and, if attacked, to
fight to the last man, whatever the cost, is but a human
imperative for survival and, of course, a national duty.

69. The PRESIDENT:
I understand that Mr, Clovis
Maksoud, to whom the Council has extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure, wishes to make a statement. I now invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make that
statement.

65. On the occasion of a recent debate on this subject, a number of dignitaries, a former Prime Minister
and leaders and parliamentarians
representing every
denomination
and political affiliation in Lebanon came
to New York and other United States cities to press
their case for Lebanon’s
long-delayed
salvation.
They spoke with one voice: the voice of a free, democratic and cohesive Lebanon within its territorial
integrity and without Israeli forces stoking the pot in
the south and elsewhere to the boiling point in order
to continue the destabilization
of Lebanon. The
delegations portrayed the pulse, the hopes and the
aspirations
of true Lebanon-a
harmonious
and
undivided Lebanon as so effectively portrayed to the
Council over the years by its representative, Mr. Ghassan Tukni,

70. Mr. MAKSOUD:
Mr, President, I should like
to take this opportunity to extend to you our hearty
congratulations,
knowing full well your distinguished
career, your resilient wisdom and the great traditions
of democracy that your country represents. I also take
this opportunity to take note of the distinguished chairmanship of your predecessor, the representative of the
Soviet Union, during the very grave deliberations last
month.
71. We are meeting again today to examine a situation
in the south of Lebanon, where the deployment of
UNIFIL
has not been effective in ensuring the implementation of Council resolutions 425 (1978) and 490
(1981). There has been a defect in the ability of the
United Nations mechanism to implement the resolutions in the south of Lebanon.

66. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have just received a letter
from the representative of Israel in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite him to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

72. We have sought to reflect over the last few weeks
about the cease-fire which the United Nations was
instrumental
in bringing about. We have been able
to examine the meaning of the cease-fire, to reflect
about its significance and to realize, as the League of
Arab States and the Arab Summit Conference have
realized, that a cease-fire is not an end in itself and
that it cannot be a substitute for a policy that implements the resolutions of the Council. This is the first
lesson that brings about a reconvening of the Council
today. That is why it becomes crucial for the Council
to realize that, simultaneously with the cease-fire that
.has been obtained
after arduous negotiations
by
several parties and by the United Nations itself, there
has been an ominous deployment of Israeli forces in
southern Lebanon-threatening
at one time, blackmailing
at another-trying
to impose a situation
whereby any movement in southern Lebanon towards
implementation
of the Council resolutions has to be
carried out under duress and in a manner to preempt the aggressive disposition of those forces.

.

67. The PRESIDENT:
I now invite the representative
of Israel to take a place at the Council table in order
to make a statement in exercise of the right of reply.
68. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I do not think it is necessary
for me to respond to the rambling and incoherent
statement that was just heard from the representative
of the Palestinian Arab State of Jordan, who incidentally
interspersed it with reminiscences of his
culinary joys in the past. If anything, he has given
repeated evidence of his well-known fantasy and
imagination-so
much so that one had the impression
at times that he was converting the chamber of the
Council into the studio of the television series “Fantasy

73. There have been attempts to calm our fears, to
bring about a measure of strategic anaesthesia, by
telling us that missions will be sent there to defuse
the threat and that in a way Lebanon and the Arab
7

countries should be thankful that Begin did not carry
out his aggressive designs and intentions. So we are
meeting today in the Council with a cease-fire that is
still in operation, yet equally threatened by the ominous deployment and logistic behaviour of the Israeli
army in southern Lebanon.
74. We have heard in the past few minutes Israel’s
prescription for dealing with the situation. We have
seen that it is only an attempt to disqualify and disenfranchise the Palestinians of their right to return to
their homes and of their right to national self-determination and to force them into a permanent state of
haemorrhage because of Israel’s repeated attacks in
the various countries in which they happen to be transient populations, and also to deny them in perpetuity
of their right to self-determination.
And we heard the
United States representative today claiming-almost
implying-that
the PLO is usurping the representativity of the people of Palestine, despite the fact that
they have a framework of peoplehood and are entitled
to self-determination,
and that this has been recognized
by the international community. This was the prescription for dealing with the PLO implied by the representative of Israel. We see that what is taking place
in southern Lebanon is an attempt by Israel to settle
big accounts in a small territory. That is why, in reflecting today, without the sense of urgency and pressure that usually characterize the deliberations of the
Council, we find that what is taking place is that Lebanon and the entire world community are faced with
the blackmail
of an overpowering Israeli logistical
deployment near southern Lebanon, trying to say that
any attempt to implement
the Council resolution
would be at the cost of a recognition of Israel’s strategic hegemony in the region.
75. It is from this viewpoint that we have to look
at the needs of the south of Lebanon, not only for its
own reconstruction
but so that the Government
of
Lebanon, the central authority of that country, can
retrieve its full sovereignty and authority in the soutth
effectively and without equivocation,
the equivocation which Israel in the aftermath of its 1978 invasion
sought to interpose-a
mutineers’
situation-with

the aim of helping itself under the pretence of opendoor policy in the south of Lebanon. That was in fact
an attempt to cause a haemorrhage in the credibility
of the United Nations mechanism, the credibility
of
the central Government of Lebanon and the credibility
of any resolution that allows and entitles the Palestinians to return to their homes and to build a State in
their homeland, as is their right.
76. It is through these collective aspects of its policy
--the tri-dimensional
haemorrhaging
of the Palestinians, of their credibility and of their effectivenessthat Israel attempts to sap the capacity of the PLO to
play its role in the West Bank, East Jerusalem and the
Gaza Strip as the representative of the people there.
This is an attempt to undermine and destroy the Palestinian presence in the south of Lebanon physically and
in terms of the objective of liquidation, and to render
the Lebanese helpless and the Palestinians hopeless.
It is an attempt at creeping annexation all over. So
what we have in Israel is not a State but a nucleus of
an empire.
77. That is why, although the Council meets today in
the calm of the cease-fire, which is appreciated,
it
meets also in the atmosphere of tension and the ominous threat of an invasion that Israel has been planning
for long and is only postponing, while keeping Lebanon and the entire world hostage to its objectives of
colonial annexation, expansion and destruction. That
is why the prescription
that has been implied by the
Israeli representative
today is only a sign of the criminal intention to destroy and liquidate physically the
Palestinian political and social presence everywhere,
in all their places of abode, temporary or permanent,
as is the case in the lands of Palestine.
The meeting

mse at 5.05 p.m.

NOTE

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Natians publications
may be obtained rrom bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en ventc daos les librairics et Its agences depositaires du
monde cntier, informez-vous
auprits de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gentve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLlCACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.
