S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6520th meeting
Thursday, 21 April 2011, 3.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alzate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Colombia)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Vukašinović
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Sun Xiaobo
Mr. Bonne
Mrs. Ntyam-Ehya
Mr. Tillmann
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Khachab
Mr. Edokpa
Ms. Cortes Palma
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Govender
Mr. Parham
Ms. Kinyon

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-30799 (E)

*1130799*

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.30 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in this
meeting. Unless I hear any objection, I invite that
representative to participate in this meeting.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Saudi
Arabia.
Mr. Al Oyaidi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to thank Mr. Pascoe for his comprehensive
briefing to the Council. My delegation is delivering
this statement on behalf of the Arab delegations to the
United Nations.
I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of April. The Arab Group would like to express
its appreciation for this open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
This meeting takes place as the Israeli Government
persists in its intransigence and its illegal settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, jeopardizing the entire peace
process.
The Arab-Israeli conflict supersedes all other
issues in the Middle East, as there is no other regional
conflict that more greatly affects international peace.
What exacerbates the situation is the lack of good faith
on the part of the Israeli Government, which, instead of
seriously engaging in the peace process, continues to
confiscate more Palestinian territory, to build illegal
settlements, thereby creating new realities on the
ground, to kill and unlawfully evict Palestinians, and to
confiscate their land and property.
Israeli settlement activities undermine the
establishment of a lasting, contiguous and viable
Palestinian State. That makes it difficult for any
Palestinian Government to function effectively and to
convince its people that peace is achievable. It is
immoral that a nation under occupation must endure
punishment while the occupying Power pursues its
settlement activities with impunity. Peace is the only
way to achieve security for our Palestinian brothers

2

and for the Israelis, but we doubt Israel’s intentions
when it shows no sincerity with regard to peace. It
continues to undermine the negotiation process and to
pursue unilateral actions, which will not lead to peace.
It is time for Israel to realize that it is not above the
international standards of behaviour, which are based
on international law.
Most States gathered in this Council, including
the permanent members, have issued separate
statements against Israeli settlement activities. What is
needed is the adoption of a unified position clearly
reflecting that consensus. The Arab States have clearly
affirmed their commitment to peace through the Arab
Peace Initiative, which was initiated by the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia and later adopted at the Arab summit
in Beirut. The Arab States affirmed their commitment
to achieving a just and comprehensive peace based on
international law, but there was no reciprocal response
or commitment from Israel. There is an urgent need to
revive the peace process and for Israel to sincerely and
seriously engage in it, including an immediate freeze
on settlement construction, and to start dismantling the
settlements instead of expanding them.
The current situation in the besieged Gaza Strip is
another factor that has exacerbated the problem and
turned Gaza into a large prison through the siege
imposed by Israel, the occupying Power, unleashing an
appalling humanitarian disaster. The Israeli occupying
forces continue their barbaric military attacks against
the Palestinian people, the most recent of which took
place in Gaza on 2 April and caused deaths in Beit
Lahia, where many others were also wounded. That
was just the latest in a long list of Israeli violations of
international law, including international humanitarian
and human rights law.
Through its repeated attacks and crimes, Israel
shows that it considers itself above the law. It
disregards resolutions of international legality and
international law and the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. It
exploits the international community’s silence and
reluctance to address Israeli war crimes.
In this context, the Arab Group demands that the
United Nations, in particular the Security Council and
the Quartet, assume its responsibilities, put an end to
the brutal settlement activities and ongoing aggression
against unarmed Palestinian people in Gaza, stop the

11-30799

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

Israeli siege, open the crossings to and from Gaza, and
enforce the agreement on border crossings.
On the occasion of the annual Palestinian
Prisoners’ Day, the Arab Group urges the international
community, in particular the Security Council, to
compel the Israeli authorities to allow Palestinians to
visit their relatives in Israeli prisons and to release the
more than 6,000 prisoners being held there, including
300 who have been in Israeli prison for decades.
The Arab Group urges the international
community to implement the relevant United Nations
resolutions, in particularly those of this Council. It also
demands that Israel withdraw its forces from all Arab
territories, including the Syrian Golan. The steps that
Israel is taking or may take in the future to alter the
legal, physical and demographic nature of territories in
the Syrian Golan are null and void, and clear violations
of the United Nations Charter and resolutions of
international legality, including resolution 497 (1981).
The Arab Group also demands the withdrawal of Israeli
forces from Lebanon’s Sheba’a Farms, the Kfar Shuba
Hills and the northern part of Al-Ghajar. The Arab
Group asks that the Security Council strive to achieve a
just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East on
the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 497 (1981), the principle of land for
peace, and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The freezing of the peace process only fans the
flames of extremist tendencies and raises despair and
frustration to a dangerous level. It is most urgent to
take note that the Arab and Islamic public perceives the
international community to be lacking in seriousness
and credibility. We see the Security Council’s inability
to implement its own resolutions as a problem resulting
from the double standards in international relations, in
particular the fact that the use of the veto power
incapacitates the Council and makes it unable to assist
affected States. When the Security Council is able to
resolve this problem, the commitment and respect of
all Member States for all Council resolutions will be
assured. Such a change will result in making the
Security Council more credible and capable of
performing the tasks needed to maintain international
peace and security.
In conclusion, the Arab Group welcomes the
efforts of President Barack Obama to achieve a
comprehensive peace and the establishment of a
sovereign State for the Palestinian people, living side

11-30799

by side with Israel, as called for in his statement before
the sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly in 2010
(see A/65/PV.11), in which he spoke of the
establishment and recognition of a Palestinian State at
the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly, with
borders drawn at the lines of 4 June 1967 and with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mrs. Smith (Norway): This debate comes at a
time of momentous developments across the Middle
East and North Africa. The popular uprisings in the
region are ushering in a period of great opportunity. We
are hopeful that the people of the Middle East will be
heard in their rightful demands for political
participation and human rights. Our message to the
regimes and the people is clear — autocratic rule and
popular repression belong to the past; democracy and
freedom are the future.
In the midst of these historic changes, I would
like to take this opportunity to report on another and no
less historic event in the history of the Middle East
peace process. At the meeting of the international
donor group for the Palestinians in Brussels last week,
the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) and the United Nations reported to the donor
community that the Palestinian Authority is above the
threshold for a functioning State. The three
organizations have concluded that the Palestinian
Authority’s delivery of public services to its population
and implementation of reforms now compare
favourably with those of many middle-income
countries. The IMF even reported that Palestinian
reforms have come so far that the public financial
management system is not only ready to support the
functions of a State, but has even become a model for
other developing countries. At the same time the,
Palestinian Authority has reduced its dependence on
donor budget support by almost 50 per cent. In other
words, we have a functioning Palestinian State
structure.
This remarkable progress over the past few years
could not have happened without the determination and
hard work of Prime Minister Fayyad and his Cabinet,
the cooperation and support of the Government of
Israel, and the unwavering financial support of the
international donor community. This tripartite
cooperation within the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee

3

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

framework has greatly contributed to the success of
Palestinian State-building efforts.
However, there are still challenges that need
immediate attention. The Palestinian State-building
agenda is rapidly approaching its limits in terms of
what it can achieve within the political and physical
space available to the Palestinian Authority. As long as
Israel maintains control in Area C, which constitutes
60 per cent of the West Bank, economic growth will
not be sufficient to enable the Palestinian Authority to
become sustainable. To break this cycle and secure the
future sustainability of the Authority, Israel needs to
take further steps to dismantle restrictions and
measures in Area C, allow access to land and water in
these areas, and pursue a coherent trade strategy.

independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, and achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the region by September of
this year. Upholding that consensus and fulfilling our
commitments require urgent collective action on the
part of the General Assembly and the Security Council.
NAM regrets that all serious efforts exerted to
date by international and regional parties, including the
Quartet, to resume and advance direct negotiations on
the Palestinian track towards that objective have failed.
It is equally alarming for the Movement that merely
convening a Quartet meeting is becoming an issue in
itself, with consecutive meetings postponed and no
apparent determination to put forth a clear and credible
vision for achieving the desired solution.

As noted time and time again by the international
community, the Palestinian State-building track and the
political negotiating track are interdependent. Progress
on one track can only go so far without progress on the
other. For all practical purposes, the State-building
process has been completed. The road towards the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State,
however, goes through negotiations.

It is also highly regrettable that Israel, the
occupying Power, continues to defy the will of the
international community and pursues its illegal
settlement activities, along with many other policies
and practices, in a manner that constitutes the main
obstacle to all efforts to resume peace negotiations,
thus making it nearly impossible to realize the twoState solution on the basis of the 1967 borders.

But time is running out. We are only a few
months away from the internationally recognized
deadline for negotiating a framework agreement on
permanent status and a subsequent comprehensive
peace treaty. Now is the time for both parties to come
back to the negotiating table and show, through
decisive action, that this conflict can be ended and the
Palestinians can have their own independent,
democratic and viable State.

Israel’s refusal to renew the unilateral
moratorium on settlement activities; the recent
announcements regarding the establishment of
thousands more settlement units at an unprecedented
pace; and the continued Israeli demolitions of
Palestinian property, including historic places such as
the Shepherd Hotel in the Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood
of occupied East Jerusalem, and of numerous
Palestinian homes in order to build new settlements in
the heart of the city all affirm Israel’s expansionist
intentions and totally contradict the Israeli
Government’s alleged commitment to the peace
process and its sincerity in achieving the two-State
solution.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the honour to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and to start by
expressing the Movement’s appreciation for the
briefing given today by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs.
The Non-Aligned Movement believes that, at this
critical juncture, the international community must
renew its resolve to uphold its long-standing
commitment to the realization of the two-State solution
on the basis of international law and the terms of
reference of the peace process. There is an
international consensus that we must establish the

4

All indications at the present time, including
provocative
declarations,
accelerated
illegal
construction on the ground and the continued
revocation of Palestinian residency rights, reaffirm that
Israel is persisting with its unlawful attempts to alter
the geographic and demographic situation of the
occupied Palestinian territory, particularly East
Jerusalem, with a view to establishing new realities on
the ground that hamper the final status negotiations.
The Security Council should reject and condemn such
unlawful acts.

11-30799

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

The majority view of the Non-Aligned Movement
States that co-sponsored the draft resolution presented
earlier this year to the Security Council (S/2011/24) —
calling for the immediate cessation of all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, as
outlined in relevant letters addressed by the Chair of
the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement to the President of the Security Council —
reflects the international position on this most critical
issue. The Non-Aligned Movement regrets the fact that
the draft resolution was not adopted by the Security
Council as we had hoped and expected.
The Non-Aligned Movement therefore reiterates
its call for the Security Council to be resolute in
demanding that Israel abide by its legal obligations.
Israeli impunity must be tolerated no more and the
Security Council has the responsibility to ensure that
Israel abides forthwith with all of its obligations,
including those under the Fourth Geneva Convention,
relevant United Nations resolutions and the Road Map.
In this connection, the Movement takes note with
appreciation of the consultations undertaken by the
Government of Switzerland to implement the
recommendation made by the General Assembly in
resolution 64/254, of 26 February 2010, that a
Conference of the High Contracting Parties to the
Fourth Geneva Convention be convened on measures
to enforce the Convention in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. NAM stresses the
importance of a speedy resumption of the process of
consultations, with a view to convening a Conference
of High Contracting Parties at the earliest possible
date.
The Non-Aligned Movement condemns the
heinous Israeli military attacks on Palestinian civilians
in the Gaza Strip earlier this month, which resulted in
the killing of 19 Palestinian civilians, and regrets the
fact that the Security Council failed to react after
considering this serious matter. We call upon the
Security Council to take all necessary measures in
order to protect the Palestinian civilian population
living under Israeli occupation, in accordance with
international humanitarian law and in keeping with the
swift actions by the Security Council to protect
civilians elsewhere.
In this regard, NAM emphasizes the need to
ensure that Israel, the occupying Power, fully lift its
illegal blockade on Gaza, in accordance with its

11-30799

obligations under international law, resolution 1860
(2009) and all other relevant United Nations
resolutions. This unresolved crisis continues to have
serious repercussions for broader efforts to promote
peace and unite the Palestinian people, and continues
to inflict deep suffering on them.
In this connection, the Movement also
emphasizes once again the need for the reconstruction
of Gaza, and calls on Israel to open all its crossing
points with Gaza and allow for the sustained and
regular movement of persons and goods, including the
import of essential reconstruction materials, including
those needed for the long overdue reconstruction of
United Nations facilities and United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) schools, and normal commercial flows.
NAM also reiterates the need to empower UNRWA
with all the financial and human support needed to
undertake its mission effectively.
NAM strongly condemns the continued detention
and imprisonment of thousands of Palestinians in
Israeli jails, where ill-treatment and torture are widely
used. The Movement commends international efforts to
shed light on this crisis, including through the
convening of the United Nations International Meeting
on the Question of Palestine in March in Vienna,
focusing on the urgency of addressing the plight of
Palestinian political prisoners in Israeli prisons and
detention facilities. It is the conviction of the members
of the Movement that those prisoners, who include
children and women, should be immediately released,
and proper international inspection of their current
condition should be a priority for the international
community, particularly the Security Council and the
Human Rights Council.
There is unanimous agreement on the imperative
need for Israel to respect its obligations in order for
direct negotiations to be resumed towards a two-State
solution, based on resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008), the Madrid
terms of reference, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Road Map. The
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, must exert all efforts to ensure that Israel
abides by its obligations and commitments forthwith
and resume final status negotiations on appropriate
grounds so that we may this year realize the
independence of the State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

5

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

Turning now to Lebanon, NAM condemns
Israel’s ongoing violations of Lebanese sovereignty
and the recurrence of serious breaches of resolution
1701 (2006). The Movement calls on all parties
concerned to fully implement resolution 1701 (2006) in
order to end the current fragility and avoid a recurrence
of hostilities.

occasions, to freeze its settlement activities in the West
Bank, which includes East Jerusalem. In this
connection, Japan is deeply concerned that the Israeli
authorities continue to approve plans to build more
settlements. Japan does not recognize any unilateral
measures that prejudge the outcome of the final status
negotiations.

Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan or to
impose its jurisdiction and administration there are
null, void and have no legal effect. The Non-Aligned
Movement demands that Israel abide by resolution 497
(1981) and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, in implementation
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

At the same time, we call upon the Palestinian
Authority to continue its efforts to improve security
and fulfil its commitments to cease violence and work
against incitement. Japan strongly condemns the
murder that occurred on 12 March in Itamar, in the
north of the West Bank. Only negotiations, not
violence, can bring about a resolution of the issues.

The Non-Aligned Movement looks forward to the
leadership of the Security Council and the revitalized
Quartet setting the parameters that will govern our
joint efforts in the run-up to the establishment of the
independent State of Palestine in September. The
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its commitment to
work hand in hand with the Council, the Quartet and
other partners to ensure that we achieve our just cause.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): Thank you very much, Sir,
for giving us this opportunity to address the situation in
the Middle East. I would also like to thank Mr. Pascoe
for his comprehensive briefing, as well as Ambassador
Mansour and Ambassador Reuben for their respective
statements.
Japan strongly supports a two-State solution and
remains convinced that achieving such a solution
through sincere negotiations is the only way to achieve
durable peace. We believe that at present there is a lack
of mutual trust, which is preventing the resumption of
direct negotiations. We call on both sides to engage
with the United States and the international community
and to take steps that will create an environment
conducive to restarting direct negotiations. We strongly
encourage both parties to restart direct negotiations.
The two parties must abide by their obligations
under previous agreements, most importantly the Road
Map. We call on Israel, as we have done on so many

6

According to the assessment provided by the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the
United Nations at the recent meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee, the Palestinian Authority is now
above the threshold for a functioning State in key
sectors. Japan strongly supports the State-building
efforts of the Palestinian Authority and will continue to
provide assistance thereto.
We are seriously concerned about the recent
escalation of violence along the borders between Israel
and the Gaza Strip. We strongly condemn the targeting
of civilians. We continue to call for the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) and call on
Israel and the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip to refrain
from violence and to accept mutual coexistence.
Japan remains concerned about the humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip. Japan stresses the
importance of lifting the blockade while preventing the
flow of weapons into the Gaza Strip. We do not agree
with the blockade. We also call on those wishing to
provide aid to the Gaza Strip to coordinate
appropriately with relevant authorities to avoid
unforeseen incidents. We call on both parties to make
the difficult but necessary decisions to advance peace.
Japan will continue to make efforts to realize a just and
comprehensive peace in the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba supports the statement made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

11-30799

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the region, in particular in
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem,
remains deplorable. The situation in the Gaza Strip is
unsustainable. Cuba is deeply concerned by the
increasing deterioration of conditions there due to the
escalation of the military offensive carried out by Israel
over the past few months. A ceasefire is urgently
needed.
Israel’s flagrant and deliberate violations of the
provisions of international humanitarian law against
the civilian population in Gaza are unacceptable. The
international community must take all possible
practical measures to put an end to this state of affairs
and prevent Israel’s indiscriminate bombing of the
Palestinian people. Cuba reiterates its demand that
Israel immediately, unconditionally and fully lift the
cruel and illegal blockade of Gaza and allow the free
movement of supplies to and from the Gaza Strip and
permanent humanitarian access.
Cuba condemns the settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. We demand the immediate cessation of the
demolition of Palestinian houses, the construction of
the wall and the eviction of Palestinian families in East
Jerusalem, as well as other illegal incitements,
provocations and attacks carried out by extremist
settlers against the Palestinian people and holy sites.
These measures and policies implemented by Israel are
serious and flagrant violations of international law, the
United Nations Charter, many General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions and the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice of 9 July 2004.
The Security Council cannot remain passive in
the face of these facts. Cuba regrets that the recent
exercise of the veto by a Council member prevented
the adoption of a resolution condemning settlements
and demanding an end to these policies. Israel has
exploited the Council’s silence on this issue in recent
years to continue to pursue these illegal policies. The
widespread physical, economic and social devastation
caused by the illegal and destructive settlement
practices is the main obstacle to reaching a peace
agreement. The settlement policy prevents, in practical
terms, the establishment of a Palestinian State on the
basis of the 1967 borders and thus the possibility of a
just resolution of the Israel-Palestine conflict.
Cuba reaffirms that any measure or action that
Israel has taken or shall take to alter the legal, physical

11-30799

and demographic status or institutional structure of the
occupied Syrian Golan, as well as Israeli measures to
exercise its jurisdiction and administration in this
territory, are legally null and void. We state once again
that these measures and actions, including the illegal
construction and expansion of Israeli settlements in the
Syrian Golan since 1967, are violations of international
law, international agreements, the United Nations
Charter and resolutions, including resolution 497
(1981), and the Fourth Geneva Convention, and
constitute a challenge to the international community.
Cuba demands Israel’s full withdrawal from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967.
A peace agreement must be achieved this year, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions, the Madrid
principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. We have
witnessed increasing international recognition of a
Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders. We
trust that September 2011 will prove the right time to
achieve this goal at last.
Cuba once again reiterates its position in favour
of a just and lasting peace for all the peoples of the
Middle East that would put an end to the occupation of
the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967 and
ensure the Palestinian people’s exercise of their right to
self-determination through the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia): Let me first
congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency of this
Council and, secondly, align my delegation with the
statements made by the representatives of Egypt, on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and Tajikistan,
on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference.
Malaysia is deeply concerned by the recent
disproportionate attacks by Israeli military forces in the
Gaza Strip. The attacks have resulted in a number of
civilian casualties and, if left unchecked, would lead to
greater destruction and further loss of lives, especially
among the civilian population in the Gaza Strip. We
therefore urge all involved parties to refrain from any
provocative act and call on the international community,
especially the Security Council and the Middle East
Quartet, to act swiftly and decisively to ensure that

7

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

Israel ceases its military operations in the Gaza Strip and
to prevent any further escalation of violence.
My delegation is also concerned by recent articles
and comments appearing in the newspapers regarding
the so-called Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48). We are
of the view that such comments have not nullified the
report or suggested that the author wanted to retract it.
In this regard, my delegation supports the statement by
the three other co-authors of the report, which, in a
way, has further bolstered the process of having Israel
answer to the world for having used disproportionate
force leading to the death of approximately 1,400
Palestinians during the military onslaught it carried out
over two years ago. We would like to state here that the
imperatives of peace and justice are mutual, and
therefore justice for the Palestinians in Gaza cannot be
delayed in order to reach peace.
In this connection, we reiterate our call on Israel
to completely lift the blockade on Gaza, which is a
form of collective punishment that is forbidden under
international law, and to expedite further approval of
United Nations projects. Israel must fulfil its legal and
international obligations by stopping all settlement
activities, the construction of the separation wall and
the demolition of Palestinian-owned buildings and
infrastructure, particularly in East Jerusalem, which are
illegal under international law and represent serious
impediments contributing to the deadlock of the peace
talks.
Resolving these issues will require the
international community to focus all its energy and
effort at achieving a comprehensive peace in the region
and restoring the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including their right to an independent State of
Palestine. All parties must act truthfully and sincerely
to achieve these objectives. We again urge the Security
Council to take the necessary measures to implement
the Council’s very own resolutions on Palestine and on
the Middle East, failing which the Council’s credibility
would be at stake.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): As many colleagues have
pointed out, historic events are sweeping the Middle
East and North Africa. These major developments
rightfully deserve the attention of the international
community.

8

Meanwhile, the Palestinian issue is rapidly
approaching a critical stage. Turkey continues to
believe firmly that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict lies
at the heart of many disputes in the region and beyond
and therefore merits our special attention. That is why
the quest for a lasting and comprehensive settlement
should not take a back seat to developments in the
region. On the contrary, it must once again be our
priority.
Despite the current impasse in the peace process
due to Israel’s unabated settlement activities in
occupied East Jerusalem and the West Bank, we see no
alternative to a negotiated settlement. The lack of a
solution serves only to perpetuate insecurity and
suffering. Turkey attributes importance to the work of
the Quartet and hopes that it will meet soon to lay out
the parameters of direct negotiations.
The Palestinians have been working hard for the
past two years to lay the institutional groundwork of
their future State. As evidenced at the recent meeting
of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC),
they are ready. Through its State-building efforts, the
Palestinian Authority has proved to all skeptics that the
Palestinians deserve to attain their decades-long target
of internationally recognized statehood, even though
they continue to suffer under occupation.
Needless to say, the progress on the ground as
reflected in economic figures can be sustainable only if
the political process proceeds in parallel with it. In
other words, efforts in good faith should not be
confined to so-called “economic peace” but should
reinforce the political dimension of the peace process
and materialize in the form of Palestinian statehood.
The time has come to show solidarity with the
Palestinians and help them to live in peace and dignity.
In that context, Turkey believes that if the
Palestinians are objectively ready to be accepted as a
fully fledged State member of the international
community, with all the relevant rights and
responsibilities — and it is clear that they are on the
verge of that momentous step — then the international
community cannot and must not turn a blind eye to
their just and legitimate appeal.
On the other hand, the plight of Palestinians in
the Gaza Strip should urgently be alleviated, and the
reconstruction and rehabilitation requirements of the
Gaza Strip must urgently be addressed. Security

11-30799

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

Council resolution 1860 (2009) must be implemented
as a whole. The current humanitarian and human rights
conditions of the civilian population in Gaza are
unsustainable, unacceptable and, ultimately, not in the
interests of any of those concerned. The recent
escalation of tensions among the parties is clear proof
that the situation is tenuous at best. Minimalist
approaches aimed at public diplomacy will not work.
Israel must lift its illegal blockade of Gaza
immediately.
Meanwhile, achieving national reconciliation
among Palestinians also remains an urgent priority.
Turkey calls on the Palestinian groups to once and for
all end their disunity, embracing a future in their own
State, living side by side with Israel in peace and
security. In that respect, the international community
should extend a helping hand, in an unequivocal
manner, to the Palestinians.
Eleven months have passed since the deadly
attack by Israeli forces on a humanitarian aid convoy
sailing to Gaza, which resulted in nine civilian deaths
and many injuries. That was an international incident
with ramifications for international peace and security,
which is why the Council issued a very firm
presidential statement immediately following the
event.
Moreover, that tragic episode was also the result
of numerous and successive blatant violations of
international law by Israel, beginning with the
imposition of an unlawful blockade and continuing
with the torture and murder of passengers on the
international humanitarian aid convoy. Turkey at first
tried to prevent this incident; then, once tragedy had
struck, it referred the matter to the relevant
international bodies. Turkey, for its part, has strictly
abided by all the parameters established for the
international inquiry process under the auspices of the
United Nations, while refraining from unilateral acts
and inflammatory statements.
We continue to make every contribution to the
inquiry process under the auspices of the United
Nations, with the expectation that a fair and just
conclusion will be reached. But there should be no
question about our resolve with respect to this issue.
We will pursue this matter and explore every avenue
available in the international system until we are
convinced that justice has been done. No member of
the international community is above international law.

11-30799

Accountability is the key to stability and security. It
should also be borne in mind that the phenomenon of
humanitarian convoys to Gaza cannot simply be
explained away as unilateral provocations. If the
current pattern of Israeli policies towards Gaza, which
target the entire population in a disproportionate
manner, can be reversed, then the root cause of such
reactions will also have been eliminated.
In conclusion, let me reiterate once more
Turkey’s unwavering support for and determination to
assist our Palestinian brothers and sisters in the process
of reaching their long-delayed target of a viable,
peaceful and prosperous Palestinian State.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Pedro Serrano, Acting Head of the
delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
Mr. Serrano: The candidate countries Croatia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Montenegro; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia; as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.
This debate comes at a time when the
international community is faced with a number of
challenges in the Middle East region. Nevertheless, the
Arab-Israeli conflict remains a focal point and the
events across the Arab world, while historic in their
own right, mean that we must increase our efforts to
address this problem with the utmost priority.
The European Union (EU) firmly believes that
the transformational moment we are witnessing is
actually an opportunity not to be missed. The parties
and the region have waited long enough. Their hopes
and aspirations have been dashed too many times. We
have invested a great deal of effort in the Quartet in
recent weeks, and will continue to do so, because it is
our conviction that by complementing and supporting
United States efforts, the European Union, the United
Nations and Russia, has a contribution to give to the
negotiated solution we all hope will be achieved. We
also recognize the crucial importance of an active Arab
contribution building on the Arab Peace Initiative.
The European Union affirms that unilateral actions
by either party cannot prejudge the outcome of
negotiations. We must continue to make concerted

9

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

efforts towards a negotiated solution. The European
Union reiterates that settlements in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, are illegal under international
law, constitute an obstacle to peace and threaten to make
a two-State solution impossible. All settlement activity,
including in East Jerusalem, should cease immediately.
New construction plans should be abandoned.
Trust between the parties has been seriously
undermined. That is why our efforts have been aimed
at promoting a credible framework for the resumption
of negotiations between the parties on all final-status
issues that should lead to a two-State solution by
September 2011.
This is an opportunity for the European Union to
recall its positions in this regard. We believe that the
following parameters could serve as a basis for a
resumption of negotiations between the parties: first,
an agreement on the borders of the two States, based
on the 4 June 1967 lines, with equivalent land swaps as
may be agreed between the parties; secondly, security
arrangements that, for Palestinians, respect their
sovereignty and show that the occupation is over, and,
for Israelis, protect their security, prevent the
resurgence of terrorism and deal effectively with new
and emerging threats; thirdly, a just, fair and agreed
solution to the refugee question; and fourthly,
fulfilment of the aspirations of both parties for
Jerusalem. A way must be found, through negotiations,
to resolve the status of Jerusalem as the future capital
of both States.
The European Union has a strong track record as
a supporter of and large contributor to Prime Minister
Fayyad’s State-building programme. At the recent
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee meeting on 13 April,
hosted by European Union High Representative
Catherine Ashton in Brussels, there was a unanimous
acknowledgment that the Palestinian Authority’s Statebuilding effort has gained renewed momentum in the
past two years as the international community has
coordinated its efforts to support the plans to build a
sustainable economy and to strengthen State
institutions. The European Union welcomes the
assessment of the United Nations and the international
financial institutions that the Palestinian institutions
are above the threshold for a functioning State in the
key sectors they studied and compare favourably with
those in many established States, despite the
continuing occupation and the divide between the West
Bank and Gaza.

10

The European Union strongly supports this
institution-building process. In this regard, the
European Union welcomes the organization of a
second international donors conference for the
Palestinian State this June in Paris. The European
Union has further increased the component devoted to
institution-building assistance, which this year amounts
to €75 million out of €300 million earmarked for the
occupied Palestinian territory. However, the significant
achievements of the Palestinian people will be
sustainable only if there is a political breakthrough.
The European Union regrets the renewed
violence witnessed in the past weeks. European Union
High Representative Catherine Ashton has made clear
statements condemning mortar and rocket attacks out
of the Gaza Strip, in particular the recent attack on a
school bus, which resulted in the death of a student,
and has called for these attacks to stop immediately
and permanently. She has also deplored the loss of
civilian life in Gaza and called on Israel to show
restraint. The lives of civilians must be protected
everywhere and in all circumstances. The European
Union urges full respect for international humanitarian
law. The announced ceasefire must be fully respected
by all sides if there is to be any hope of a genuine
peace process. The European Union calls on those
holding the abducted Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit to
release him without delay.
The European Union firmly reiterates its calls for
the full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009)
calling for the immediate, sustained and unconditional
opening of crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and persons to and from Gaza,
including goods and persons from the West Bank. The
European Union calls on all international supporters to
make use of the existing land crossings to channel their
support to Gaza.
Increased and accelerated imports of construction
materials are another crucial component of Gaza’s
recovery. Despite some progress following the decision
of the Government of Israel in June 2010 regarding
Gaza access, further efforts are needed to achieve a
fundamental change of policy that allows for the
reconstruction and economic recovery of Gaza and
improves the daily lives of the population while
addressing Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
The European Union reiterates its readiness to
contribute substantially to a comprehensive and

11-30799

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

sustainable solution, with the State of Israel and an
independent, democratic, contiguous and viable State
of Palestine living side by side in peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.
Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, allow me to warmly
congratulate you, Sir, on the exemplary manner in
which you have been steering the work of the Council
this month. I would also like to express my
appreciation to Ambassador Li Baodong, Permanent
Representative of China, for his efficient presidency of
the Council in March.
I would also like to express my appreciation to
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for today’s excellent briefing, in
which he vividly described the volatile situation on the
ground, particularly in the Gaza Strip, and called on the
international community to engage with the parties to
create conditions conducive to the resumption of the
peace process.
The recent upsurge in violence in the occupied
Palestinian territories, particularly the Gaza Strip, is a
cruel reminder of how tense and fragile the situation
remains. The rocket fire by Palestinian militants and
reprisals by Israeli forces have claimed numerous
victims, most of them Palestinian civilians. Our
Committee calls on the parties to refrain from all
provocation and to act responsibly, and unequivocally
condemns all attacks on civilians, who urgently require
protection.
We are hopeful that the Council will assume its
Charter responsibilities by acting as resolutely and
with the same vigour as it has in other ongoing conflict
situations. It must also redouble its efforts to ensure the
full implementation of its resolution 1860 (2009) in
order to end the Gaza blockade and restrictions on the
freedom of persons and goods, and to promote
inter-Palestinian reconciliation.
We look forward to the resumption of serious
direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians
on all permanent status issues before the September
target date set by the Quartet. In that respect, we call
on the Quartet to speedily endorse the recent initiative

11-30799

of the United Kingdom, France and Germany to restart
negotiations leading to the signing of an agreement on
Jerusalem as the capital of two States, Israel and
Palestine, founded on the basis of the borders of June
1967; to the reaffirmation of the illegality of
settlements; to a just, consensual solution to the
refugee question; and to security arrangements ending
the Israeli occupation.
The negotiations will succeed only if the parties
implement in good faith their road map obligations, in
particular a complete freeze of all Israeli settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including so-called natural growth. I take this
opportunity to register our disappointment with the
Council’s lack of leadership on this important issue,
and its unwillingness to reaffirm its previous positions
and to adopt the pertinent draft resolution, which
enjoyed vast support among Member States. Israel’s
unfortunate recent approval of over 900 additional
housing units in Gilo in East Jerusalem illustrates the
fact that the issue is not going away. It is the Council’s
Charter and moral obligation to intervene.
We are pleased to note the recognition of the
State of Palestine by numerous Member States. These
countries and many others are supporting the
Palestinian Authority’s programme to build the State
by September. The United Nations, the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund have confirmed that
the Palestinians now have the institutional structure
necessary to administer their own State.
Since the most recent open debate of the Council
under this agenda item (see S/PV.6484), our Committee
has held international meetings in Vienna and
Montevideo devoted to achieving Israeli-Palestinian
peace. We remain fully committed to and will continue
to promote the objective of a two-State solution, in
conformity with Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative,
whereby Israel and the State of Palestine will live side
by side in peace and security. The United Nations and
its Security Council have a very special responsibility
to ensure the realization of this vision. I assure the
Council of the Committee’s cooperation and support in
the implementation of its own resolutions on the
Palestinian question.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tajikistan.

11

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Noziri (Tajikistan): I have the pleasure to
deliver the following statement on behalf of the
members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
(OIC) in Tajikistan’s capacity as Chair of the OIC
group.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his briefing. I also would like to express our deep
appreciation to the Colombian presidency of the
Security Council for the convening of this timely
meeting and for giving the OIC group the opportunity
to address the Council.
The Palestinian question remains a top priority
and a challenge for the entire international community.
The implementation and fulfilment of our collective
political commitments, resolutions and pledges on this
issue have been pending for more than half a century.
The OIC group remains firm in its conviction that the
Security Council must not be absolved of its role in
this regard and should act forthwith to ensure the
realization by the Palestinian people of their right to
self-determination, sovereignty and independence in
their State of Palestine in the territory occupied since
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, including a
just solution for the plight of the Palestine refugees in
line with United Nations resolutions and international
law.
Our debate today acquires extraordinary
importance, given that it coincides with the difficult
situation that millions of Palestinians in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
continue to endure. Despite resolution 1860 (2009), of
8 January 2009, Israel, the occupying Power, continues
its military aggression against the Gaza Strip. The
illegal Israeli blockade remains in force, thereby
continuing to affect the lives of the entire Palestinian
civilian population of Gaza — preventing their access
to humanitarian aid and basic materials; impeding
reconstruction, including by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East and the United Nations Development Programme,
of the thousands of destroyed homes and infrastructure;
and obstructing economic and social recovery. In this
regard, the OIC group continues to call for serious
follow-up to the findings and recommendations of the
investigations of the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict as an essential step to
ensuring justice and accountability and averting further

12

human rights violations in the occupied Palestinian
territory by Israel, the occupying Power.
In the West Bank, Israel continues its illegal
settlement construction, home demolitions, violent
military raids, movement restrictions and land
confiscation, imposing hundreds of checkpoints and
detaining thousands of Palestinians. It also continues to
build the annexation wall, in clear violation of
international law and the legal authority of the advisory
opinion (see A/ES-10/273) of the International Court of
Justice. These violations are most intense and
aggressive in occupied East Jerusalem, where Israel
also continues a systematic process to alter the historic
Palestinian-Arab-Islamic identity of Al-Quds Al-Sharif
through its flagrant attempts to Judaize the city by
changing its demographic composition and character.
Today, the OIC group reaffirms the centrality of
the cause of Al-Quds Al-Sharif for the entire Islamic
Ummah and stresses the Palestinian, Arab and Islamic
nature of occupied East Jerusalem and the need for full
respect for the sanctity of Islamic and Christian holy
places in the city. The OIC group also reaffirms that
Al-Quds Al-Sharif remains an integral part of the
Palestinian territory occupied by Israel since 1967, and
that its illegal annexation by Israel continues to be
rejected and unrecognized by the international
community.
We affirm that the resolution of the entire Middle
East conflict is dependent on solving its core issue,
which is the Palestinian question. The international
consensus to realize the vision of two States requires a
clear stance based on international legitimacy and
justice. There must be full acknowledgement of, and
respect for, the historic commitments and pledges made
in that regard, as embodied in the terms of reference of
the peace process, namely, the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, including
the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace
Initiative, to which the OIC subscribes, and the Quartet
Road Map. Every effort must be exerted by the
Security Council as well as by the Quartet, in the light
of its declared commitment to fulfil the collective legal
and moral responsibilities relevant to the realization of
peace, justice and security in the region this year.
At this crucial stage, there must also be
acknowledgement of, and continued full support for,
Palestinian State-building efforts, which are advancing
successfully. Since, regrettably, the peace process

11-30799

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

remains in a sate of stagnation, the time is ripe to
recognize the independent State of Palestine based on
the 1967 borders, as that is the cornerstone for
achieving stability, prosperity, peace and security for
Palestine, Israel and other neighbouring countries in
the region.
The OIC also joins the international community’s
stance reaffirming that all measures and actions taken
or to be taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to alter
the legal, physical and demographic status of the
occupied Syrian Golan and its institutional structures,
as well as Israeli measures to impose its jurisdiction
and administration there, are null and void and have no
legal effect. The OIC demands that Israel abide fully
and immediately by resolution 497 (1981) and
withdraw completely from the occupied Syrian Golan
to the lines of 4 June 1967, in implementation of
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as well as from
the remaining Lebanese occupied land.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm the full support
and solidarity of the OIC with the Palestinian people in
their endeavour to regain their legitimate and
inalienable national rights, including their rights of
return, self-determination and to establish their
independent Palestinian State on their national soil,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to say that my country
is an important party to the Arab-Israeli conflict, as
well as to reiterate two vital points. First, the Syrian
Golan Heights have remained under Israeli occupation
since 1967. Secondly, when my country was a
non-permanent member of the Security Council from
2001 to 2003, we proposed that the Council convene an
open public meeting every three months to consider the
situation in the Middle East.
My delegation would like to thank the Columbian
presidency of the Council for convening this open
debate to discuss the escalation of Israeli aggression
against the occupied Arab territories. We would also
like in particular to thank the Permanent
Representative of China for his excellent work as
President of the Council last month.
In the many decades of the Israeli occupation that
began in June 1967, the Security Council, the General

11-30799

Assembly and other United Nations bodies have
adopted hundreds of resolutions calling upon Israel to
end its occupation of Arab territories and its massacres
of unarmed and unprotected Palestinian people. Sadly,
in spite of all those resolutions, the facts show that
Israel continues to engage in organized and systematic
practices and is not subject to international
accountability for its violations of the basic principles
of international law and international humanitarian law.
This demonstrates that Israel is defying international
law.
Among its main hostile acts that have been
internationally condemned is its feverish settlement
campaign in occupied Arab lands, including its seizure
of land, the destruction of houses and expulsion of its
inhabitants and the settling of herds of foreign
colonialist settlers in those houses — to say nothing of
its construction of the racist separation barrier and the
Judaization of occupied Jerusalem. All of his is
happening right under the noses of the very people who
call for the protection of human rights while closing
their eyes to flagrant Israeli violations of human rights
in the occupied Arab territories.
Moreover, all of this is taking place while the
Security Council remains ineffectual in exercising its
duty and obligations to enforce international peace and
security in accordance with the purposes and principles
and of the United Nations Charter. The most recent
example of this was the Council’s non-adoption of a
draft resolution (S/2011/24) calling on Israel to end its
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories (see S/PV.6484), in spite of the fact that the
draft resolution and the principle of the illegality of
Israel’s settlement activity both enjoyed international
consensus.
Two years have gone by since the Israeli
aggression against Gaza began. During that action,
Israel committed war crimes and serious violations of
humanitarian law considered to be crimes against
humanity. But the Israeli perpetrators of those crimes
have not been held accountable or subjected to any
punishment. Israel continues to reject the rebuilding of
schools and other facilities by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East and is preventing all such activities and
projects in Gaza. That has only encouraged Israel to
pursue its inhuman embargo against the people living
in Gaza. In addition, Israel is once again threatening
further aggression against the second humanitarian

13

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

flotilla, which is planning to provide humanitarian aid.
Israel is committing further aggression against Gaza
and is undertaking further massacres of Palestinians,
creating dozens of innocent casualties and many
hundreds of wounded civilians.
In this context, we are shocked by the lack of any
response from the international community to the
appeals by the Palestinian people. For many decades,
the international community has ignored the Israeli
crimes against the Palestinian people and its continued
occupation of Arab land. In the past few days, the
League of Arab States has called upon the Security
Council to adopt a resolution to impose an air embargo
against Israeli airplanes attacking Gaza, so as to protect
unarmed civilians and to put an end to the unjust
embargo. We therefore call on the Security Council to
follow up immediately on that demand by the League
of Arab States to protect Palestinian civilians. We
reaffirm that the protection of Palestinian, Syrian and
Lebanese civilians living under Israeli occupation and
subject to Israeli attacks on a daily basis is an integral
part of the issue of protecting all civilians without
distinction.
The Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan is also
a very serious issue. Israel refuses to return and
reintegrate the Syrian Golan into Syria and flouts
international resolutions, in particular resolution 497
(1981), which declares the occupation of the Syrian
Golan by Israel to be completely illegal, null and void.
Israel is continuing its policy of terror and repression
against Syrian civilians in the Golan, as well as to
imprison Syrian citizens. It is also seizing land and
continuing settlement activities, including its most
recent settlement campaign in the Syrian Golan. A
council of settlers in the Golan has undertaken a new
provocative measure in the form of a publicity
campaign for the building of new settlements in the
occupied Syrian Golan. The campaign, called
“Welcome to Golan”, is responsible for transferring
3,000 Israeli settler families to the Golan.
The Israeli Knesset recently adopted a law
requiring a general referendum before any Israeli
retreat from the occupied Syrian Golan or occupied
East Jerusalem. This is in total disregard for
international law and the resolutions of the Security
Council, in particular resolutions 497 (1981) and 487
(1981). We reiterate that this measure is totally rejected
and unacceptable and does not change the fact that the
Golan is occupied Syrian land and that the restoration

14

of the entire Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967 must
be the basis of any peacebuilding arrangements. We
hold the Israeli Government responsible for all these
hostile and provocative policies.
In their statements today, some permanent
members of the Council have referred to the situation
in my country. They have spoken in biased terms and
have made very dangerous exaggerated statements. I
would like to draw the attention of the Security
Council to the following.
On Saturday, 16 April, Syria’s President chaired
the first meeting of the new Government. He called on
the Government to be active and to take immediate
action in order to launch a number of draft proposals to
ensure reforms and promote national democracy and
citizen participation, for the purpose of consolidating
national unity, stability and security for the country and
its citizens. Four days after that meeting, the
Government submitted three draft laws, which were
signed by the President and entered into force today,
lifting the emergency law, dismantling the Supreme
State Security Court and granting the right to peaceful
demonstrations. The Government is now working
expeditiously on a number of new draft laws on
political parties, the media and local administrations.
President Al-Assad is seen by all as a reforming
leader, because he is aware of the fact that these reforms
are a national necessity — exclusively national.
Needless to say, any reform in any State Member of the
United Nations is, according to the Charter, a domestic
issue. All must respect the principle of non-interference
in the internal affairs of States, including some
permanent member States. Such reforms must not be
obstructed by obstacles that could only serve foreign
interests and agendas. Whoever encourages reform from
the outside cannot deliberately ignore the fact that
reforms and measures have been undertaken on the
ground. Those individuals must not endeavour to
undermine the very well-known Syrian model of reform,
which is based on tolerance and co-existence among the
various sectors of the country’s population.
A number of calls have been made in the Security
Council, including for the overthrow of legitimate
Governments. Those who make such calls are
responsible for negative incitement and for
irresponsible acts that harm the interests of peoples and
Governments. That represents a clear violation of the
United Nations Charter and an irrational attempt to use

11-30799

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

international law to take advantage of this meeting on
the situation in the Middle East, which is limited to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in particular the question of
Palestine. Thus, it is a misuse of that agenda item to
ignore the underlying aspects of the problem. It also
encourages the continuing Israeli aggression and
occupation and the Israeli Government’s engagement
in further violence and settlement expansion.
Furthermore, it encourages intransigence and defiance
of the wishes of the international community and the
Palestinian people for peace.
We would have liked to hear the representatives
of the United States and the United Kingdom express,
if only just once, their sympathy for and empathy with
the suffering of the Syrians living in the Syrian Golan,
occupied since 1967. We would have liked to hear
those two delegations call on Israel to put an end to the
state of emergency that has been in effect in that
country since 1948 to this day. The state of emergency
has been used to seize Palestinian territory, to destroy
houses and expel their inhabitants, and to allow gangs
of Israeli settlers to occupy the land. Furthermore,
Israel has exploited an emergency regulation enacted
under the British Mandate in 1939 and applied to all of
Palestine.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We congratulate you, Sir,
on steering the work of the Security Council this month
with dedication and finesse.
We align ourselves with the statements delivered
by the Permanent Representatives of Egypt and
Tajikistan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
respectively.
During the most recent debate on the Middle East
in this Chamber (see S/PV.6484), most of us lamented
the breakdown of Palestine-Israel direct negotiations
and its implications for peace in the region. Three
months later, the pall of gloom is heavier. The
prospects for a resumption of the Middle East peace
process are not encouraging. The slight window of
opportunity for sustainable peace, created by the recent
reduction in violence, appears to be slipping through
our fingers. To make matters worse, the Middle East
Quartet also appears to be increasingly hamstrung in its
efforts to facilitate the resumption of direct
negotiations and to specify the parameters of the final

11-30799

settlement. That was made evident by the recent
postponement of the Quartet’s Berlin meeting.
Amidst such despair, the Security Council, too,
has abdicated its role in the settlement of the question
of Palestine to individual countries or informal
groupings. It is worrisome to note that the Council’s
only activities in regard to the Palestinian issue are its
quarterly open debates, where even spirited and
well-drafted statements fail to cure the somnambulance
of their audience, which knows only too well that the
stalemate is as immutable as the proverbial North Star.
The only ray of hope in this pessimistic scenario
is the impressive march of the Palestinian Authority on
the road to statehood. Numerous independent sources
have confirmed that building State institutions by
August is well within the reach of the Palestinian
Authority. According to recent reports prepared by the
United Nations, the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund for the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee of
the Middle East Quartet, the Palestinian Authority is
above the threshold of a functioning State in several
key sectors. Its fiscal performance and high rates of
economic growth in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
have been duly acknowledged in those reports. The
Quartet itself has welcomed that assessment and stated
that Palestinian institutions compared favourably with
those of established States. The Palestinian Authority’s
policies of self-reliance, empowerment and creating
economic opportunities have disabused even the
occupiers of their ability to justify the illegal
occupation as a necessary evil.
The attainment of the goal of a Palestinian State
by September is well within our grasp. Letting it
founder on the rocks of cynicism, inaction or political
expediency would have serious consequences for peace
and stability. The failure to meet the 1999 deadline set
in the Oslo Accords triggered the second intifada. The
missing of the 2005 deadline for Palestinian statehood,
as set in the Quartet Road Map of 2003, precipitated
violence and bloodshed and culminated in the siege on
Gaza and its violent aftermath. September 2011 cannot
become just another date in that tragic chronology.
The people of Palestine have already travelled
more than halfway in honouring their side of the
bargain. Israel must reciprocate with an open mind and
in good faith. It must stop all settlement activity in the
occupied Arab territories and fulfil its obligation to
respect the human rights of the Palestinian people.

15

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

Israel’s blockade of Gaza is neither conscionable nor
tenable. Israel must also facilitate the completion of
reconstruction projects, including those undertaken by
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
Pakistan is supportive of lasting peace for all
inhabitants of the Middle East, irrespective of their
religion, ethnicity or nationality. As Palestinian
statehood emerges from the debris of broken promises,
it should not be stymied by violence. We join other
delegations in calling for a prevailing ceasefire in
Gaza.
The framework for peace in the Middle East is set
forth in detail in resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008); the Madrid
terms of reference; the Arab Peace Initiative; and the
Quartet Road Map. Mustering and sustaining the
political will to implement the framework is
imperative.
We hope that the Security Council and the Middle
East Quartet will engage themselves meaningfully with
the parties concerned to realize the collective objective
of the international community for an independent,
sovereign and viable State of Palestine, living side by
side and in peace with all of its neighbours. Pakistan
shares and supports that objective.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): Sir,
your presidency of the Security Council comes at a
very difficult time in the international situation, one
which has required consultations and resolutions. The
Colombian presidency has demonstrated its wisdom,
perceptiveness and vision. This does honour to your
friendly country and its work, which deserves all
possible praise.
My delegation associates itself with the
statements made by the representatives of Saudi Arabia
on behalf of the Arab Group, Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and Tajikistan on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), and
would like to express the concerns of the Kingdom of
Morocco over the delays in the efforts to breathe new
life into the peace negotiations and over developments
in Gaza and the other occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem.

16

Only a few months remain before the
international community’s deadline for enabling the
Palestinian people to achieve their legitimate
aspirations to establish an independent and viable
Palestinian State within the borders of 4 June 1967,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side in
peace and security with Israel. In that context, my
delegation would like to express its appreciation for the
efforts of President Barack Obama of the United States
to honour the commitments he made in his statement to
the General Assembly on 23 September 2010 (see
A/65/PV.11) concerning the right of the Palestinians to
establish an independent Palestinian State within a
specific time frame. We also feel very optimistic about
the continued efforts of the United States to fulfil those
commitments, based on the established terms of
reference of the peace process and in accordance with
international law, the principle of land for peace, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Road Map.
We look forward to continued international and
regional efforts, based on the same vision, to achieve
the same objectives. Such efforts would support and
complement the positive dynamism that emerged for an
unfortunately brief period in the wake of the
resumption of direct negotiations last September in
Washington, D.C., under the auspices of the United
States. In that context, the role of the Quartet, with all
its elements and international influence, remains
extremely important to the task of launching a new and
effective impetus for the negotiations that would
bolster the Quartet’s credibility and be judged on the
basis of its concrete results in September.
While we must voice our deep regret that the
Quartet’s meetings in March and April have been
delayed, we value the constructive ideas produced by
the delegations of France, the United Kingdom and
Germany during the Security Council’s meeting on
18 February (see S/PV.6484) on the objectives that
must be attained, the most important of which is
enabling the Palestinian people to establish an
independent State in the territories occupied since
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. This vision is
consonant with the Arab Peace Initiative and
appropriately lays the ground for overcoming the
obstacles to direct negotiations.
Since the suspension of direct negotiations, Israel
has continued to forcibly annex more Palestinian
territory, build more settlements, demolish houses and
expel their owners from their ancestral cities and

11-30799

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

villages. Israel’s persistence in building settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territories is an illegal act that
cannot lead to sincere negotiations for a comprehensive
and just solution on the basis of international efforts.
Settlement construction is an obstacle that cannot be
overcome or circumvented; it must be eliminated.
Occupied Jerusalem and adjacent areas are no
exception; not only have they not been spared such
practices, they have been targeted more heavily than
others. Israel has continued its illegal policy of
Judaizing that city, which is sacred to all revealed
religions. It has sought to change its original character
and to build more housing units for its settlers,
depopulating it of its Palestinian residents through
forcible expulsions, home demolitions and revocation
of their residency rights, in blatant violation of
international humanitarian law and various Security
Council resolutions. The Israeli authorities have
continued to attack Islamic shrines; the international
community must reject that policy, for it can only lead
to increased religious friction both inside and outside
the area.
Given its responsibilities as an Arab and Islamic
State, and the responsibilities of His Majesty King
Mohammed VI as Chair of the Jerusalem Committee of
the OIC, Morocco denounces such acts, which affect
the special legal status of that holy city and the rest of
the Palestinian territories in blatant violation of
international legitimacy and the foundations necessary
to a just peace. We appeal to the international
community to shoulder its responsibilities and to call
unequivocally on Israel to end its unilateral actions and
respond sincerely and positively to international efforts
to resume negotiations forthwith in a way that will lead
to their success.
The Gaza Strip is still enduring the frequent
escalation of Israeli military operations, exacerbating a
situation that was aggravated from the start by the
blockade imposed on the civilian population,
preventing them from enjoying the bare minimum of
humanitarian assistance and the infrastructure
necessary for survival. In this regard, we pay tribute to
the continuing vital role of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) and its support for the Palestinian
people inside the occupied territories and in
neighbouring countries. We welcome all initiatives to
provide UNRWA with the financial and human
resources needed to pursue its vital mandate to ensure

11-30799

the basic living conditions for an extremely important
segment of the Palestinian population.
It is no secret that all the elements of a just and
comprehensive peace based on two functioning, viable
States can be implemented. No one questions the
Palestinian people’s resolve and sincere desire to live
in peaceful coexistence and national reconciliation.
The only thing remaining is for Israel to demonstrate
political will and a vision of a future free of hegemony.
International efforts must be made to move the
dynamics of the peace process forward in a region that
has seen enough wars and tragedies, and in which all
people can look forward to freedom, dignity and peace.
The Kingdom of Morocco, based on its support
for peace, international law and legitimacy, the
relevant resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, still
supports and holds fast to the two-State solution
providing for an independent, viable Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side in
peace and security with the State of Israel. We also
urge Israeli withdrawal from the Syrian Golan and all
remaining occupied Lebanese territory.
Every country and people of the region has had
enough of the obstacles blocking the road to peace, the
violence and counter-violence, the victims, tragedies,
destruction, mistrust, hatred and alienation. It is high
time to effect real and drastic change in the situation
through the firm implementation of international law. It
is high time for Israel to demonstrate genuine resolve
and will to respond to the Arab Peace Initiative and a
commitment to living side by side with its neighbours
and to building a cooperative, prosperous, secure and
safe future for all.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uganda.
Mr. Lukwiya (Uganda): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of my Permanent
Representative, Ambassador Ruhakana Rugunda. I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his briefing this morning.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has remained
unresolved for far too long, despite protracted
international and regional efforts. The situation is not
sustainable. We recall the international community’s
optimism following the resumption of direct talks
between Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and

17

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

President Mahmoud Abbas, and are deeply concerned
about the loss of momentum in the peace process in the
wake of the breakdown of the talks.
It is now more urgent than ever for both parties to
redouble their efforts towards the achievement of a
comprehensive peace based on the vision of the twoState solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by
side in peace and security. We encourage Israeli and
Palestinian leaders alike to resume negotiations
without further delay. We call upon both parties to
summon the necessary courage to take bold decisions
in a spirit of give and take.
In that regard, it is essential to refrain from
unilateral actions that prejudge final status issues and
undermine progress. It is also important to bear in
mind that the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians
to statehood cannot be delayed much longer and that
the legitimate security concerns of Israel must be
addressed.
We remain deeply concerned about the continued
construction of settlements by Israel and call for a
complete freeze on all settlement activity, which not
only hinders progress in the negotiations, but also
undermines Israel’s security. We salute the Palestinians
for their continued efforts to fulfil their obligations
under the Road Map, particularly in the security and
economic development sectors. We also commend
President Abbas on his initiative to resolve the current
divisions among Palestinians, and encourage him to
intensify efforts on that important component.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza remains dire,
and we reiterate our call for a complete lifting of the
blockade on Gaza. We deplore the continued firing of
rockets into Israel by Hamas and the airstrikes on Gaza
by Israel during the reporting period. We call on all
parties to exercise maximum restraint, to avoid further
escalation and to fully implement resolution 1860
(2009).
In conclusion, while the primary responsibility
for negotiating and reaching a comprehensive
agreement lies with the Israeli and Palestinian parties,
the efforts and support of all international and regional
partners must be stepped up for that goal to be attained
sooner than later.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.

18

Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I begin by thanking
your country, Colombia, and you personally,
Mr. President, for steering this very important open
debate on the situation in the Middle East. I would also
like to convey our appreciation to Under-SecretaryGeneral Lynn Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing
this morning. I also wish to state that the Bangladesh
delegation aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representatives of Egypt and Tajikistan on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, respectively.
In addition, I wish to briefly make certain points that
Bangladesh believes to be of importance.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, has always been of major concern
to the international community and the United Nations.
A durable and sustainable resolution of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, including the issue of Palestine, which is at
the root of the long-lasting crisis, must therefore be our
collective strategic objective. All Member States
should pledge complete commitment to that objective
and throw their full moral, diplomatic, political and
economic support behind its early realization.
Bangladesh is always ready to play a constructive role
in that collective endeavour to achieve a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East based on
the two-State principle. Bangladesh joins the
international community in reaffirming its full support
for the Palestinian people in their just and legitimate
struggle for self-determination and freedom from
continued occupation and oppression.
The people of Palestine are being denied their
fundamental right to self-determination and to live
freely in their own land, and displaced Palestinians
have been denied their right to return home and to live
in dignity and safety. Unfortunately, this appears to be
the result of a collective failure on the part of the
international community, in particular the people of
Israel, who have suffered deprivation as they have
failed to rise to the occasion by guaranteeing the
people of Palestine their fundamental right to selfdetermination and a sovereign State of their own, side
by side with theirs. In order to achieve a lasting
solution in the Middle East, it is very important to
address the key issue, which is Israel’s prolonged and
illegal occupation of the Arab territories.
We commend the leadership of President
Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority and
continued Palestinian State-building efforts. However,

11-30799

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

we are concerned about the disproportionate military
strikes and unabated atrocities, causing civilian
casualties. Therefore, we call for maximum restraint
and respect for international humanitarian law.
Furthermore, we regret the discontinuation of Israel’s
10-month moratorium on settlement activity, and
strongly reaffirm that unilateral actions by either party
cannot prejudge the outcome of negotiations.
Let me also reiterate our support for the
conclusion of such negotiations by September. It is our
belief that further delay in the resumption of
negotiations is detrimental to the prospects for regional
peace and security. We urge the parties and others
concerned to urgently strive to expedite IsraeliPalestinian and comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace,
which is essential to avoid outcomes detrimental to the
region.
My delegation believes that direct negotiations
will be successful only if there is sustained regional
and international support for the talks, the parallel
process of Palestinian State-building and the pursuit of
a just, lasting and comprehensive regional peace, as
envisaged in the Fourth Geneva Convention; the
relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 425 (1978);the principle of land for peace;
the Madrid terms of reference, which guarantee Israel’s
withdrawal from all occupied Arab and Palestinian
territories to the 4 June 1967 line; the Road Map and
the Arab Peace Initiative, which are the best guides for
achieving a two-State solution.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Bangladesh’s longstanding position that the continued illegal occupation
of Palestine over the past six decades is the root cause
of violence, unrest and destabilization in the region.
Let me also reiterate our full support for a lasting
peace for all inhabitants of the region, Arabs and
Israelis alike, and our strong commitment to the
realization of an independent, sovereign and viable
State of Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital, living side by side in peace with all its
neighbours.
In this holy month, when the people of Israel
celebrate their freedom from slavery and the clutches
of Pharaoh, we look forward to a global commitment
and meaningful action on the ground for the people of
Palestine to be freed from Israeli occupation, ending
years of deprivation, suffering, attacks, counterattacks,

11-30799

death, misery, fear, uncertainty and tension for all
people of this region, Arab and non-Arab.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Republic of
Tanzania.
Mr. Seruhere (United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, thank you for convening this meeting.
The United Republic of Tanzania is pleased to see
Colombia preside over the Security Council and host
deliberations on the situation in the Middle East, in
particular the question of Palestine. We commend the
commitment and efficiency with which you are leading
the deliberations.
The Security Council decided in 1948 to create
two States, Palestine and Israel, co-existing in peace in
some part of the Middle East. However, politics, group
interests and individual acrimony eventually led to the
disintegration of the United Nations arrangement. The
Cold War served only to exacerbate the situation.
Since 1948, a lot of statements have been made in
the Council urging it to rectify the situation, to no
avail. Must we continue talking endlessly as if no one
is listening? The situation in the Middle East situation
and question of Palestine were created by human
beings, using the Security Council. The issues can also
be solved by human beings using the same Council or
any other means of their choice at their disposal.
We cannot afford to say that the Security Council
has failed to solve the Palestinian question. We are all
aware that discontent causes conflict and that conflict
has by-products that we cannot always predict and
which we do not always like. In any conflict, the
parties involved lose property and lives. Let us
therefore think not only of war and conquest; let us
also think of making durable peace and go for it.
The Quartet elaborated a Road Map that would
lead to a two-State solution of Palestine and Israel
living with each other in peace. I believe that the
Council has not failed to pursue this option. Let the
Security Council pledge to us and vow that, at its next
meeting, it will tell us about results, and not about
work in progress.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): First of all, I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the

19

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

work you are doing as President of the Council,
including chairing this debate, which comes at a
critical juncture.
The region has undergone some dramatic changes
since the last Council debate on the situation in the
Middle East (see S/PV.6484). As events show
dramatically, the people of the region have made it
clear that their aspirations are to greater political,
social and economic opportunities and that they must
be addressed.
But in the face of these regional tectonic shifts,
one crucial issue — the peace process — has stalled.
Australia has consistently supported a just and enduring
peace based on a negotiated two-State solution, allowing
Israel and a future Palestinian State to live side by side
in peace and security. There is a now an urgency to
achieving progress towards peace — an urgency that our
Government conveyed to Israeli and Palestinian leaders
during our Foreign Minister’s visits to the region in
December 2010 and again in March 2011, and in regular
conversations since then.
Australia continues to urge all sides to exercise
maximum restraint, avoid all civilian casualties and
return to negotiations as soon as possible. If these steps
are not taken and credible progress towards peace not
made, there is a real risk that the surge in violence we
saw in March will be repeated, with unacceptable
civilian casualties on both the Palestinian and Israeli
sides.
Australia is deeply concerned at this recent surge
in violence in Israel and the Palestinian territories,
including rocket attacks on southern Israel by militants
in Gaza and the killing of civilians in Gaza, the West
Bank and Jerusalem. Violence undermines the
prospects for a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
Above all, all of us must condemn terrorism in all its
forms; there can never be justification for the wilful
killing of innocent civilians through such brutal acts.
As a strong supporter of Palestinian Statebuilding efforts, Australia welcomes the remarkable
progress made by Prime Minister Fayyad and the
Palestinian Authority since 2009 in building the
institutions necessary for Statehood. It is clear that this
institution-building must be matched by political
progress towards peace — political progress involving
both sides, negotiating directly on final status issues. In
this context, both sides must refrain from actions which
undermine confidence and the prospects for achieving

20

peace, including the construction of illegal settlements.
Settlements undermine the prospects for achieving
peace and compromise the future of a two-State
solution. They should stop.
Australia also remains concerned at the
humanitarian situation, particularly in Gaza. We
continue to welcome the relaxation of some Israeli
restrictions on access to and from Gaza and recognize
Israel’s legitimate security concerns. However, the
restrictions remain a barrier to peace. Gaza does not
need ad hoc assistance measures, even if wellintentioned; it needs predictable and adequate flows of
goods and materials. The United Nations will continue
to have a critical role to play in addressing the
humanitarian needs of the people of Gaza.
In conclusion, the changes in the wider region
underline the urgency of achieving progress towards
peace. Australia calls upon Israelis and Palestinians
alike to recognize that it is in their mutual interest to
return to direct negotiations so that a just and enduring
peace can finally be realized.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mr. Shaanika (Namibia): I join other
representatives in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation in the Middle East. Namibia aligns itself with
the statement made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Let me at the outset reaffirm Namibia’s
unequivocal and unwavering support for and solidarity
with the people of Palestine in their quest to exercise
their inalienable right to self-determination. Namibia
believes that the right to self-determination is a
fundamental human right and that the international
community is duty-bound, in accordance with its legal
and political obligations, to assist the Palestinian
people to achieve this right as soon as possible.
Namibia was once an occupied territory. Its people
know too well the harsh reality of living under
occupation. We wish to see the people of Palestine
emerge from the chains of oppression just as we
emerged from them 21 years ago.
This year began with dramatic events in the
Middle East, marked by the democratic aspirations and
demand for freedom, justice and human rights. The
situation in Palestine is even more urgent. However,

11-30799

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

Israel’s unlawful construction of settlements and its
demolition of Palestinian homes and property,
including the historic Shepherd Hotel, continue to
undermine efforts to return to the path to peace,
increase tensions and further destabilize the situation
on the ground, which is yet another attempt by the
occupying Power to overshadow international goodwill
towards the people of Palestine.
Namibia believes that the construction and
expansion of illegal settlements and the erection of
walls of separation and annexation are serious
impediments to peace and obstacles to the realization
of the two-State solution. The illegal construction of
Israeli settlements in and around East Jerusalem in
particular is nothing but an attempt to alter the legal
status of the city and its physical, demographic and
cultural character. They must cease. We call on Israel,
as the occupying Power, to stop these provocative
activities, which are illegal under international law and
constitute an obstacle to peace.
Israelis are entitled to live in peace and security,
which must be acknowledged. However, the pursuit of
security by Israel should not create insecurity for other
people in the region, in particular not for civilian
populations.
We continue to witness the ongoing deplorable
Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip, which is a clear
punishment of the entire population of Palestine. The
hardship and misery being imposed on Gaza is morally
unjustifiable and unacceptable by any human standard.
The blockade must be lifted immediately and the
human rights of the population respected.
The Security Council must take appropriate
measures and demonstrate its resolve to protect the
civilian population in the occupied Palestinian
territories in a manner consistent with international
humanitarian law. The international community, and
the Security Council in particular, should not cherrypick, acting as a matter of expediency at times, while
ignoring the plight of a people who have been
dispossessed of everything, including human dignity,
for more than 60 years. Furthermore, the Council
should not fail to discharge its responsibility to protect
the civilian population as part of its commitment to
maintain international peace and security and its duty
to implement its resolutions relating to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict and the broader Arab-Israeli
conflict.

11-30799

Israel and Palestine must resume negotiations to
build confidence, which is a clear and necessary step to
build a harmonious future. The international
community must not shy away from its responsibility
to help the people of Palestine, who have been
yearning for freedom for more than 60 years. The time
for the international community to act is now. It must
garner the necessary political will to act with
consistency to uphold international law, the Charter of
the United Nations and all relevant Security Council
resolutions, with which all States Members of the
United Nations, including Israel, are bound to comply.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Namibia’s
full support for Prime Minister Salam Fayyad’s plan to
end the occupation of Palestine and achieve the
independence of the State of Palestine, living side by
side with the State of Israel in peace and security. We
call on the Security Council to demonstrate effective
leadership and support for that plan.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Ordorica (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like, as many other speakers have done, to
thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing, as well as the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements this morning.
For decades, the international community has
been witness to wars, tensions and violence in the
Middle East, often with no means to act, hoping that
this conflict would one day come to a definitive end
and give way to the peaceful coexistence of nations.
Today, no efforts have been spared in pursuit of that
goal. The United Nations and a number of States, both
within and beyond the region, have become directly
involved in this complex task. Nonetheless, the conflict
continues, and the goal that would provide for its
definitive solution — the establishment of a sovereign,
independent and economically and politically viable
Palestinian State, coexisting peacefully with Israel
within secure, internationally recognized borders —
has not been achieved.
Dialogue and negotiation must continue and
produce tangible results for Palestinians and Israelis.
The status quo is not an alternative, as it will only
exacerbate tensions and lead to further violence and
confrontation, directly affecting the civilian population
and destabilizing the region, especially given the
current unrest there. We therefore reiterate our concern

21

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

at the continuing stalemate in the negotiations between
the parties, which has weakened the prospects for
peace being achieved in the short and medium term.
During my country’s recent term as an elected
member of the Security Council, we actively supported
efforts aimed at achieving peace in the region and
promoting greater involvement on the part of the
Council in seeking a lasting solution to this issue. In
20 monthly debates and a number of emergency
meetings in 2009 and 2010, we witnessed and
participated in the efforts of the Council to resolve the
conflict between Israel and the Palestinian Authority.
We remain convinced that the Security Council
needs to assume greater responsibility and continue to
do everything within its power to re-establish trust and
bring about a resumption of substantive negotiations
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority. For
example, with the adoption, against all expectations, of
resolution 1860 (2009), we were able to call for a
definitive ceasefire in Gaza and for the opening of
border crossings to guarantee access for humanitarian
aid. Similarly, in June 2010, the Security Council was
able to speak in a single voice to condemn the clashes
during the attack on the humanitarian flotilla and request
an investigation of the facts. The Security Council also
came together to establish the parameters for a definitive
peace agreement between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority, as shown by the adoption of the presidential
statement of 11 May 2009 (S/PRST/2009/14).
Nonetheless, in spite the priority that the Security
Council attaches to the resolution of this conflict, those
efforts did not have a substantive impact on the ground.
In Gaza, resolution 1860 (2009) has not been fully
implemented, and the situation seems to have returned
to as it was before the military intervention. Rocket
attacks have resumed and the humanitarian situation of
the residents of the Gaza Strip deteriorates every day,
despite the partial opening of the border crossings.
As we have stated since January 2009, we believe
that the best way forward, taking Israel’s legitimate
security concerns into consideration, is to establish an
international monitoring mechanism to ensure that the
ceasefire is upheld, border crossings fully opened and
the illicit trafficking of arms into Gaza effectively
controlled, pursuant to resolution 1860 (2009).
Israeli settlements continue to expand in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem, as do the corresponding
evictions and demolitions. We view such settlement

22

expansion and the demolition of Palestinian homes in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, as a serious obstacle to the peace process,
contrary to international law and detrimental to the
viability of a Palestinian State. We therefore call on
Israel to cease these activities immediately in order to
give the peace process a real chance.
Regarding the current situation and the recent
upsurge in violence, my country condemns all acts of
violence, including those promoted by extremist
religious elements in the Israeli settlements, and the
provocations by Palestinian groups. Such acts only fuel
further escalation in the violence. We also urge the
parties to refrain from any actions or statements that
may lead to incidents of violence and stress that those
responsible be punished in accordance with the law.
After a brief resumption resulting from the
considerable efforts undertaken by the United States
Government, it has not been possible to resume direct
peace talks between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority, despite the fact that they represent the best
option for achieving a comprehensive, lasting and
mutually acceptable solution that would lead to the
establishment of a political and economically viable
Palestinian State, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Road Map and the
Arab Peace Initiative, as well as the Quartet statements
of March and September 2010 and February 2011.
We have taken note of the report of the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Robert Serry, on the progress made over the past
two years in the implementation the programme of the
thirteenth Government of the Palestinian Authority.
The Quartet supported that programme, through which
the Palestinian Authority is endeavouring to build the
institutions necessary for the establishment of a State.
The Mexican delegation would like to express its
concern regarding what is documented in Coordinator
Serry’s report, namely, that the main obstacle to the
existence of a Palestinian State being declared is the
continuing Israeli occupation and the failure of a
negotiation process aimed at resolving the conflict
between both parties. We also support his indication
that it is of the greatest importance that the parties
overcome the current impasse and resume negotiations
in order to reach a framework agreement on a
permanent status that resolves all the core issues and
makes the two-State solution a reality.

11-30799

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

We would also like to mention the three other
reports that which were presented on 13 April, in
Brussels, to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of International Assistance to Palestinians,
on the progress achieved by the Palestinian Authority.
Our assessment of the situation in the Middle
East must take into account the situation in the region.
We note with concern the increase in inter-communal
tensions in Lebanon, which jeopardize the political
balance and the coexistence among the various groups
that compose Lebanese society. Violations of resolution
1701 (2006) continue, along with daily incursions by
Israeli armed forces into Lebanese territory. We call on
Israel and Lebanon, as well on as all political actors
involved, to comply with the provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and to avoid any
belligerent rhetoric, which could lead to an escalation
of violence. We trust that a Government will be formed
as a result of the consultations being led by Prime
Minister Mikati.
I should like to conclude by stating that the time
has come for difficult and momentous political
decisions to be taken by the leaders of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority for the benefit of their own
peoples and for the sake of international peace and
security. We deem the support of the Security Council
and of the international community to be of the utmost
importance in achieving that objective.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela once again pays tribute to our
brother country Colombia on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council.
We welcome the briefing by Mr. Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, and we endorse
the statement made by the Permanent Representative of
the Arab Republic of Egypt on behalf of the countries
members of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The demolition of houses and the continuing
retaliatory measures carried out by Israel, the
occupying Power, in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, are illegal acts
that pose major obstacles to the achievement of peace
in the region. Those actions are aimed at altering the

11-30799

demographic composition, character and configuration
of Palestinian territory, in flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law and the relevant
Security Council and other United Nations resolutions.
We regret that the draft resolution on the
illegality of Israeli settlement construction was not
adopted, even though it enjoyed the support of the
overwhelming majority of States. The United Nations
and the Security Council must take the measures
necessary for the State of Israel to comply with the
resolutions that promote the creation of two States
living side by side within peaceful, secure and
recognized borders. Our country reaffirms the need for
Israel to fully respect the provisions of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War in the Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, and the other occupied Arab
territories.
Venezuela appreciates the fact that, over the past
few months, a growing number of countries have
recognized Palestine as a free and independent State.
This constitutes a major contribution to the peace
process in the Middle East.
The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip
remains serious owing to the sustained and brutal
blockade by the State of Israel. Venezuela demands
once again the immediate and unconditional lifting of
this illegal and unilateral measure.
Venezuela calls on the State of Israel to respect
the sovereignty of Lebanon and avert further conflicts
such as that which took place in July 2006. Only
through direct negotiations between the parties, as
established by resolution 1701 (2006), can constructive
solutions be reached.
Venezuela also reiterates the need for Israel to
withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan, in keeping
with resolution 498 (1981) and in compliance with
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
As several members of the Council have brought
up the topic of Libya in this forum, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela would like to reiterate its
concern regarding resolution 1973 (2011), which has
led to military aggression against that country. If some
members of the Council exceed their legal powers and
decide of their own accord to redefine international
law, the United Nations loses its raison d’être.

23

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

I would recall that representatives of 14 countries
of Latin America and the Caribbean, Africa and Asia
submitted, on 31 March, a communiqué to the
President of the Security Council for the month of
March, the Permanent Representative of China, in
which we asked this body to work closely with
countries and organizations in the region and take
urgent measures leading to an immediate ceasefire and
a peaceful and sustainable solution reflecting the will
of the Libyan people.
What action has been taken by the Security
Council to implement the ceasefire and seek peace?
What measures are being taken to prevent the military
occupation of Libya? The Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela opts for peace in the world. That is why
President Hugo Chávez Frías has called for the
creation of impartial international bodies aimed at
promoting dialogue among Libyans and leading to a
lasting, sustainable peace.
Allow me to conclude by stating that it is
imperative that the military aggression by Israel
against the Palestinian people cease, and that an
immediate end be put to Jewish settlements in the
region. As stated by our President, the only way to
achieve peace is by way of justice.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me first of all to congratulate the Colombian delegation
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We wish you every success in
your work, Sir. We would like also to thank the
friendly delegation of China for the outstanding
manner in which it presided over the Security Council
last month. We would also like to thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his briefing this morning.
My delegation supports the statements made on
behalf of the Group of Arab States, the Organization of
the Islamic Conference and the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The negotiation process has now been at a
standstill for seven months, despite efforts by a great
number of parties to see them resumed. Many had
hoped to see the end of this long conflict within the
present year through the establishment of an
independent, sovereign Palestinian State, within the

24

1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital and
living side by side with Israel in peace and security.
Once again, the established goals have been
compromised by the situation on the ground, which is
characterized by the intransigence of Israeli policies
that flagrantly contravene international conventions
and go against the negotiating process. That process
must be based on trust, good faith and the will to
seriously address the issues that determine the fate of a
people that has been deprived of its most fundamental
rights and suffered the consequences of war and unrest
for many years.
The occupying Power, Israel, continues its acts of
colonization instead of promoting peace, despite the
international consensus as to the illegal nature of such
settlements. This complicates the situation and
jeopardizes the chances for achieving peace through
the two-State solution.
We are all aware of the fact that this colonization
reduces the size of the territory that has historically
been Palestinian and which is subject to negotiation,
thus affecting one of the most important elements of a
final settlement. Moreover, the expulsion of Palestinian
residents, the confiscation of their land and the
demolition of homes and eviction of their owners are
all in complete contravention of the relevant legal
norms, and the Fourth Geneva Convention in
particular, on which the Council has drawn in adopting
a great many resolutions that have been decisive with
regard to the settlements and the illegal acts
perpetrated by the occupying Power, Israel, against the
people of Palestine over many decades.
I would like to recall that more than 30 years ago,
in March 1980, when Tunisia was a non-permanent
member, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 465 (1980). In so doing, the Council adopted
a clear and sincere position on the colonization, and the
international community has to this day referred to that
resolution. However, there has been no real change on
the ground and no respect has been shown for
international law by this State Member of the United
Nations.
Tunisia views the Palestinian question as a matter
of national interest. We have always seen it as a
priority and consistently and robustly supported our
Palestinian brothers. Theirs is a just and legitimate
struggle for sovereignty, freedom and dignity.

11-30799

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

Tunisia is proud of its glorious revolution of
14 January 2011, a revolution of dignity and freedom.
We reassert our commitment to international law and
our support for just causes throughout the world, first
and foremost the Palestinian question. We reaffirmed
our support to President Mahmoud Abbas when he
visited our country from 18 to 20 April during his
discussions with various leaders. This position was
reaffirmed by the people of Tunisia on many occasions
throughout and at the culmination of our revolution.
Tunisia calls for the occupying Power, Israel, to
bring an immediate end to its settlement activities and
to respect its commitments under international law,
international humanitarian law, the Road Map and the
peace process. Tunisia calls on all parties concerned,
and in particular the international Quartet, to assume
their responsibilities to respond to the intransigent
Israeli position of refusing to respect international law
and do what is needed to achieve a just peace.
We reject all measures aimed at altering the
religious, demographic and social identity of
Jerusalem. We thoroughly reject attacks on the holy
sites, arbitrary expulsions and the separation of
families. We condemn Israel’s continued perpetration
of such acts and call on the international community to
adopt a strong position in order to put an end to these
actions and to prevent the imposition of a status quo.
The situation in Gaza, as has been said by many
people on many occasions, will only lead to greater
unrest. The latest acts of aggression against Palestinian
civilians underscore the danger of a new cycle of
violence, which would further increase the suffering of
the Palestinian people, whose wounds have not yet
healed following the aggression against Gaza of
December 2008 and January 2009.
Tunisia reiterates its position in support of
international protection for the Palestinian people. We
affirm the need for the occupying Power to respect its
obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention. We
caution against any acts of violence, which would only
detract from peace efforts and destroy any hope for a
peaceful settlement of the conflict.
With regard to the Syrian and Lebanese tracks,
Tunisia reaffirms that comprehensive and just peace
with Israel can be achieved only through Israel’s
complete withdrawal from the occupied Arab territories
to the line of 4 June 1967, including East Jerusalem,

11-30799

the occupied Syrian Arab Golan and the territory still
occupied in southern Lebanon.
The establishment of an independent Palestinian
State with East Jerusalem as its capital, in keeping with
the Arab Peace Initiative, is important for the
realization of a fair solution to this issue based on the
resolutions of the United Nations. The people of the
Middle East have suffered far too long. We must bring
the occupation of Arab lands to an end in order to
promote the security and stability of the region. The
security of the region is linked to the security and
stability of the whole world. Indeed, global security is
linked to security in the Middle East.
We must not allow a return to tension,
confrontation and attacks against civilians. To prevent
such a scenario, we must adopt urgent, decisive
measures to address the underlying causes of these
tensions.
Given the extremely sensitive circumstances at
present, there is greater need than ever for us to save
the peace process so as to meet the aspirations of the
peoples of the region and support the just cause of the
right of the Palestinian people to freedom, dignity and
an independent State, on the basis of international will.
We call on all parties to go beyond mere rhetoric
and to undertake courageous initiatives that show
sincere and robust will to jointly assume the historic
responsibility to bring an end to this long-standing and
bitter conflict, which has taken a heavy toll on the
region in terms of both property and human life. This
conflict has deprived the people of the region of
stability and development and forced them to live in
constant fear.
Despite this situation, those who are calling for
peace, dialogue, negotiations, a settlement of the
conflict, and security and lasting peace in the region
remain strong in their hope for a change on the ground
leading to the two-State solution and an end to the
Israeli occupation of Palestinian-Arab territory. We
must support their voices.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, I appreciate your efforts during your
presidency of the Security Council this month and I
thank you for convening this meeting on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

25

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

I align myself with the statements delivered by
the representative of Saudi Arabia on behalf of the
Group of Arab States, the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and the
representative of Tajikistan on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference. I also thank
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing and stress the
importance of the role of the Secretariat in accurately
reporting the facts on the ground in the occupied Arab
territories and the impact of the prolonged Israeli
occupation on stability not only in the Middle East but
around the world. I also welcome the participation of
Mr. Pedro Serrano, Acting Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, and of
Mr. Abdou Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People in this meeting.
The world has recently borne witness to the
radical position of the Israeli Government, which has
shirked its internationally agreed obligations and
brought the peace negotiations to a deadlock while
remaining immune to accountability. Such behaviour
thwarts the efforts of the Council to send a clear signal
to Israel that the world can no longer accept the
continuation of illegal settlements and the occupation
of Arab territories since 1967. Especially in light of the
current turmoil in the Arab world, it is mistaken to
believe that the flexibility of Arab States and the
efforts of the Quartet and the Secretary-General will
continue
forever.
Unfortunately,
the
Israeli
Government persists in its illegal settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories and the occupied
Syrian Golan, in defiance of the demands of the
Quartet, the Committee of Ministers for the Arab Peace
Initiative, and the two-thirds of the members of the
international community that stand ready to recognize
the Palestinian State.
There is an international consensus today in
favour of the two-State solution of Palestine and Israel,
living side by side in peace. We must take advantage of
this consensus and momentum to avoid a regional
confrontation that is not unlikely to erupt in the present
circumstances. The leaders of Israel ought to take this
danger seriously.
The position of Arab and peace-loving States is in
line with relevant United Nations resolutions,
including those of the Security Council. The
establishment of a lasting, just and comprehensive

26

peace in the Middle East can be based only on the
principle of land for peace and international legality.
We reiterate our firm rejection of the illegal
measures taken by Israel in occupied East Jerusalem
and its attempts to change the Arab identity,
demographic composition, legal status and religious
character of the city, and we stress that all such
attempts are null and void and without effect. The
international community must reject the attempts of the
Israeli Government to undermine the Islamic and
Christian holy sites, demolish houses in the city, expel
Arab residents and revoke their residency rights with
the aim of Judaizing the city. Such attempts violate the
obligations of Israel, the occupying Power, under
international law, are inconsistent with the relevant
decisions of the United Nations, and undermine the
foundations of a peaceful solution to the Palestinian
question and the Arab-Israeli conflict.
While the Israeli occupation of Lebanese territory
continues, we note ongoing Israeli violations of airspace
and espionage activities, which pose a threat to
Lebanese sovereignty and violate resolution 1701
(2006). Israel also continues to occupy the Syrian Golan
Heights and deplete its wealth. It has scaled up its
settlement policy there alongside its policy in Palestine,
expelling Arabs and demolishing their homes in an
attempt to change the identity and structure of the
occupied territory, in contempt of basic human rights
and in violation of international law. We reaffirm here
the decisions of the General Assembly, which has
declared invalid the Israeli decision to annex the Golan
and affirmed the need to return it to Syria, in
implementation of resolution 497 (1981). We also
reaffirm the need for the remaining occupied Lebanese
territories to be returned to Lebanon and for the right of
the Lebanese to defend their territory to be recognized.
I recall that this Council has the responsibility to
achieve peace in the Middle East; that is particularly
true of the five permanent members, which have a
historic and political responsibility vis-à-vis the current
situation. The solution exists, provided that there is
political will to create conditions conducive to the
establishment and viability of an independent
Palestinian State and the recognition of its borders
based on those of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. In conclusion, I recall that the right to
struggle for liberation from foreign occupation is a
legitimate right that cannot be equated with military
aggression by occupation forces.

11-30799

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Maldives.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): Let me begin by
expressing our profound appreciation for the
opportunity to address the Security Council during this
important debate on the situation in the Middle East
and the question of Palestine.
It is with great concern that we note the ongoing
violence in the Middle East. While we applaud the
international community in its implementation of
resolution 1973 (2011) in Libya, my Government feels
that more needs to be done in the Middle East to
preserve the basic and fundamental rights of the
region’s populations and to end the ongoing violence.
The Maldives, as a State member of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), strongly
believes that peace and prosperity in the Middle East
can be achieved only by empowering the people to
bring in much-needed social, economic and political
reforms that would lead to a more democratic and
representative system of Government. In our own
experience, the suppression of human rights and basic
freedoms is hugely counterproductive and eventually
leads to the disintegration of societal norms. We urge
the international community, especially the members of
the League of Arab States and the OIC, to assist their
fellow member States going through similar periods of
transition in building the institutional infrastructure
necessary to complete the transition to a system of
governance that is best defined by their respective
peoples.
On the question of Palestine, the position of my
Government is well known. We are hugely
disappointed to note the continued suffering of the
Palestinian people. They have been denied their rights
to self-determination and to live in peace and freedom
in their own independent State for far too long. While
recognizing the rights of the Palestinians, we also
appreciate and support the right of the people of Israel
to live in peace and security alongside an independent
and sovereign State of Palestine.
The Israeli settlement is another issue of concern.
The Maldives recognizes the Israeli right to housing,
but at the same time the rights of Palestinians should
not be trampled. Therefore the Maldives calls on Israel
to freeze the expansion of all settlements in the
occupied territories.

11-30799

In conclusion, the Maldives does not wish to see
another generation of Palestinians grow up under the
yoke established by the occupation and the blockade,
which perpetuates the extreme poverty and depravity
witnessed over the past 63 years. We urge all countries
to support the pillars that will provide an enduring
solution to the conflict for the people of this region.
Violence will never bring peace to the Middle East;
instead it will create more violence, shed more blood
and increase hatred on both sides. My Government
therefore strongly believes that peace will be
established in the Middle East only when a sovereign
State of Palestine is formed.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East. The issue under discussion is of
paramount importance, and this meeting is all the more
important in the light of new developments taking
place in the region.
The Israeli regime continues to defy international
law by continuing its unlawful and inhuman blockade
against Palestinians, in particular in the Gaza strip,
while the damages inflicted on Gaza as a result of the
occupying regime’s 2009 onslaught are yet to be
remedied. The report of the United Nations FactFinding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48)
constitutes an important step in remedying the
violations of the Israeli regime in Gaza. When it was
issued, the report raised hopes that action would be
taken by the relevant bodies of the United Nations,
including the Security Council, to put an end to the
culture of impunity for Israeli war crimes.
However, no credible action has been taken to that
end. Attempts are still being made to whitewash the
atrocities committed by the Israeli war machine. What
would remain of the credibility of the United Nations if
no action were taken on the report? United Nations
bodies, including the Council, should ensure the full and
immediate implementation of the recommendations
contained in the Goldstone report. Impunity for
perpetrators of crimes of a grave nature is in itself a
cause and incentive for further atrocities. In that regard,
we welcome the efforts by the Government of
Switzerland, in its capacity as depositary of the Geneva

27

S/PV.6520 (Resumption 1)

Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, to reconvene the Conference of High
Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention to
consider measures to enforce the Convention in the
occupied Palestinian territory. We hope that the
Conference can be held before September.
We also look forward to a comprehensive report
by the Secretary-General on the progress made in the
implementation of the recommendations of the FactFinding Mission by all concerned parties, including
United Nations bodies and, in particular, the Security
Council.
It is regrettable to witness that inaction by
relevant United Nations organs in dealing with the
Israeli regime’s unlawful and inhuman policies and
oppressive practices against the populations of the
occupied territories has emboldened this dangerous
regime to continue its crimes against the defenceless
Palestinian people. The generous support by certain
Powers for the Israeli regime has been some of the
most consequential support in contemporary history.
That support has been provided to the detriment of
regional peace and stability, as well as Palestinians’
basic human rights. Last February, the Council again
failed to take action on a draft resolution (S/2011/24)
that simply underlined the urgency of putting an end to
the Israeli apartheid regime’s unlawful campaign to
destroy Palestinian homes and build new settlement
units (see S/PV.6484).
The draft resolution was doomed to failure
simply because just one permanent member resorted to
its privileged veto right and obstructed the Security
Council from action. That was of course not the first
time, as the United States has a long recorded history
of covering up the atrocities committed by the Israeli
regime, and hence sharing the regime’s crimes as an
accomplice. Blocking actions by the Council will only
embolden the Israeli regime to continue its inhuman
and war-mongering policies with impunity and to
violate internationally recognized human rights and
humanitarian law without any consequences.

28

The Israeli regime has persisted in its aggressive
policies towards Lebanon by constantly violating its
land, sea and air space and refusing to withdraw from
Lebanese occupied territory. It also refuses to withdraw
from the Golan Heights. This regime is continuing its
hostile and provocative policy of spying against
Lebanon. Recently, sophisticated spying equipment was
detected and confiscated — the second such incident in
less than a year. This is a blatant violation of Lebanese
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Achieving a peaceful and just settlement of the
question of Palestine is imperative for the realization
of comprehensive and lasting peace and stability in the
Middle East and beyond. In our view, lasting peace in
Palestine and the region will be possible only through
justice and putting an end to discriminatory and racist
policies and ending the occupation of Palestine and
other occupied territories. Today, we see more and
more States joining the ranks of those that have already
recognized Palestine as an independent State. This is a
very clear indication that the cause of Palestine is
taking on new momentum. Let us hope that oppression
and occupation will end and justice and freedom will
prevail in the Palestinian occupied territory.
Before I conclude, I would like to react to the
reference made to my country by the representatives of
the United States and the Israeli regime. I would like to
place on record that my delegation rejects the baseless
allegations and distortions made in the Chamber, which
are intended to distract the attention of the
international community from the facts concerning the
criminal policies and abhorrent atrocities in the region
committed by the Israeli regime, in particular the
heinous crimes committed against the people of
Palestine.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.

11-30799
