S/2022/623

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 August 2022
Original: English

Letter dated 10 August 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to write to you with regard to the financing of the Residual
Special Court for Sierra Leone.
Pursuant to article 3 of the Agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of Sierra Leone on the establishment of a Residual Special Court for
Sierra Leone, “the expenses of the Residual Special Court shall be borne by voluntary
contributions from the international community. The parties and the Oversight
Committee may explore alternative means of financing the Residual Special Court”.
The oversight committee of the Court has informed me that the Court will run out of
funding at the end of 2022 and that, while fundraising efforts will continue, it is not
expected that there will be sufficient voluntary contributions for the operations of the
Court beyond 2022.
The Residual Special Court was established pursuant to a mandate from the
Security Council and has been carrying out residual functions of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone since 1 January 2014. Those functions include supervising the
enforcement of sentences of the persons who were convicted by the Special Court;
providing for witness and victim protection and support; preserving and managing
the Archives of the Special Court; responding to requests for access to evidence by
national prosecutorial authorities; responding to requests from national authorities
with respect to claims for compensation; reviewing convictions and acquittals;
conducting contempt of court proceedings; providing defence counsel and legal aid
for the conduct of proceedings before the Residual Special Court; and preventing
double jeopardy.
The Residual Special Court is a lean institution with a small number of staff. The
Registrar is the only senior full-time official, and the judges, the Prosecutor and the
Principal Defender are remunerated on a pro rata basis for work actually performed.
In order to minimize costs further, the Office of the Residual Special Court in The
Hague is co-located with and receives administrative support, on a cost-reimbursable
basis, from the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
The senior officials of the Residual Special Court have continued to raise funds
in 2022, with a view to broadening the donor base of the Court. Furthermore, in May
2022, I wrote to all Member States to appeal for voluntary contributions for the Court.
I am grateful for all contributions of Member States to the Residual Special Court
over the years, including those for the 2022 fiscal year. No contributions or pledges
have been made towards the budget of the Court for the 2023 fiscal year.

22-12735 (E)

180822

*2212735*

S/2022/623

The Residual Special Court is helping to consolidate the rule of law and
contributes to efforts aimed at achieving peace and security in Sierra Leone and the
region. If it does not secure sufficient funding, the Residual Special Court will not be
able to fulfil its important mandate. The failure of the Residual Special Court would
diminish the legacy of the Special Court for Sierra Leone and severely undermine the
achievements made in pursuit of accountability for the serious international c rimes
committed in Sierra Leone.
In the light of the foregoing, I intend again this year to propose to the General
Assembly that the costs of the Residual Special Court for 2023 be met through a
subvention under the assessed programme budget. A subvention would be a temporary
measure to address the current financial situation. Moreover, I will continue to seek
additional voluntary contributions for the Court, as well as to assess the potential for
achieving greater efficiencies and possible savings in coordination with the Court.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/2

22-12735
