VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

6. Appeals to Governments to promote the establishment of appropriate facilities for the care and education of
children as a means of combining parenthood with economic, political, social, cultural and other activities, and
thus to assist women towards full integration in society;
7. Calls upon Member States to adopt the necessary effective measures with a view to implementing the Nairobi
Forward-looking Strategies as a matter of priority, including the establishment or strengthening of appropriate
mechanisms for the advancement of women, in order to
ensure the full participation of women in all spheres of life
in their countries;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, when preparing
surveys on the role of women in development as well as reports on the world social situation and other relevant surveys, to pay due attention to all the interrelated aspects of
the role of women in society;
9. Invites the Commission on the Status of Women to
pay due attention to the provisions of the present resolution during the consideration at its next sessions of the priority themes under the heading "Equality", with a view to
formulating recommendations for appropriate action by
concerned United Nations organs and bodies.
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/65.

International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 40/38 of 29 November 1985 as
well as Economic and Social Council resolution 1987 /25
of 26 May 1987,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women on its activities, 54
Recognizing that the Institute's mode of operation,
through the use of networks, in carrying out its functions
at the international, regional and national levels has enabled it to strengthen the scope and impact of its activities,
Convinced of the important role of research, training
and information for the implementation of the Nairobi
Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of
Women 40 and for monitoring new trends and issues related to women and developmental policy design,
1. Expresses its satisfaction at the significance and
scope of the activities of the International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women, particularly as they relate to statistics and indicators on
women and training for the formulation of policy analysis,
planning and programming relevant to an increased participation and the integration of women in development;
2. Requests the Institute to continue and strengthen its
research, training, information and communication activities, particularly the developing of innovative training
methodologies on women and socio-economic issues related to development, networking as far as possible with
other relevant research and training activities;
3. Also requests the Institute to promote general
awareness of and training in the pragmatic approach to
the integration of women in policy designs, including the
elaboration of special methodologies for monitoring and
evaluation purposes, with particular reference to the im-

54 A/42/444, annex.

193

plementation of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies
for the Advancement of Women and the feedback of results into the operational system;
4. Calls upon institutions and organizations within and
outside the United Nations system, particularly the
United Nations regional commissions, to continue their
collaboration with the Institute, on the basis of equitable
cost-sharing, by strengthening the network of co-operative
arrangements related to research, training, information
and communication programmes concerning women and
development;
5. Invites States and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to contribute to the United
Nations Trust Fund for the International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women so as to
ensure that the Institute has the necessary resources to implement its long-term policies and programmes;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session a report on
the activities of the Institute;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women".
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/94.

Universal realization of the right of peoples to
self-determination

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance, for the effective guarantee
and observance of human rights, of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations and embodied in the
International Covenants on Human Rights, 13 as well as in
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Welcoming the progressive exercise of the right to selfdetermination by peoples under colonial, foreign or alien
occupation and their emergence into sovereign statehood
and independence,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of acts or threats of
foreign military intervention and occupation that are
threatening to suppress, or have already suppressed, the
right to self-determination of an increasing number of sovereign peoples and nations,
Expressing grave concern that, as a consequence of the
persistence of such actions, millions of people have been
and are being uprooted from their homes as refugees and
displaced persons, and emphasizing the urgent need for
concerted international action to alleviate their condition,
Recalling the relevant resolutions regarding the violation of the right of peoples to self-determination and other
human rights as a result of foreign military intervention,
aggression and occupation, adopted by the Commission
on Human Rights at its thirty-sixth/5 thirty-seventh, 56

55 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1980,
Suf[1ement No. 3 (E/1980/13 and Corr.I), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
Ibid .. 1981, Supplement No. 5 (E/1981/25 and Corr.I),
chap. XXVIII. sect. A.
