OFFICIAL

RECORDS

CONTENTS
PLQpf

, . , . , . . . . ,, , . . . . , . . , , . , . . . , . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . , , . . , , . , . . , . . . , . . . . . . , , . . . , . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia . . , . . . . . . . , , . . . , , . , . , . , , . . . . . , , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l962/Rev.l)

S/W.1962

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/? . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplemettts of the Officid Reco~~l.s qf’ the Smrrity Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rewlutions
rrr?t/
Decisions of the Security Coutxd. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1962nd MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 18 October 1976, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr. Iqbal A. AKHUND

(Pakistan).

present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
ofGreat Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l962/Rev.l)

1. Adoption of the agenda
‘2.

sin), Ms. Jnsoszek (Polnrd),
Mr. Bosoody
(Snrdi
Asnbin),
Ms. Mirmh
(Sicwn
LeolIe),
Mr. Hlrsseu
(Sowdin),
Ms. Kmokaratr~e
(Ssi Lanka),
Mr. Sallnm
(Yemen),
Ms. Pets2 (Yugoslovin)
otui Ms. MWOIP
(Zciinl~ici) took the plnces reserwtifor
them nt the side
of the Corrrtcil chnmber.

2. The PRESIDENT:
Before I call on the first
speaker, I should like to call the attention of the members of the Council to the draft resolution before the
Council which is sponsored by Benin, Guyana, the
Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania
and the United Republic of Tanzania [S/12211].

The situation in Namibia
The meeting

~IIS called

to ostl’es nt 3.50 p.nl.

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in Namibia
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
previously taken by the Council [/954th rrrd 1956th
to /96/st meetings]
I shall now invite the President
and other members of the United Nations Council
for Namibia,
and the representatives
of Algeria,
Bangladesh, Botswana, Burundi, Cuba, Democratic
Kampuchea, Egypt, Ethiopia,
German Democratic
Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius,
Morocco, Mozambique,
Niger, Nigeria, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, Sri Lanka, Yemen, Yugoslavia and Zambia
to participate in the Council’s discussion without the
right to vote.

3. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): Since the Council met
on 31 August [1954th meting]
pursuant to resolution 385 (1976), which was adopted unanimously
earlier this year, we have held several meetings on
the question of Namibia. No fewer than 34 representatives of Member States have participated in our
deliberations. Since then, too, some heads of Government and many Foreign Ministers and other heads of
delegation have spoken in the now concluded general
debate in the General Assembly giving their Governments’ views and positions on the situation in Namibia.
We have also had the benefit of the opinion of the
United Nations Council for Namibia, which is empowered by General Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V)
to “administer South West Africa until independence”.
And the members of this Council had the privilege on
28 September [I956th mwtiu.y] of listening to the clear
statement by Comrade Sam Nujoma, President of the
South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO),
the authentic representative of the people of Namibia,
containing modest and reasonable proposals for the
fulfilment of the legitimate aspirations of all true
Namibians to the freedom and independence of Namibia as a territorial unit in and of itself.
4. Outside the United Nations, efforts, which have
been much publicized, have been undertaken with the
declared objective of bringing about a peaceful resolution of the conflict situation existing in and in
relation to Namibia. Outside the United Nations also,
the non-aligned countries, at their Fifth Summit
Conference, held in Colombo in August 1976, discussed
this question. Their conclusions in this regard are
contained in document S/12188. Additionally,
the
representative of Sri Lanka presented the views of the
movement with clarity in his statement before us on
7 October [l96Otk mwing].

5. The Council, therefore, is now at a stage when, in
the discharge of its primary responsibility
for the
maintenance
of international
peace and security, it
can .determine
action-necessary
and appropriate
action-to
meet the requirements of the present situation in Namibia properly. And the Council should make
that determination
free from the prism of narrow
national perceptions, assigning priority to the expectations of the people of Namibia and of the international community.

again promised to meet immediately
in the event of
failure by South Africa to implement
the resolution.
Later that year, South Africa in resolution 269 (1969),
the Council condemned for its refusal to comply with
resolution 264 (1969). The ,call for withdrawal from
-Namibia was reiterated and a deadline of 4 October
1969 was fixed. Once again, the Council declared its
intention to meet immediately
if South Africa did not
comply with the provisions of that resolution. But
meetings in January and July 1970 found South Africa
still defiant. Those meetings also found the Council
still hesitating on the threshold of decisive action.

6. There are certain golden threads which run through
most, if not all, of the presentations made before this
Council and the General Assembly.
Reflected in
them in a stark manner is the anxiety and anguish.
felt by the international
community over the situation
in southern Africa in general, and in Namibia in
particular. Everyone is deeply concerned.

10. When in February 1972 this Council held its
historic meetings in Addis Ababa it decided, by resolution 310 (1972) on Namibia, that, in the event of
failure on the part of South Africa to comply with the
provisions of that resolution, the Security Council

7. In more specific terms, South Africa has been
condemned for its continued illegal-or,
as some say,
unlawful-occupation
of Namibia. It is clear that the
international
community wants, indeed demands, the
withdrawal of South Africa from Namibia right away.
It is clear too that the international
community
is
deeply concerned over the militarization
of Namibia,
a militarization
which betrays South Africa’s intentions
in relation not only to that Territory but to neighbouring
African States as well. Indeed, as you will recall,
Mr. President, this Council has found it necessary
twice this year to demand that South Africa desist
forthwith from the utilization of Namibia as a base for
launching armed attacks against neighbouring African
countries [r~i’solririom 387 (1976 uutl 393 (1976)].
Angola and Zambia were the countries involved. It is
clear also from the various presentations that decisive
action is expected of the Council at the conclusion of
our current debate. There has been in many speeches
an insistent call for action in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter.

“shall meet immediately
to. decide upon effective
steps or measures, in accordance with the relevant
Chapters of the Charter, to secure”-and
I stress
“to secure”-“
the full and speedy implementation
of the present resolution.”
1 I. That the question of Namibia was discussed by
the Council in 1973, 1974, 1975 and earlier this year is
adequate testimony that South Africa continues to defy
the Council, to ignore the decisions of the Organization
and to take no account of the opinion of the overwhelming majority of the world’s States and peoples.
That fact also testifies eloquently to our inability “to
secure” South Africa’s compliance
with our resolutions.
12. That we are meeting now, pursuant to resolution 385 (1976) is the result of South Africa’s intransigent attitude, for no one can seriously contend that
the diatribe contained in document S/12180, relating to
a so-called constitutional
conference at Turnhalle,
represents an adequate response to the clear prescriptions of resolution 385 (1976), if it is indeed a response
at all.

8. The Council’s concern with the question of Namibia is not of recent origin. Speaking in the Council
nearly two years ago in my capacity then as President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia, [18/1th
~rr~tirr~] I drew attention to the catalogue of South
Africa’s defiances of the Organization
and of its
refusals to implement the United Nations resolutions,
and to the need for effective action to put an end to
South Africa’s contumacious practices.

13. The critical question is: where do we go from
here? In this connexion, it is perhaps apposite to
reiterate the truism that in the final analysis it is the
people of Namibia, led by its authentic representative,
SWAPO, which will wrest its freedom from the racist
oppressors from Pretoria. But the Security Council,
the United Nations Council for Namibia, the United
Nations in general and all progressive and freedomloving peoples have a duty to assist the people of
Namibia in its legitimate struggle. There is also room
for support to be given through bilateral efforts,
especially by those whom the South African authorities
would wish to count as their allies. All these efforts
interact, but they do not depend one upon the other.
The exercise of duties and responsibilities
can be
complementary,
once all those efforts are motivated
by one primary concern: the freedom and independence of Namibia,

9. In 1968, resolution 246 (1968), which was adopted
unanimously,
called on South Africa to take certain
specific steps. The Council decided that, in the event of
non-compliance
by South Africa, it “will meet immediately to determine effective steps or measures in
conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations”.
As expected, South Africa
refused to comply with that resolution. Thus, when
resolution 264 (1969) was adopted, calling inter t//h
upon South Africa “to withdraw immediately
its
administration
from the Territory”,
the Council once
2

14, It therefore becomes necessary, I suggest, for the
Security Council to look at its own record in regard
to decisive action on Namibia. In 1969 it considered
that the continued illegal presence of South Africa in
Namibia was “detrimental
to the interests of the
population of the Territory and those of the interna[rc.vol~rfii~n 264 (/WY)].
In 1970
tional community”
it considered that the continued occupation of Namibia
hy South Africa had “grave consequences for the
rights and interests of the people of Namibia”
[mesa/l/t/on 276 (IY70)].
In 1971, in the face of the contemptuous South African defiance, it declared that
“any further refusal of the South African Government
to withdraw from Namibia could create conditions
detrimental to the maintenance
of peace and
security in the region” [resoltrtion 301 (/Y7/)]. In 1972
it went a little further. It considered that the continued
occupation of Namibia by South Africa “in defiance
of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and
of the Charter creates conditions detrimental to the
maintenance of peace and security in the region”
[wsolrrtion

United States, then Ambassador Scali, said: “In view
of the facts of the Namibian situation, it is difficult
to find that a threat to international peace and security
exists within thebmeaning of the Charter” [/825th
meating,
pcrru. (YY]. He went on to point out that
“it would not be appropriate to invoke mandatory
sanctions which are specifically reserved for threats
to peace” [/hid.]. As to the third veto-wielder, Ambassador Ivor Richard of the United Kingdom, who is
now involved in a delicate exercise as umpire or
chairman-I
am not sure which-said
quite categorically: “my Government does not regard the
situation in Namibia as a threat to international peace
and security...” [182Yth meeting, pam. 281.
19. Clearly there is no significance in the fact that
none of those three representatives is with us at this
moment. But, quite seriously, can anyone who is aware
of the situation in Namibia today really and justly
uphold the argument that that situation does not
constitute a threat to international peace and security?
What Ambassador Richard said last year in justification
of a different position is particularly relevant today.
He said: “Yet, when we look back from today, it is,
I think, striking to see how the pattern of events has
changed.” [/hid., para. 10.1 He said that in 1975;
I reiterate it now in 1976.

310 (IY72)].

15. In 1973 and, more particularly,
in 1974 the
Council, encouraged by a mood of optimism that
changes of a far-reaching nature induced by the racists
would be forthcoming,
considered the question of
Namibia with some hope. But the dialogue with South
Africa during those years was essentially a dialogue
with the deaf.

20. The truth is that the situation in Namibia has for
som,e time constituted a threat to international peace
and security. That fact is perhaps more clearly
perceived now. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Sweden, speaking in the General Assembly on I3
October, reflected widely held views when she said:

16. During that period and since then, changes of
a far-reaching nature have indeed taken place in
southern -Africa. The valiant freedom fighters of
Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique,
Cape Verde, Sao Tome
and Principe and Angola have wrought those changes.
The boundaries of freedom have now reached the
Cunene and the Limpopo.
Zimbabwe, Azania and
Namibia still, however, remain in the clutches of the
racists.

“Sweden and manv other States have characterized the situation in-southern Africa as a threat to
peace. If acceptable results cannot be attained
through negotiations, the Security Council should
therefore impose sanctions to eliminate the threat.
In the first place, we have proposed that the recommendation already adopted by the Security Council
on the cessation of all shipments of weapons to
South Africa should be made mandatory. Such a
measure would give effective expression to the
entire international community’s condemnation of
South Africa’s policies.“’

17. Last year, in June, when the question of Namibia
was debated by the Council, some of us sought to
convey the true dimensions of the Namibian tragedy.
As a consequence, we endeavoured to persuade the
Council to take action under Chapter VII of the
Charter. Our efforts, however, attracted a triple
veto-that of France, the United Kingdom and the
United States. Let us review the situation and the
arguments put forward then,

Further, no less a person than President Ford of the
United States acknowledged on 8 September that the
efforts of Secretary of State Kissinger were designed
to avert an escalation of violence in southern Africa
and that those efforts were “in the interest of world
peace’ ’ . That was no empty rhetoric.

18. The representative of France, now the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, said that his delegation did not
agree with “the opinion stated by some, according to
whom the situation in Namibia comes under Chapter VII of the Charter or under one of its Articles”
V824th meeting,
partr. 1041. Later, in explaining his
negative vote, Ambassador de Guiringaud, said that
his delegation did not think that the concept of international peace and security was “now jeopardized or
involved in the circumstances prevailing in Namibia”
[/829th meeting, para. 1931. The representative of the

21. Today a crisis exists in southern Africa. It is a
crisis universally recognized. It is a crisis about freedom. It is a crisis about human dignity. It, is a crisis
which affects us all. It is a crisis that threatens
international peace and security.
22. The situation in Namibia now pales by comparison with that in Rhodesia in 1965. Then-that
is,
3

assistance, both overt and covert, to the South African
rkgime. Such provisions would also contribute in no
small measure to the achievement of independence
by the Namibian people, their imprescriptible
right,
By resolution 282 (1970) the Council called on all
States to strengthen the voluntary arms embargo
requested earlier. But arms are still flowing into South
Africa. Let us therefore now impose a mandatory
embargo. Paragraph 12 indicates quite clearly the
necessary actions to be taken by States which may
have entered into contractual or other agreements
relating to military assistance and collaboration with
the South African rkgime. The role accorded to the
Secretary-General in paragraph 13 would, in the view of
fhe co-sponsors, *adequately complement
the provisions of paragraph 11 Paragraphs 14 and 15 are selfexplanatory.

in 1965-the Security Council in an astute display of
judgement
determined that the continuance of the
conditions then existing would constitute a threat to
international
peace and security. We do not have to
await such a continuance in Namibia. Let us determine
it now. The conflation of interests is there. We need
to act upon it.
23. In this connexion the delegations of Benin, the
Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania,
the United Republic of Tanzania and the delegation
of my own country, Guyana, have prepared a draft
resolution [S/12211] which, if adopted, will go some
way towards meeting the requirements of the situation.
In the first two paragraphs of its preamble, the draft
resolution
pays due attention to the statements
delivered by the Presidents of the United Nations
Council for Namibia and SWAPO-the
Council being
the body authorized. by the United Nations to
administer the territory of Namibia until independence,
and-SWAP0
being recognized by the United Nations
as the sole authentic representative of the people of
Namibia. The third, fourth and fifth paragraphs of the
preamble recall those elements of United Nations and
international activity which are directly relevant to the
total liberation of Namibia. The seventh paragraph
of the preamble is self-explanatory in its terms, and
the remaining paragraphs of the preamble address
themselves to those activities of the South African
regime which have been impediments to Namibia’s
attainment of independence.

25. Any cursory review of Council action on Namibia will lead to the inescapable conclusion that the
Council has consistently promised effective action.
Its defaults are known within it and beyond. But
expectations of performance have not yet been stilled
in the wider international community.
26. This is not the time for forays into sophistry or
intellectual calisthenics. The people of Namibia, the
people of Africa demand decisive action by the
Council. And there are others who do so. People all
over the world who are for freedom look to the Council now. Not least among them are the people of the
black diaspora.

24. In operative paragraph 1 the draft resolution justly
condemns South Africa’s failure to comply with the
terms of Security Council resolution 385 (1976):
Paragraphs 2, 3, 6, 7 and 9 address themselves to the
evasive devices practised by the racist South African
rCgime in its resolve to flout the authority of the
United Nations in pursuit of its course of intransigence.
In paragraph 4 the draft resolution reaffirms the legal
responsibility of the United Nations over Namibia,
and in paragraph 5 support for the just struggle of the
people of Namibia for self-determination
and independence is reaffirmed. In paragraph 8, the draft
resolution would have the Security Council reaffirm
its declaration that free elections should be held to
permit
the exercise of the principle
of selfdetermination,
under the supervision and control
of the United Nations. Paragraph 10 is concerned
with those prerequisites to which the South African
rkgime must give full effect in order to create the
climate necessary for the realization of the complete
and total independence of Namibia. Paragraph 11,
which lies at the core of the draft resolution, would
seek to invoke certain of the provisions of Chapter VII
of the Charter. Such provisions, if faithfully implemented by States Members of the United Nations,
would effect the cessation of all forms of military

27. The essential human commons have imposed
upon the Council an extraordinary necessity. It is to
reach for those high and lbfty ideals of freedom and
dignity which have always informed the beliefs of
dedicated individuals and guided the actions of mature
statesmen who choose no other course than that which
pursues justice and that which requires courage. The
question of Namibia
today affords us all that
opportunity.
28. History records the achievements of people who
have fought for and who have steadfastly stood by
fundamental principles no less than of those who have
abandoned such principles in the interest of shortterm need. It is the hope of the sponsors of the draft
resolution that the vote on this issue will not so
separate the members of the Council. On behalf of
the sponsors and my own country I commend the draft
resolution to the members of Council.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

’ Officirrl Rrcorrls
of the Getled
Assembly,
Pke~rory Meetings,
29th meeting, para. 105.

4

Thirty-first

SedoC
