1

ljI

/
i’,

TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 27 MAY 1968

I

NEW

’

YORK

CONTENTS
Pay
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1427) . . . . . . , , . . , . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda , . . , , . . , , . . , . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Letter dated 21 May 1968 from the Permanent Representative ad interim of Haiti
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8593) . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.1427

‘7

‘/I,

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Coun$l (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of fie Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND TWENTY-SEVENTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Monday, 27 May 1968, at 4 p.m.
President: Lord CARADON
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

position, their power, their ethnic composition or culture,
their language or religion, in accordance with Article 1,
paragraph 3, of the Charter.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America,

5. When, as now, so many terrible problems are facing
Governments and communities and when, as prophesied in
the Bible, the earth is removed and the mountains are
carried into the midst of the sea, when the waters thereof
roar and are troubled, when the mountains shake with the
swelling thereof, when the hire of the labourers who have
reaped down the field of the rich; which is kept back by
fraud, crieth, it is neither surprising, untimely nor unreasonable that the 4 million negroesof the small Caribbean State
of Haiti, the first independent and sovereign black republic
in the world, should come to the Security Council to cry
halt! My Government’comes befor’e the Council today to
draw attention to facts which, according to Articles 34 and
35 of the Charter, create a situation which might lead to
international friction.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 427)

I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2. Letter dated 21 May 1968 from the Permanent Representative ad interim of Haiti addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8.593)
Adoption of the agenda

LQe agenda wasadopted.

3. The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Haiti, to whom I now give the floor.

6. This situation has already causeda breach of the peace
and it threatens to deteriorate in the near future. It is the
sort of situation which, according to Article 2, paragraph 3
of the Charter, would normally endanger international
peace and security. It has been characterized by repeated
acts of an aggressivenature which have been, and still are
being, perpetrated from outside and which take various
forms: sometimes a vicious press campaign and unsavoury
propaganda on radio, television and on the screen,with the
object of spreadingand encouraging hatred against the mass
of negro peasantsin Haiti and against their Government,
which has been made an object of ridicule; sometimes
economic strangulation by the blocking of all international
or private channels through which the international COoperation referred to in Article 1, paragraph 3, of the
Charter might havehelped to solve the economic, social and
humanitarian problems with which ‘this black community in
the Caribbean has been and is still faced This community,
which has always been in the forefront of the struggle
against slavery in all its forms and which is bringing about
social and racial emancipation and national economic
development, now finds itself condemned to extinction
through a slow process of starvation, with no alternative
but to rebel against the Government it has created for itself
or to throw itself into the arms of foreign ideologies.

4. Mr. BONHOMME (Haiti) (translated from Bench):
Mr. President, I should like to convey to you my Govemmerit’s thanks and great appreciation of your decision to
convene an emergency meeting pf the Security Council
which is the conscience of the world, and is answerableto
mankind as a whole. It cannot and must not make any
distinction between nations because of their geographical

7. Armed forces, regularly re-equipped from inexhaustible
fmancial resources,have kept up a constant pressure and
made eight separate invasions in an attempt to bring about
the violent overthrow of an established and recognized
Government and to halt the national revolution of a black
community. These acts of aggressionreached their height
on Monday, 20 May.

Letter dated 21 May 1968 from the Permanent Representative ad interim of Haiti addressed ta the President of the
Security Council (S/8593)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite the representative of Haiti to
participate without the right to vote, in the discussion of
the question now on the agenda. Credentials for the
representative of Haiti have been received, and the Secretary-General’s report of 24 May 1968 [S/8.594] has been
circulated.
A+’ tlze invitation of the President, Mr. Bonhomme (Haiti)
took a place at the Security Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now begin
its examination of the complaint submitted to it by Haiti in
its communications of 20 and 21 May 1968 [S/8592 and
S/8593].

1

8. They have been directed: first, against the territorial
integrity and political independence of a Member State
(Article 2, para. 4); second, against its race and the right of
self-determination of its negro masses, their right to
establish a Government capable of safeguarding their
hitherto peaceful and democratic progress towards equality
of citizens and towards human dignity, which has now been
assailed by violence, invasions, slander and economic
strangulation (Article 1, para. 2) amounting to the crime of
genocide as defined by the Convention of 9 December
1948; third, against its unarmed population, against its
Head of State and his family, which constitutes assassination and international brigandage organized as a regular
system that cannot and must not be tolerated by the
Security Council if it performs its duties faithfully and
carries out its fundamental responsibilities.

14. Mr. John N. Plank, senior staff member in charge of
political development studies at the Brookings Institution
at Washington; former Director, Office of Research and
Analysis for the American Republics in the Department of
State; former Professor of Latin American Affairs at the
Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, wrote an article
entitled “The Caribbean: intervention, when and how”
which was published in volume 44, No. 1 (October 1965)
of Foreign Affairs. Referring to intervention in the Domini.
can Republic, he said-and take careful note not only of the
factors which, in his view, caused the intervention and of
which the Security Council is well aware bu,t also of their
similarity to the situation in Haiti:
“ . . . more than 20,000 United States troops were put
into the city to ensure the safety of foreigners, halt the
bloodshed and quell the violence, restore order-and
forestall what President Johnson believed was the imnn.
nent takeover of the Republic by Communist-dominated
elements and the establishment of a ‘second Cuba’.

9. My Government is, therefore, appearing before the
Security Council today because for the moment, although
acts of aggression have been committed from outside the
country, it has not so far been a question of two States
Members of the United Nations having a dispute, a quarrel,
breaking off friendly or diplomatic relations, or being at
war, in which case Article 33 of the Charter would apply;
namely, the obligation to seek a solution by negotiation,
inquiry, mediation etc., or by resort to regional agencies or
arrangements.

“The President’s decision to intervene, applauded by
most North Americans caused consternation in other
parts of the hemisphere. Many Dominicans were offended
by this latest affront to their national dignity, seeing in it
a dramatic demonstration that the United States had no
confidence in their ability to resolve their own problems
and little respect for their position as citizens of a
sovereign and independent State, juridically the equal of
the United States itself. Many other Latin Americans
were deeply disturbed, both because of the massive
breach of the non-intervention principle and because of
the way in which the United States took to itself
responsibility for defining the character of the developing
Dominican situation and responding to it.

10. We make no accusations, we accuse no people, no
Government, no country, but we shall quote clear and
explicit texts which cover the situation m Haiti and provide
for its settlement. We shall submit facts that are supported
by evidence and that point to a logical remedy and the
action to be taken.
11. Why, then should we belittle the gravity of this
situation, for which my Government asks for your serious
attention and immediate action? Because it concerns a
small country, or a little twig of the great black branch of
mankind?

“The Organization of American States, profoundly
shocked, its pride in tatters, came reluctantly to the
support of the United States. . . .“I
15. Mr. Plank’s first conclusion was:

12. What would happen if a great power was the victim of
similar aggression on the same scale, directed from the
territory of a friendly State, financed and supported by
citizens of that friendly allied State and with the co-opera..
tion of its own nationals, in abuse of the principle of
territorial asylum and in violation of solemn international
treaties? What would it do if an armed attack had been
launched against its territory, its army, its population, its
military bases; if there had been an attempt to assassinate
its Head of State, the members of the Government and
their families; if the neighbouring Powers had mobilized
their land and sea forces? Would not the Security Council
have been asked to deal with the matter and would it not
have taken the necessary action?

“All of this is now history. But it is history that could
repeat itself-with
appropriate local variations-m other
countries of Central America and the Caribbean. In Haiti,
for instance, or in Guatemala or in Honduras. These are
countries that he within a sphere the United States
regards as being of vital importance: under no circumstances will their capture by Communist regimes be
permitted. The device of preventive intervention,
employed by the United States in the Dominican case,
could be employed again. Whether it will be employed, or
should be, is another matter.
“Three facts are to be kept in mind in thinking about
United States policy toward countries in the Caribbean
region. The first fact is that the societies of the
Caribbean, like societies everywhere in the developlag
world, are caught up in the confused but rapid process of
change which we are accustomed to call generically the
nationalist revolution. The second is that the United
States is member and leader of the Inter-American
System, the institutionalized embodiment of the Western

13. How can it be claimed that the invasion by a handful
of men of a small State in the Caribbean does not endanger
peace in this critical ama, and even in the continent and
throughout the world when such a danger has arisen in the
past and has led to mobilization and to a confrontation
which made the whole world tremble, and caused your
great Council to be convened in historic meetings and
which culminated in victory for the principles of the
Charter which we are invoking today?

1 Quoted in Englishby the speaker.
2

Hemisphere idea, known since 1948 as the Organization
of American States. The old label better conveys the
nature of the congeries of institutions through which the
states of the hemisphere conduct much of their public
business, The th)d fact is that the Caribbean is the focus
of the cold war in this hemisphere.“1

major infrastructure work designedto set the world’sfirst
independentblack republic firmly on the road to progress
and civilization, the Haitian nation finds itself up againsta
large-scale
international conspiracy.
20. When, after the secondConferenceat Punta de1Este
in 1962, the Haitian Government made the necessary
arrangementsfor the construction, at its own expense,of
the FranGoisDuvalicr International Airport, it was confronted with those seriousevents of 1963 which were
referred to here, in the Security Council, by the Foreign
Minister, Mr. RenCChalmers[I035th and 1036th meefings].

16, Mr. Plank goes on to say that the primary aim of the
United States in the Caribbean is to promote relations
between Caribbean nationalities and inter-Americanism in
the hemisphere. He points out how difficult that is in
practice, Referring to Haiti, he says:
“Haiti’s situation is even more precarious but for very
different reasons, Of all states in the hemisphere, this is
the least well structured. Politically, despite the seeming
invulnerability
of President Duvalier, it is extremely
fragile and brittle: when Duvalier goes the political
“system’‘-such
as it is-will collapse. Duvalier’s successors will inherit administrative chaos and a disarticulated
society. Desperately poor, largely, rural, living isolated
lives, the population asks little of its central government
but to be left alone. Into this administrative, political,
ideological void the Communists could step easily.“’

21. At the presenttime, the HaitianGovernmenthasjust
concludeda contract for the mostimportantproject in the
nation’s history, namely: first, the construction of a
hydra-electric power station at the P6ligre dam and an
adjoining substation;and secondly,the construction of a
power transmissionline from PBligreto Port-au-Princeanda
substationat Port-au-Prince.This contract wasintroduced
in the Chamber on 8 May 1968 and ratified by a law
publishedby the Government in the Official Gazette, ,!,e
Maniteur, on Thursday, 16 May 1968.Four dayslater, as
we know, Port-au-Princeand CapeHaiti weresubjectedto a
heavy bombingattack.

17. Those are Mr. Plank’s words. Referring to communist
opportunism, he says:
6‘. . . there is Haiti, which if left to itself could be

22. I shallnow take the membersof the Security Council
back to the year 1958, which wasthe startingpoint for a
succession
of armedinvasionsandactsof piracy, attackson
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Haiti.

effectively, if not formally, under Communist control
within hours or days of Duvalier’s demise. , , . Our area of
concern is geographically strictly delimited and we have
identified four States in that area in which intervention
might be necessary. Of these Haiti is the one whose
situation corresponds most closely to that found by
President Johnson and his advisers in the Dominican
Republic. Preventive intervention in Haiti, therefore, may
be appropriate and necessary.“1
However, while concluding that intervention
logical outcome, Mr. Plank points out that:

23. The first invasiontook placeon the night of 28 July
1958. Alix Pasquet,an ex-officer, accompanied
by former
captains Perpignan and Dominique,both of whom, like
Pasquet, were political refugeesin the United States of
America, and four Miami police officers wearing their
sheriffs badges,landed at Port-au-Prince,took possession
of the Dessalinesbarracks behindthe National Palaceand
kept the Palace under machine-gunfire all night long.
Inside,there wasonly a smallgroupof soldiersand civilians
protecting the Head of State.

might be a

“

. . * most Latin Americans question the ability of the
United States to understand or sympathize with movements of radical reform, even of non-Communist
varieties, and because they sometimes doubt the accuracy
and adequacy of the information upon which our policy
decisions are based . . .“I

24. This abortive attack cameto anendat dawn,when the
rebel groups were liquidated by loyal volunteers of the
National Guard, the Haitian army and Port-au-Prince
civilians, who rushedto the aid of the Headof State. It cost
the lives of about fifty men. A trivial price, the livesof fify
men, it might be thought, if onelaid no emphasison the
value of even a singlehuman life for whoseprotection and
dignity so many fine words wereuttered by delegationsto
the International Conferenceon HumanRightsheld recently at Teheran. It will be saidthat the lives of a merefifty
Haitian negroes are a trivial price, but that would be to
ignore the potential of one humanlife as a contributing
factor to economic development.And even if the toll, of
that infamous piratical expedition had beenno more than
one doctor, one agriculturalexpert andother suchqualified
people in an under-developedcountry like Haiti, battling
for economicgrowth, would it then be possibleto write off
such actions, and all those that followed, as being of no
importance?

18. He concludes as follows:
“It would be truly tragic, however, if the United States
should be an agency importantly responsible for those
improved prospects. This could happen if we were to put
inordinate stress upon Communist dangers in the region
at the expense of due attention to the crying needs for
political, economic and social reform. If the United States
loses its identification with the concepts of political
democracy, social justice, economic well-being and the
dignity of the individual, it has lost its purchase in this
hemisphere.“1
19. The strange fact is that, whenever the Head of the
Haitian Government of 22 September 1957 undertakes

25. As it had done on 9 June 1958,the Haitian Government followed its practice of voicing its concernin a note

1 Quoted in English by the speaker.

3

addressed to the United States Embassy at Port-au-Prince.
The note brought to the attention of the United States
Government the subversive acts against public order in Haiti
performed by Mr. Alix Pasquet, an ex-officer of the Haitian
army, who had been a political refugee in the United States
for -over a year and it earnestly requested the United States
Government to forbid him to abuse the generous American
hospitality he was enjoying by establishing, on American
teyritory, a centre of subversion against the Haitian Government.

southeastern Haiti, of a band of Haitian exiles who had
been trained in Dominican army camps. Then again, at
about 11.30 p.m. on 31 August 1964, Dominican soldiers
stationed at the neighbouring post at Jimani fired at the
frontier post of Malpasse.
32. Then there was the sixth invasion. At about the same
time south-west Haiti was invaded by a group of Haitian
exiles accompanied by a number of foreigners. The quautity and quality of their weapons, their equipment and their
modern communication system leave no doubt about their
origin or the effectiveness of a contingent properIy trained
in guerrilla warfare. The original plan was for them to bc
supplied by an air drop-this was made impossible by the
Haitian defence-and to mount a large-scale attack against
the towns and villages.

26. What was the reaction to this reasonable request from
the Haitian Government? To what extent was it taken into
consideration? The events which followed made it abundantly clear, It should be noted that the attack came only
ten months after Mr, FranFois Duvalier had been elected
President of the Republic.

:

33. How can it be denied that the various incidents I have
mentioned constitute an attempt, launched from the
territory of a foreign Power to disrupt law and order, with
bloodshed and acts of destruction affecting the country’s
economy? How can one fail to accept the evidence and
recognize the flagrant nature of the preparations and
organization in neighbour States for an armed invasion of
Haitian territory?

27. The Dominican-Haitian conflict: those events of 1963
were marked by bloodshed and devastation and known as
the Haitian-Dominican conflict. On the morning of 14 May,
an American newspaper carried a private news item from a
New York source, according to which a rebel invasion was
to take place that night. The rebel force was supported by a
self-styled Haitian Government in exile, formed two days
earlier in Puerto Rico.

34. I have spoken of the great loss of human life resulting
from these expeditions by former officers of the Haitian
army enjoying territorial asylum. In view of that loss of life,
how can the repetitive nature of their crimes be ignored?
How can one shut one’s eyes to the fact that they carry out
their nefarious operations by the same means and from the
same territories whose authorities, notwithstanding the
frequently voiced concern of the Haitian Government, have
become their accomplices by improperly condoning their
behaviour and activities?

28. You all know how the stage was set and cleverly
arranged by a vast international conspiracy; the Haitian
Government did not fail to produce the evidence and to
protest sharply, as a result of which it was decided to bring
the matter before the United Nations Security Council.
29. But the present situation has a long history. It must be
borne in mind that there have been innumerable violations
of our national sovereignty and territorial integrity: frequent violations of Haitian air space by Dominican aircraft,
the mobilization of the Dominican armed forces, large-scale
manoeuvres of combat troops massed on the Haitian
Dominican frontier, the insidious radio, press and television
propaganda from official sources in the Dominican Repub,
lit, pamphlet campaigns designed to disrupt public order in
Haiti and to create an atmosphere of danger and violence
and a state of emergency. Then there-was the ultimatum of
the Dominican Government of 28 April 1963.
‘;

35. It would be impossible to calculate the extent of the
serious damage that these invasions have done to the
Haitian economy. Leaving aside the legal aspects, they raise
a number of practical problems, which, as any thinking
person can see, are of vital importance to the Government
and people of Haiti.
36. Will the Haitian Government be asked to waive its
sacred right of self-defence, when, in contempt of the rules
of international law and custom, neighbour States, which
have become the chosen refuge of all Haitian political
exiles, have already welcomed-this
is a point to be
noted-numbers of former Haitian soldiers who have been
the constant agents of a small group of stateless citizens in
foreign pay, who have no thought for their country and
whose only concern is to seize power in infamy and
dishonour and with bloodshed,

i

30. After this came the second invasion. Thirty-six guer.
rillas, aided and abetted by foreign Governments and
Haitian exiles and at the request of the latter, landed at the
tip of the South Haiti peninsula and massacred and
terrorized the Haitian peasants in that mountainous region.
They were engaged by tactical troops and volunteers of the
National Guard and within twenty-one days, in which there
were thirteen clashes, thirty of the guerillas were killed and
six were taken prisoner.

37. While the people are directing their efforts towards
peaceful work and striving to restore an economy ruined by
the steady decline in the market price of its basic products,
these repeated attacks on the security of persons and
property-the
logical consequence of acts of piracy-are
forcing the Haitian Government to take preventive meas+
ures. Thus the country’s resources are diverted from 2s
economic development plan, designed to improve the lot of
the people and raise the level of living generally, and are
channelled into the work of rebuilding and rehabilitating

31. 1 now turn to the series of invasions of Haitian
territory from the Dominican Republic. There was the
attack on the night of 415 August on the frontier town of
Ouanaminthe by armed bands based in the Dominican
Republic. There was the assault on the frontier district of
Mont Organise, near the Dominican town of Capotille,
which, it should be noted, took place less than two weeks
after the first invasion. There was the landing at 1 a.m. on
30 June 1964 at a place called “Lacon des Huitres” in
4

the countryside and the plantations

devastated by these

invasions.
38, Although doomed to failure, this wave of invasions has
created a state of general insecurity and a disruption of
internal public order calculated to impede and jeopardize
the contribution of an outstanding tourist season with its
beneficial
effects on VaIkILlS
StXtOrs
of the economy. In
view of all this, how codd
the Security Council fail to find
die complaint of the Haitian Government well-grounded
and to give the matter its most serious attention? Moreover, what would happen to the large-scale field programmes of the United Nations spccialized agencies, the
objectives of the United Nations Development Programme
and the generous philosophy and achievements of the
Development Decade, if States Members of the United
Nations entered into the obligations ,of a necessary economic and political co-operation and at the same time
sabotaged the very channels of that co-operation by
destroying the infrastructure on which their contribution
was based?
39. Needless to say, after invasions of its territory causing
loss of life and diverting the Haitian people from their task
of reconstruction, the Haitian Government cannot be
content with mere recommendations or simple expressions
of regret such as, on the instructions of the United States
Government, Ambassador Gerald Drew offered in 1958,
when it would have been easy to prevent the unfortunate
Pasquet affair by agreeing to the reasonable request of the
Haitian Government.
40. The Security Council should adopt measures and make
recommendations with a view to prohibiting all States from
dealing in arms, war materials rind military supplies except
when deiivery is made to Governments. The Council’s next
aim should be to prevent my operational ship or aircraft
from being equipped, armed or used for any war-like
purpose whatsoever within the jurisdiction of any State.
Finally, without imposing unnecessary restrictions on the
freedom of the press and information services, it should, for
the sake of friendly relations between States, ensure that
nothing deliberately abusive or excessively defamatory is
broadcast, published in print or made known through any
other media, which might undermine the prestige of
Governments or upset internal public order by pernicious
propaganda.
41. The eighth invasion was an abortive one. It was
planned on United States territory by the Cuban, Masferrer
and the Haitian, P&e Georges, with Cuban mercenaries and
Haitian exiles, but it came to the knowledge of the United
States Customs authorities, who last no time in seizing the
weapons and handing the offenders over to the courts,
which duly convicted them.
42. With regard to the eighth invasion, it is the desire of
my Government to make an impartial statem8nt of the
facts concerning these actions, which threaten the sovereignty of the Republic of Haiti and are flagrant and
repeated violations of the fundamental principles of international law and of the spirit. and letter of the United
Nations Charter, It is not the intention of my Government
to put any country or Government on trial.

43, Here are the facts based on the minutes of the Special
Commission convened at the General Headquarters of the
Anned Forces of Haiti at Port-au-Prince,
“First day: The Commission met at 2 p.m. on Tuesday,

‘21 May 1958. Present were: Colonel Jacques Laroche,
President; Colonel FridBric McArty, Colonel Octave
Cayard, Colonel Georges Danache, Colonel Jean-Baptiste
Hdaire, Captain Lkon Achilles rapporteur of the armed
forces of Haiti,
“The order convening the Commission was read out and

placed at the top of the documents submitted and
marked exhibit ‘A’.
“After deciding to meet in closed session and settling

the preliminary items on its agenda, the Commission
began its inquiry. The Commission decided to make an
on-the-spot visit. It went to rue Geffrard on the east side
of the National Palace, where it confirmed the existence
of five bomb craters, the largest of which, near an electric
py1011, was ten centimetres deep and two metres in
diameter. This crater was caused by the explosion of
bomb NO. 10. The other four craters were smaIler and
were 1, 8, 12 and 20 metres respectively from the main
crater.
“The Commission then went to the Headquarters of the
Haitian Air Force and confirmed the existence of an
impression the length of a bomb in the asphalt, caused by
the impact of a bomb falling to the ground. It was at a
distance of 20 metres from the main hangar. The
Commission then interrogated Capt, Jean Colbert of the
armed forces of Haiti, and attached a record of the
interrogation to the minutes, marked exhibit ‘1’. Having
completed its visit, the Commission returned to its place
of meeting.
“The Commission then examined a bundle of photographs relating to its inquiry, marked exhibit ‘2’. Having
completed its inquiry, the Commission drafted its report
as follows:
“On 20 May 1968, a B-25 bomber, operating under
United States commercial licence No, N-92882, based and
registered in California, took off from Melbourne, a
coastal town in Florida, 175 miles north of Miami and 3 1
miles from Cape Kennedy, the great United States space
centre, landed at Inague after a 600.mile flight. Jupiter, a
coastal town 95 miles south of Melbourne, was included
in its itinerary as an emergency airport. Using the island
of Inague, where an American company operates the sole
concession for sea salt, as its position of attack, it headed
for Port-au-Prince, In order to attack the capital and take
full advantage of the element of surprise, the aircraft
approached from the south. At about 8 a.m. the aircraft
crossed the town from the south-east to the north-west
and dropped three bombs aimed at,the National Palace,
and in particular the private apartments of the President
for life of the Republic, with the sole purpose of taking
the life of Dr. Franqois Duvalier, the constitutional head
of the State of Haiti, and members of his family.
Continuing its attack, the aircraft dropped a bomb, on
the Chanterelles air base, which landed 20 metres from
the main hangar of the headquarters of the Haitian Air

One case containing 1,200 cartridges for 4.5 pistols;

Force. An air patrol was organized and a few minutes
after take-off one of the Haitian air force planes was seen
flying south at a height of about 7,000 to 8,000 feet in
the Port-au-Prince bay to the west of the town. The next
one to come into sight was an Air Force jet plane flying
at 15,000 feet which flew over the national territory from
north to south.

One box containing a considerable number of cartridges
and cartridge-clips for A R-15 Colts (USA) and three tent
pegs;
One carton containing M-l cartridges;
Ten empty cartridge-clips for M-3 machine guns;

“After the raid the aircraft flew off in a northwesterly
direction; the whole episode lasted about 40 seconds. The
four bombs dropped were 1.30 metres in length and 20
centimetres in diameter, had an effective radius of about
100 metres and carried a plastic explosive supplied by
Atlas Chemical Industries Inc., Wilmington, Delaware;
19-899 San Mateo, California, 94402 Wilmington, Delaware. Only one of them exploded in rue Geffrard, 200
metres to the east of the private apartments of the
President for life of the Republic, killing several people
and wounding many others. Five craters, one of which, in
concrete, has a diameter of 1.20 metres, and four others
in the asphalt can be seen at the side of the National
Palace.

One container of M-l cartridge-clips;
Four pairs of trousers;
Four cases of high explosive (plastic) marked
Chemical Industries, Inc., Explosive Division”;

“Atlas

One case extra dynamite;
Six M-l rifles;
Two boxes of inflammable plastic cement;
Twenty-five bombs;

“The same afternoon, at about 1 p.m., a bomb of the
same type as those used against the targets in Port-auPrince was dropped by a B-25 aircraft on a residential
area in the town of Cap Haitien. Armed men landed in
two aircraft, murdered civilians and took possession of
Cap Haitien airport.

One manual on tactics.
45. I shall now read out the texts of the pamphlets, copies
of which have been circulated to members of the Council:

“The following day, 21 May 1968, at about 6 a.m., a
Haitian Air Force patrol sighted a plane about to take off
from Cap Haitien airport and another was observed
behind the screen formed by the bluff, south of Port-auPrince. On Tuesday, at about 2 p.m., the Haitian army
regained control of the Cap Haitien landing strip and an
American aircraft, number N-92882, the one which had
carried out the raid, was found at the southwest end of
the runway. Various documents relating to its registration, flight plan and target were found in the cockpit. At
the same spot, by the runway, was a stack of twenty-six
bombs, some of which were of the same type as those
described above as having been used in the attacks on the
National Palace, the headquarters of the Haitian Air
Force and the civilian population of Cap Haitien.”

“People of Haiti, stand up and join the Haitian
coalition”-this
is the Haitian coalition based on UnitsI
States territory enjoying territorial asylum-‘%0 put an
immediateend to the present regimeof crime, degrada.
tion and poverty.

44. Here is a list, taken from the notary’s statement,
which has also been submitted to you, of the equipment,
weapons and ammunition seized:

“Attention!
We already control two thirds of the
territory of the Republic, The roads and coastlineari
under strict observation.The people and the officers and
soldiersin the army arejoining forceswith useverywlrcre

“Forward with us to crush the monsterDuvalierandhis
murderoushenchmen.
“The bombswe have dropped on the National Palasti
areno more than a token warning.
“If Duvalier thinks he can resist, we shalldestroy the
city over his head and there wiIl be nothingleft of it but
rubble andashes.

One case containing four boxes of 7-12 calibre cartridges
for rifle 49 kg, USA;

“Young people of Port-au-Prince,workmen, craftsmen
those of you who count yourselvesamongthe fearlesj
elementsin the capital, come forward for your libm
tion!

Two large cases, one entirely filled with cartridges for M-l
rifles, and five boxes of cartridges, calibre 12 Remington,
the other containing thirty clips of M-l cartridges;

“Down with poverty! Down with crime! Down with
Duvalier! Long live the revolution! ”

One carton containing fifteen boxes of Remington Winchester cartridges calibre 12 (twenty-five cartridges per box);

46. As soon as they landed, the mercenariesbeganli!
massacrepeasants,workers, craftsmen,soldiers,voluntcm
of the National Guard, all of whom they regardedai
belonging to the great Duvalier family. For instani?.
Mr. JeanTheard, who had come to take part in a surveyoi
the sugarrefinery in the north with two Cubanindustria!-

Three rolls of explosive detonating cord (reg. US);
One box containing 220 cartridges, calibre 30 M-2;
Two boxes containing 800 cartridges for rifles, calibre 42;
6

L

ists at present domiciled in Miami, was basely murdered
(see the photograph of his corpse among the documents
submitted to the Council). The mercenaries also seized
monks and nuns, whom they subjected ‘to the most cruel
tortures.
It is now being stated in the press that those
monks and nuns were tortured by the Haitian Government,
That is not true: the victims were summoned to the Palace
to make statements on the tortures inflicted on them by
the mercenaries.

Two red log booksfor the port and starboardenginesof the
B-25-J,recordingengineinspectionscarried out at Tucson
h~~mtiOna1 Airport, Arizona, on I1 April 1968;

47. A copy has been filed of the report of the interroga.
tion of the following mercenaries: Philippe Briette, Jean
R&my Beliard, Wesley Laman and Maurice Ambroise
MagIoire. The report of the interrogation shows that the
B-25 aircraft which bombed Port-au-Prince and Cap
Haitien, the Cessna and the C-46 were piloted by three
United States citizens, who have been described as follows:

Statute miles;

The B-X-J’S

flight plan: Melbourne-Inagua-Port-au-Prince;

The plan for the raid on Port-au-Prince;
The flight plan Melbourne-Jupiter(Florida);

TWO pencilledsheets;

Aircraft bill of sale;
Application for aircraft registration (Federal Aviation
Agency);

(1) The B-25 pilot was Mr. Jay-known
as Jay-Humphrey
according to the Associated Press-residing in Casino Street,
Freeport, Bahamas. He is a tall man with steel-blue eyes and
has a house at West Palm Beach. Mr. Jay owns a bus, a
building and a Ford, Mustang ,in Freeport. It was this
Mr. Jay-Humphrey
who purchased the arms and ammunition in the United States. He is at present in Florida.

A light blue folder marked: 67105707,Hamilton ACFT CO
Inc 4187, Box 11427, Tucson AZ 85706, Department of
Transportation,FederalAviation Administration, Aeronautical Centre, P.G. Box 25022, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
7312%Official business;
TWO yeIlow cards: (a) certificate of airworthiness and

(2) The Cessna was piloted by Mr. Larry Decraff, a United
States citizen, who lives in the Bahamas near the Holiday
Inn Hotel and the Lucarian Hotel.

(b) application for registration, both attached to the light
bluefolder;
Handbook(with marooncover);

(3)

The C-46 was piloted by an American called Bill.
One uniform;

48. Again, according to the statements of those who
participated
in the act of genocide of 20 May, these
Americans met regularly in New York, the headquarters of
the United Nations and the Security Council. Meetings took
place on Broadway, where the combat uniforms were
purchased,
and at Miami and were attended by Paul
Maglaire, Luc Fouche, Jean-Baptiste Georges, Raymond
Alcide Joseph, Raymond Cassagnol, Raymond Montreuil
and other members of Paul Magloire’s large family, such as
Maurice Ambroise Magloire, who was captured and seriously wounded during a skirmish.

Photographsof capturedweaponsandammunition;
Photographsof victims (killed and wounded);
Photographsof the prisoners;
A list of the capturedweaponscertified by a notary;
A statementby the prisonerPhilippeBriette;
Photographsof the Presidenttaken at 5 p.m. on 24 May at
Francois Duvalier airport, when the bomber was taken
there;

49. According to the mercenaries, the meetings at Miami,
New York and Melbourne, Delaware, were held without
any attempt at secrecy and could have been detected by the
most incompetent and untrained police or secret service in
the world.

Photographsof the aircraft.
52. Having read out that list of items, I cannot refrain
from making a few remarks.It would havebeenimpossible
for that invasionto be carriedout without the toleration Of
Governmentsof States Membersof the United Nations.
Paul Magloire, Luc Fouche, Jean-BaptisteGeorgeslive in
the United States and have for a long time been trying to
acquire aircraft to bomb the people and towns of Haiti.
Raymond Montreuil, the nephew of Paul Magloire, and
RaymondCassagnol
were living in the United States,where
they were busy preparing for the act Of international
banditry on 20 May, The Haitian Governmenthad known
for a long time that membersof the Haitian colony at
Nassau(Bahamas)were to take part. Medical supplieswere
purchasedat Freeport (Bahamas).The bombswhich took
innocent Haitian liveswere suppliedby a munitionsfactory
in Delaware.

50. After heavy covering fire from the G.C. 10, the
defence forces were ordered by President Duvalier, the
Commander-in-Chief
of the Armed Forces, to attack; they
captured the B-25 and routed the invaders after killing a
good number of them. This great nationalist and revolutionary victory by the Duvalier forceswasfollowed up with
the destruction of the enemy forces and the capture of
arms and ammunition.
51, The following is a list of the items submitted in
evidence :
Two leaflets;
Two maps;
7

i
I

53. The plan to assassinate the Life President of the
Haitian Republic, his family, members of the Haitian
Government, their families and Haitian people, t$e plan to
destroy Port-au-Prince and Cap Haitien-“there
will be
nothing left but rubble and ashes”-indeed the whole plot
was, in our view, conceived by Paul Magloire, Luc Fouch6,
Jean-Baptiste Georges, Raymond Alcide Joseph (chairman
of the group) and some other mercenaries who, notwithstanding the protests of our Government, have been
broadcasting every day-1 repeat, every day-for three years
on a New York radio station (Radio New York World Wide,
Inc. WNTW-WRPM, 485 Madison Avenue, New York
10022, tel. (212) 452.3322), for the manifestpurposeof
discrediting the Haitian Government, inviting the army to
mutiny and the population to revolt; in other words,for
the purposeof destroyingthe democraticinstitutionsof the
first independent black Republic in the world. No other
country in Asia, Africa, Latin America, Easternor Western
Europe hasbeenthe target of suchvilification in American
territory. The weaponsand ammunitionwerepurchasedin
the United Statesand the large.quantitiesinvolved arequite
apparentfrom the list of the captureditems.
54. These perpetual threats by powerful nations against
the future of the first independentblack Republicin the
world compelusconstantly to maintainsufficient forceson
a war footing to defend our territorial sovereigntyand
integrity and to protect our cultural patrimony, inherited
from ancientAfrican civilizations.
55. The closelinks betweenpolitics andeconomicscannot
be ignored. The earlier invasionstook placeimmediately
after our decisionto build the FrdnqoisDuvalier airport,
which is one of the finest in the Antilles. The eighth
invasion,in which largeforcesandenormousresources
were
used,took placefour daysafter publication in theMoniteur
of the ratification of the contract to constructthe Frangois
Duvalier hydroelectric power station at the Pt%gredam.
For the Haitian people,this power stationwill be what the
Aswan Dam is for Egypt, the home of the ancient
civilization of our ancestors.
56. Is the Republicof Haiti at war, andwith what country
in the Westernhemisphere,sincethere arevictims, deadand
wounded,amongthe population?
57. In any event, theseactsof aggression,
aimedat forcing
the Haitian Governmentand peopleto take desperate
steps
and to follow unfamiliar paths, have failed andthe black
people of Haiti andtheir leader,FranqoisDuvalier,thinker,
author and statesman,will keep the nation on the path of
its destiny: the total emancipationof the black race from
all servitude and slavery according to the ideals of
Dessalines.

HolinessPope Paul VI, whose reputation as the greatest
Popefor peacewill endure throughout the ages.
60. The Haitian Government specifically requests:first,
the immediatecessationof these attacks againstits terri.
torial integrity and national sovereignty; secondly, the
punishment,by way of example, of all thosewho, contrary
to international agreementsand to the Chartersof the
Organization of American States and the United Nations,
usethe territory of certain countriesfor the preparationof
and as a point of departure for their criminal acts-the
majority of them are in the United States, where they
manageto violate with impunity the lawsof that tradition.
ally friendly Republic which maintains normal relations
with the Government of Haiti-and who usethe services
of
certain agenciesoperating in a specific territory. A number
of these mercenariesare at present in other Caribbean
countries; thirdly, that the Council shouldtake the ncces.
sary steps to prevent any repetition of theseacts, which
underminethe fundamentalrights of the Republicof Haiti,
its Governmentand its people and impedeHaiti’s develop
ment and progressin the community of nations; fourthly,
that the guilty parties should be compelledto pay to the
Government of Haiti and its people reasonabledamages
as
compensationfor the loss of life and destruction of
property.
61. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): Tile
United States delegation has listened with care to the
statementmadetoday by the representativeof Haiti. On all
occasionsin the past when a question such as this has
arisen, the United States has promptly and thoroughly
investigatedall information or indicationsit hasreceivedof
any activity on its soil, allegedly directed againstthe
Government of Haiti which might involve a violation of
United Stateslaw, and it has taken action in every caSeto
punish any violation found. We are ready to live up to our
record of the past, but of coursecan do so only on thebasis
of establishedfacts,
62. Eagerto be of assistance
in establishingthe originand
precisefacts of the events of 20 May, my Government
immediatelyoffered to assistthe Governmentof Haiti in an
examination of those events. Weoffered the servicesof our
Embassyin Port-au-Prince,aswell asthose of our Military
Attach6 there, to examine the captured aircraft and
fragmentsof bombsdropped on the Haitian capital on 20
May. We alsoimmediately askedthe Governmentof Haiti
to supply us with the maximum amount of information
available concerning the events of 20 May: information
relating to the identity of the aircraft involved, the
individualsparticipating in the events of 20 May, and the
origin,‘backgroundand purposeof their activities.

58. In view of the seriouspolitical crisisprevailingin the
Caribbean,theseacts of internationalbrigandage
constitute
a threat to peace,both in the hemisphereandin the whole
world.

63. Our desireto give assistance
in this connexionremains
undiminished. However, our offer to help in such an
examination, as well as our requestfor information which
would make possiblea thorough and meaningfulinquiry On
our part, remainoutstandingand unhonoured.

59, All the international conspiracieswhich, since 1804,
have been directed againstthe territorial sovereigntyand
integrity of the first independentblack Republic in the
world have already beenjudged by history andby all men
who follow Christianhumanistidealsasexemplifiedby His

64. It has been our understanding,from our information
as well as from statementsmade by the Governme‘ntof
Haiti, that the situation to which the eventsof 20 May gave
rise is regardedby the Government of Haiti asbeingfal):
under control. Under these circumstances,it is our belief
8

that the moat appropriate and constructive course would be
for the Government of Haiti to pursue this matter with any
Government with wh!ich the Haitian Government deems it
appropriate to do so. My own Government remains
prepared to co-operate as in the past with the Government
of Haiti in such an effort, and to take whatever action may
be appropriate, on its part, under our laws in the light of
the facts that are ascertained.

study with equal attention the content of that
statement and will present its views thereon at the next
meeting of the Council.

will

70. The PRESIDENT: I think that I should report to the
Council that I have received, through the Secretary-General,
two communications on the matter before us. The first is
from the representative of Jamaica, and the second from
the representative of the Dominican Republic. I shall first
read out the letter dated 24 May 1968 from the representative of Jamaica /S/8598] addressed to the SecretaryGeneral:

65. Mr, SETTE CAMARA (Brazil): The Security Council
us seized today of a complaint by the Government of
Haiti according to which Haiti has been the victim of armed
aggression. In his letter to you, Mr. President, of 21 May
1948 [S/8.59.3], the representative of Haiti referred to the
bombing of the National Palace in Port-au-Prince by a
pirate aircraft, and to the flight of two jet planes over the
area of the island of Gonave. Today we have heard a
statement by Mr. Bonhomme, the representative of Haiti,
about those facts.

“I have the honour to refer to document S/8592 of 21
May, circulated at the request of the Permanent Representative ad interim of Haiti to the United Nations.
“In the sixth paragraph of that document Jamaica is
named as one of the countries which hostile aircraft
might have used as a base for aerial bombing of the
Republic of Haiti.

66. At the present stage of our debate, the situation
prevailing in the region is still far from clear. The
information made available to the Security Council is too
vague and fragmentary and does not provide a sound basis
on which the Council could proceed to a full debate on the
complaint, much less to ‘any decision on the matter.
Particular mention should be made of the fact that the
source of the alleged aggression has not been established,
and that the Council, therefore, at this stage cannot even
determine whether the incidents referred to in the letter of
the representative of Haiti and stated here today represent
an instance of aggression from outside or of internal
conflict, in which latter case the Council would have to
take into consideration paragraph 7 of Article 2 of the
Charter. The Council should also bear in mind the fact that
the Charter of the United Nations provides a whole range of
methods for the pacific settlement of disputes, including
negotiation, inquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration,
judicial settlement, and-last but not least-resort to
regional agencies and arrangements. Before the Council
proceeds to a substantive debate or a decision, one or
several of those methods should be tried, especially resort
to the Organization of American States, of which Haiti is a
member.

“My Government has instructed me to inform you that
Jamaica was not associated in any respect with aircraft
that attacked the Republic of Haiti. The Haitian Consul
in Kingston has already been informed by my Government that Jamaica was not a basefrom which any aircraft
operated for bombing the Republic of Haiti.
“It would be appreciated if this letter could be
circulated asan official United Nations document.”
71. The second letter, dated 27 May 1968, also addressed
to the Secretary-General is from the representative of the
Dominican Republic [S/8599/; it is a letter written in
Spanish and I shall ask the interpreter to read it out in
English.
The following interpretation into English of the letter was
read:

“I have the honour to addressmyself to Your Excellency and to refer to what’ the Permanent Representative
of Haiti has said about the Dominican Republic in
connexion with the incidents that occurred in that
country, starting 20 May, ‘which threatens not only
Haiti’s internal security but also international peace and
security’.

47. Paragraph 3 of Article 52 of the Charter of the
United Nations provides that
“The Security Council shall encourage the development
of pacific settlement of local disputes through such
regional arrangements or by such regional agencieseither
on the initiative of the states concerned or by reference
from the Security Council.”

“In fact, in the letter of 20 May, the Permanent
Representative ad interim of Haiti stated that it was
probable that the Territory of the Dominican Republic
had been a point of departure for armed incursions
carried out against the territory of the neighbouring
country.

68. In the light of these considerations, the Brazilian
delegation is of the view that the Security Council should
refrain from taking any action on this matter until those
methods have been tried, especially those which are
provided by the Charter of Bogota.

“To give you further information, may I refer to
paragraph 6 of the document I mentioned earlier, which,
according to our translation, readsas follows:

69. Mr. MALIK

(Union ,of Soviet Socialist Republics)
The Soviet delegation has
listened with due attention to the statement made by the
representative of Haiti. He has made a very serious
accusation against a foreign State. The Soviet delegation
(translated

from

‘In all probability, the territories most likely to have
been used for these criminal ends are those of the
United States, Cuba, Jamaica, the Dominican Republic
or the Bahamas’.

Russian):

9

“In regard to this, I wish to indicate that the Government of my country has authorized me to reiterate that it
maintains a position of complete neutrality and non-intervention in affairs that concern other States of the
international community and that any internal measure
that may have been adopted must be interpreted solely
and exclusively as designed to preserve our neutrality.

Bahamas comprises a great many islands spread over a wide
area with many scattered small air strips. Pilots of aircraft
whose movements on 20 May could not immediately be
accounted for have been interrogated, and the Governor of
the Bahamas has reported that these on-the-spot investlgations have revealed no positive evidence of flights to Haiti
at the time in question.

“It is the hope of my Government that any uncertainty
regarding our position on this matter which may have
been in the mind of the Government of Haiti will be
totally dispelled.

74. I merely wish to add that the Government of the
Bahamas is, I know, most anxious that the Haitian
Government and all concerned should be assured that aIl
the resources available to the Bahamas wilI be used to
prevent improper activities directed against another Government.

“I should be grateful if Your Excellency would arrange
to have this Note circulated to members of the Security
Council.”
72. The PRESIDENT: There are no other members of the
Council that have expressed a wish to speak and consequently I should like to make a very short statement on
behalf of the UNITED KINGDOM.

75. That concludes my statement on behalf of the United
Kingdom. I speak again in my capacity as PRESIDENT,
76. There are no further members who wish to speak this
afternoon, and, after consultation with members of the
Council, I propose to announce the time of the further
meeting of the Council on this subject in due course, and I
shall consult members accordingly. If there is no objection,
I therefore propose to adjourn this meeting.

73. The representative of Haiti made in his statement one
or two references to the Bahamas. I should like to tell the
Council that immediately after the incidents had been
reported careful investigations were made by the Governor
of the Bahamas. As members of the Council will know, the

The meeting rose at 5.40 pm.

10
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

35542-September

1972-2,100
