TWENTY-EIGHTH

\

YEAR

th
MEETING: 25 OCTOBER 1973
NEW

ItiJ n &y~
1,
'Ld

YORK

CONTENTS
Puge

.., .. ..., ,. . .. .... . ... ........

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1010) . . . . . , . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l750)

S/PV.1750

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Securiry Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

President: Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia).

3. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council will recall
that at our last meeting a draft resolution(S/11046]
sponsoredby Guinea, India, Indonesia,Kenya, Panama,
Peru, the Sudan and Yugoslavia was introduced by the
representative of Kenya. This draft resolutionhas been
revised[S/ZI046/Rev.I/.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

4. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): When I introduced the
draft resolution contained in documentS/11046on behalf
of the delegatjonsof Guinea, India, Indonesia,Panama,
Peru, the Sudan arid Yugoslaviaand my own delegation,I
pointed out that we wanted to exposethe draft to the
widest consultation in order to allow wide supportfor and
consensuson the draft to emerge.I am glad to say that
during the past 12 hours membersof this Council have
consulted very Gdely on the draft. As a result of these
Collsultatic;n!;,certain amendmentshave been introduced
which I wish to accept on behalf of the sponsorsof the
draft resolution. The amendmentshave been included in
documentS/ 11046;Rev.1.

Provisional agenda (§/Agenda/ II750)
1, Adoption

of the agenda.

3.. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October I973 frorn the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to
the IJrlited Nations addressed to the Resident of
the Security Council (S/I 1010).

5. In operative paragraph 1 of the initial draft, which
readasfollows:

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October
1973 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressedto the President of the
Security Council (S/ 11010)

“Demands that imrnedialt’ and completecease-firebe
observed and that the parties withdraw to the positions
occupied by them at 1650 hoursGMT on 22 October
1973”

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 1743rd meeting, I propose now, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representativesof
Egypt, Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to take their
places at the Council table in order to participate in the
discussionwithout the right to vote.

the word “withdraw” has been replaced by the word
“return”. We accepted this amendment,becausethe word
“return” describesmore accurately than the word “withdraw” the moves which have to be undertakenby the
parties to the conflict along the cease-fireline asrequired
by the draft resolution.
6. The revised text of operative paragraph3 now readsas
follows:

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. E. AbdelMeguid (Egypt), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. M. Z.
Ismail (Syrian Arab Republic) took placesat the Council
table.

“Decides to set up immediately, underits authority, a
LJnited Nations Emergency Force to be composedof
personnel drawn from States Membersof the United
Nations except the permanent membersof the Security
Council, and requests the Secretary-Generalto report
within 24 hourson the stepstakento this effect”.

2. The PRESIDENT: In accordancewith further decisions
taken at previous meetings,I proposealso,with the consent
of the Council, to invite the representativesof Nigeriaand
Saudi Arabia to participate in the discussionwithout the
right to vote. I shallask them to take the placesreservedfor
thetn at the side of the Council chamber,on the under- 7. The revisedtext of operative paragraph5 now readsas
follows:
standing that they will be called upon to be seatedat the
Council table when it is their turn to addressthe Council.
‘%lequests all Member States to extend their full
co-operationto the United Nationsin the implementation
At the invitation of the President,Mr. E. Ogbu (Nigeria)
of the presentresolution aswell asresolutions338 (1973)
and Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took theplacesreserved
and 339 (1973)“.
for them at the sideof the Council chamber.
I

8. I should like to commend this draft resolution, as
revised, to members of the Council, with the hope that all
will vote for it. I am sure that the draft does not satisfy
every member of the Council, but in the nature of things
we have to give and take, and without a spirit of give and
take this Council and indeed the United Nations could not
function.

occupy Arab territories.
example?

Is not South Korea a living

13. China has always been opposed to the dispatch of the
so-called “peace-keeping forces”, We maintain the same
position with regard to the present situation in the Middle
East. Such a practice can only pave the way for further
international intervention and control with the supw
Powers asthe behind-the-scenes boss. The evil consequences
of such a practice are bound to be seen through gradually
by the hundreds of millions of Arab people, thus giving r&
to their stronger resistance. It is only out of consideration
for the requests repeatedly made by the victims of
aggression that China is not in a position to veto the draft
resolution. China has decided not to participate in the
voting on that draft.

9. I should like to appeal to those members who still have
some reservations about one or two of the operative
paragraphs kindly to join hands with us to give this draft
resolution unanimous support in order that the objectives
we want to attain in the Middle East may be achieved as
soon aspossible.
10. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from Chinese):
In his statement at the 1748th meeting of the Security
Council, on 23 October, the Chairman of the Chinese
delegation pointed out that, like the resolution concocted
by the United States and the Soviet Union on 22 October,
the so&led resolution calling for the implementation of
the cease-fire decision presented jointly by the United
States and the Soviet Union at the meeting of the same day
wasa scrap of paper that could solve no problems. The facts
show that what we said was right. After the second
so-called resolution on a cease-firewas adopted and became
“operative”, the Israeli Zionists once again launched
military attacks to seize new positions. The vivid facts
before us have fully shown that the two so-called “resolutions on a cease-fire” which the two super-Powers, the
United States and the Soviet Union, hurriedly asked the
Security Council to force through have had the actual
effect of sapping the fighting will of the Arab people and
shielding Israel’s further expansion of aggression. At the
meeting on 23 October, Mr. Malii pretentiously said that
he was instructed by his Government to issue a “solemn
warning” to Israel. It is apparent now that this was an
obnoxious, ugly performance.

14 I should like to express high appreciation for the just
attitude taken by the non-aligned States members of the
Security Council at yesterday’s meeting. They disapprove
of the malicious practice of surprise attack resorted to by
the two super-Powers at the Security Council meetings of
22 and 23 October. That is fair.
15. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

I now call on the representative of

16. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Israel’s policy has been, and
continues to be, founded on three principles: cease-fire,
negotiations, peace. At this stage it is necessary to direct all
our endeavours to ensuring the observance of the cease-fire.
Israel will view with favour all constructive efforts to
strengthen the cease-fire. Those are the considerations that
will guide my Government in examining the draft resolution before us and will determine its position regarding the
provisions of the draft resolution.
17. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Saudi Arabia
has indicated that he wishes to address the Council. I now
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

11. Through their prolonged struggle against foreign
aggression over the past century and more, the Chinese
people have come to realize that a scrap of paper cannot
drive away the aggressors. The two super-PowerswiI1 never
and cannot possibly help us oppressed and aggressed
countries and people. to achieve what they call “just and
durable peace”. On the contrary, they will only take
advantage of our temporary difficult position to seek their
own gains and achieve their imperialist purpose of dividing
spheres of influence.

18. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): The draft resolution
submitted last night by eight members of the Council and
ably presented by our colleague from Kenya is laudable in
its intent and purpose. However, some other Council
members thought that the text raised some points that
needed clarification, especially in regard to the immediate
setting up of a United Nations Emergency Force, as spelt
out in paragraph 3 of the draft resolution. From which
countries should that Emergency Force be selected?
Who will pay its expenses, who will foot the bill-the
United States and the Soviet Union? I say that in view of
the fact that the emergency force may have to be there for
many, many years.

12. With regard to the draft resolution before us, the
Chinese delegation understands the good desire of the
sponsors. However, we deem it necessaryto point out that
the dispatch of a United Nations emergency force will be of
no avail. Instead, it will leave infinite evil consequences in
its wake, turning sovereign Arab States in the Middle East
into an area of irlternational control. Did not the Soviet
representative say that the dispatch of Soviet troops to this
area would be entirely correct, just and in accord with the
Charter of the United Nations? Then he should dispatch
them right now. Why not send them now? Is it not merely
because it is afraid of the opposition of the other
super-Power? What “United Nations emergency peacekeeping force”? TO put it bluntly, this is an attempt to

19. Furthermore, I would be failing in my duty if I did
not bring to the attention of the CounciI the following
points. First, the war has taken place on Egyptian soil. In
consequence, the United Nations Emergency Force would
function on Egyptian territory. Second, to judge by the
negotiations on wars in Indo-China and elsewhere, negotiations might last many years without conclusive results;
thereby Egypt’s sovereignty over its own territories would
2

be stalled. In such circumstances, what would prevent Israel
from establishing Zionist settlements, as it has been doing
since 1967, on Egyptian soil? They would be peaceful
settlements. Remember, members of the Council, that
Zionist ideology is predicated on the ingathering of Jews
from all over the world. The United Nations emergency
force would by freezing Egypt’s sovereignty over its
occupied territories, give Israel the advantage of gradually
annexing those territories and considering them as the
fruits of victory. The inflow of Jewish immigrants, not only
from the Soviet Union but also from the United States and
many other countries of the world, would be accelerated.

since 1947, that if Israel or the world Zionists-m fairness
to Israel, I would say the world Zionists-continue their
policy of pressure on Western Europe and the United States
of America they may one day involve the United States in a
global conflict.
23, I have one last word. What happened to the RussianAmerican detente? We were told that this dgtente wasfor
the welfare of humanity, so that there might be peace in
the world, lest through misunderstanding there should be a
confrontation between those two Powers which could spell
the end of the world.
24. The hour is not late, and the Sixth Fleet, whether it is
in the Mediterranean or elsewhere-I do not know whether
the Seventh Fleet is in the Pacific; I am not a military
man-will not intimidate us. What about your Monroe
Doctrine? That was laudable. “You Europeans keep away
from the Atlantic. We left the shores of Europe, we
Americans to be free from the entanglements of Europe”. As
we say in Arabic, “Praise be to God who is eternal and
never changes”. But the fickleness of human beings and the
acquisition of power makes individuals as well as nations
drunk. Which reminds me of the ancient Greek proverb:
“Those whom the gods destroy, they first make strong”;
and there is another version-“they first make mad”. And
too much strength and madness are synonymous.

20. The present draft resolution refers in its preamble to
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) a resolution which
proved from the beginning to be abortive. It is not in the
interests of Israel to relinquish territories. On the contrary,
Israel needs additional land in order to carry out its
expansionist policies. Of course, one might say that the
primary purpose of the draft resolution of which the
Council is seized is to ensure the stopping of the fighting.
What if negotiations were protracted for 10 or 20 years?
Israel would then succeed in annexing territories, in line
with what it did in the war of 1948, when it extended its
deficto frontiers beyond the partition lines of 1947. That
is why I believe the sponsors of today’s draft resolution
should have taken into account the fact that some provision
should be made not to create a situation which would put
in jeopardy Egypt’s sovereignty over the occupied territories. I believe that our colleague horn China was right
when he said that in effect the draft resolution, if adopted,
would be “a scrap of paper”. I repeat that some provision
should have been made in the draft resolution so that a
situation would not be created which would put in
jeopardy Egypt’s sovereignty over the occupied territories.

25. You all rose against Mussolini when he said “mare
nostrum”-our sea-about the Mediterranean, and rightly
so. But in fairness to Mussolini, he did not mention the
Atlantic.
26. And now you, the American Government, want to do
the same thing asMussolini: the Mediterranean is “our sea”.
This reminds me of the British when they had their empire.
Gibraltar was necessary for the route to India, and Malta
was necessary to ensure the communications with India.
Suez also was necessary for them, they said, and they drew a
circle around the world. That was necessaryfor protecting
their interests.

21. This morning the newsmedia referred to what may be
considered as sabre-rattling by the super-Powers, and more
so by the United States Government. Whether or not it is
true that the Soviet Union might dispatch some troops to
the Middle East to see to it that the United Nations
cease-fire resolutions would be respected, the powerful
United States of America, or rather its Government-or was
it President Nixon, I do not know; maybe my good friend
Ambassador Scali would clarify the situation for us-saw fit
to ask the Pentagon to alert the armed forces for any
emergency that might occur. If all this disturbing news is
true-and I hope that it is not-1 must declare that we will
not be intimidated. We would rather perish than be
subjugated to a policy that might is right. We will not be
intimidated by a show of force, by super or lesser Powers.
And should miscalculation push the super-Powers to the
brink of war, we are confident that the American people
will rise against any misadventure that may end up in the
annihilation of the human species on this planet.

27. But you, the United States, who is threatening your
interests? Are the Arabs threatening your interests? ISthat
sea, the Mediterranean sea, a marenostrum? You choose to
be silent. We are talking for the world, not for American
people only. You give us answers. When Europe has, we
hope, disentangled itself from future wars,and is setting up
a Common Market, you come and say-and you not only
say it but act as if were true-the Mediterranean is your
own swimming pool.
28. Beware, American people, you are a great people. Do
not be misled. Why do you not tell the Arab people that
they are misguided? We can tell you that if we are, we will
change, perhaps taking into account your advice. But
people who hail from any country, small or big, they have a
tongue, they have two eyes, they have two ears. You are
not the chosen people of the world-leave asidethe chosen
people of God, who are sitting here on my left: you are
human, like us. You extol the freedom of speech,and I am
giving you a dose of that freedom of speech.

22. I do not know much about the Soviet people because I
never went to Russia in order to assesshow they feel about
such miscalculations. I said that I am confident about the
American people because I have spent over three decadesin
this country. The American people have been fooled time
and again about Israel and how necessary it is for the
well-being of the United States. We have warned the United
States, time and again, and indeed I have been doing SO

29. Answer me, my dear friend Mr. Scali. That Ambassador sitting behind you said in the corridors how sorry he
3
#

was that the American people had to listen to what I have
to say. I said, “You stooge”, because he insulted me. I
know that the American people are listening to me. Every
day I receive letters, not from Arabs but from American
people, from Jews, saying “Our eyes are opened”. And here
you exercise ominous silence.

personnelfrom Member States except those of the permanent membersof the Security Council. In addition, wewill
seekto be helpful in facilitating the transportation of this
Force to the area.We trust that the Secretary-Generalwill
proceedwith the umost dispatchto carry out the functions
entrustedto him under the draft resolution.

30. Do not be up to your old tricks again, interrupting me,
for heaven’s sake.

38. We believe that the draft resolution now before us
will, if faithfully implemented by all concerned, resultin
the prompt and effective establishmentof a true cease-fire
in the Middle East. Nothing could be more important asa
step towards peace. We urge that the Security Council
adopt this draft resolution asa matter of highest priority.

31. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel):
speaking to my colleagues.
32. Mr. BAROODY
ing to me.

Freedom of speech. I was

(Saudi Arabia): No, you were speak39. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translationfrom Russian):The delegation of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics has carefully studied the draft
resolution submitted to the Security Council by eight
sponsorsrepresentingthe non-permanent members of the
Council, namely, Guinea, India, Indonesia,Kenya, Panama,
Peru, the Sudan and Yugoslavia. On the whole, this draft
resolution is aimed in the right direction. It includes
condemnation of the aggressorwho has perfidiously violated the two previous decisionsof the Council concerning
the cessationof firing and of all military action, and the
return of the forces of the two sidesto the cease-fireline
existingat the moment when resolution 338 (1973) became
effective.

33. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): No, to my colleagues. Unless you
want direct negotiations with Israel.
34. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I do not want to
negotiate until you haul down the flag of Israel.
Mr. President, why do you not appeal to this gentleman not
to interrupt me? He wants to drag me into an altercation
with him. I feel sorry for him because it seems that all the
nicotine in his pipe is not enoughto quiet his nerves.I am
sorry in a way that I wasimpolite and told him to “shut
up”. I do not like to say “shut up” to anybody, including
him. After all, I standon his humanrights.But I wasabout
to finish. Whenever I am about to finish he creates an
incident. Peoplelaugh. I will be the first to defendthe Jews
as such-not the Zionists-if they continue to live asJews
and not asZionists in the land of Palestine.

40. The discussionof this item has shown that the
overwhelming majority of the members of the Council
categorically condemnsthe aggressor,namely, Israel, for its
failure to carry out theseresolutions.

35. My last word is this, The Security Council seemsto be
neglecting the Palestinianpeople-with the exception of
AmbassadorHuang, who alwaysrefers to them. From the
beginning they have been the core of the question. But
nobody talks of them any more. We all talk about occupied
territories, but rememberthat the core-1 repeat,the core-of
the problem is the Palestinianpeople.They have fermented
the Arab world and to a large extent the Muslim world,
which extends from the Atlantic to the confinesof China,
from the so-called northern tier of Turkey, Iran and
Afghanistan down to Pakistanand down to Africa-leaving
aside those African countries that have many Muslims in
their own lands. If you want to arousethe Muslim world,
that is your privilege, my good friend Mr. Scali.Weare not
finished yet. “Allah Akbar”: God isgreat. Men areguestsin
this world. Today they are here and tomorrow the earth
inherits them. They go down into the ditch and only God
eternal will in hiswisdomjudge the evildoers.
36. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): The United
States supports the eight-Powerdraft resolution submitted
to this Council last night, as revised as a result of our
consultationsthis morning.
37. We have from the first advocated an immediate
cease-fire at the positions occupied when resolution
338 (1973) cameinto effect at 1650 GMT on 22 October.
We agree on the need to increasethe number of observers
of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
immediately. We approve of the establishmentof a new
United Nations Emergency Force to be composed of

4

41. In its statement yesterday the Soviet delegation called
for stronger and more decisive measures to curb the
aggressor,even including the application of sanctions in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter VII of the
Charter as well as an appeal by the Council to all States
Members of the United Nations to break off diplomatic
relationsand all other ties with Israel asan aggressorwhich
hassystematicallyviolated United Nations decisionsandis
continuing its policy of international brigandage in the
Middle East. We note with satisfaction that many African
countriesare already following this courseand arc breaking
off diplomatic relations with Israel as a protest againstits
policy of aggression.The delegation of the USSR also
statedthat Egypt’s request,put forward by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, at yesterday’s meeting of the Council, to
the effect that the Soviet Union and the United States
should sendtheir armed forces to ensure compliance with
the cease-firewas reasonableand justified and that the
Soviet sidetook a positive view of it. At the sametime the
Soviet delegationtakes account of the important considera.
tion that the draft resolution at present before the Council
was introduced by a majority of the members of the
Council-the eight representatives of non-aligned COW
tries-and that the draft is aimed in the right direction. It
contains an unambiguous,even though somewhat oblique,
condemnation of the aggressorfor its failure to CO@~
with the Security Council resolution. The draft also
provides for the adoption of effective measuresto enstm
that the Council’sdecisionconcerning a cease-fireis carried
out, i.e., by increasing the number of United Nations

observers .supervising the cease-fire and by establishing a
United Nations Emergency Force for that purpose. The
delegation of the USSR will not oppose the adoption of
this resolution and will vote for it.

to its system of operation and the organisation of its
activities in the discharge of its mission. The Force must be
established and must act in strict conformity with the
Charter, i.e., under the direct authority of the Security
Council. Any other approach to the establishment of the
Force and the organisation of its activities leads to tragic
consequences, as the sad experience of the past has shown.
At the twenty-eighth session of the General Assembly
Mr. Kissinger, Secretary of State of the United States, made
a statement in the general debate. Referring to the question
of United Nations peace-keeping operations, he spoke of
United States willingness for the Security Council to play,
as he put it, “a more central role” in the conduct of United
Nations peace-keeping operations.’
also

42. We have also studied the revised version of this draft
resolution which contains a provision to the effect that the
United Nations Force in the Middle East should not include
contingents provided by the permanent members of the
Security Council. Our position on this question is well
known. However, taking account of all the circumstances
and the position and request both of the delegations of the
eight non-aligned countries which are non-permanent
members of the Council and of the delegation of Egypt, the
Soviet delegation has decided, by way of an exception in
this particular instance, not to object to the provision in the
draft resolution to which I have referred. With these
reservations, the delegation of the USSR will vote in favour
of the revised draft resolution.

47. The eight-Power draft resolution takes the same
approach. The provision of this draft resolution to the
effect that the United Nations Emergency Force is to be set
up under the authority of the Security Council means that
the Security Council itself will take all decisionsconcerning
the establishment of the Force and the carrying out of the
peace-keeping tasks entrusted to it.

43. It goes without saying that if the aggressorcontinues
t0 violate the decisions of the Council, the Council will
then have no alternative but to resort to the more effective
means provided for in the Charter, i.e., the application of
sanctions in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VII
of the Charter.

48. In conclusion, a few remarks about the latest antiSoviet statement by the representative of China.
49. I have already drawn the attention of the Chinese
representatives to the fact that anti-Soviet nonsense and
frantic anti-Sovietism cannot really help the Arab people
and the peoples of Egypt and Syria. I pointed out that if
China had sent missiles, rifles, tanks, guns and other kinds
of weaponsto Egypt and Syria in the samequantities asthe
Chinese representatives pour out anti-Sovietism in the
United Nations, then the Arabs would feel more confident,
and China’s assistance would be more real. I think that in
time the Chinese representatives will understand this
simple, elementary truth, which is understood by all
Members of the United Nations.

4-4. As to the question of observers, the Soviet delegation
would like to reaffirm the statement it made yesterday
that, in forming the United Nations observer force in the
Middle
East, the principle of equitable geographical representation should be strictly observed. It is essential to put
an end to the anomalous situation in which, ashas already
been pointed out, the entire staff of the United Nations
permanent observer force in the Middle East, numbering
more than 200 members, consists, with the exception of a
few from two Latin American countries, entirely of
representatives of Western countries, that is to say, representatives of only one political and geographical group of
States Members of the United Nations. I think that the
overwhelming majority of the members of the Council and
of 0ur distinguished colleagues here present-the permanent
representatives to the United Nations of the countries that
are Members of the United Nations-will agree with this
view of the Soviet delegation. In supplementing the
observer force it is essential to include representatives of
the socialist countries and representatives of non-aligned
States.

50. We have again listened to a statement by the representative of China concerning his intention not to take part in
the vote on the draft resolution submitted by the eight
non-aligned countries. What does this mean? It is a
challenge to the non-aligned countries, since their position
is diametrically opposed to the position of China on this
question. And the amiable words which the Chinese
representative addressed to the sponsors of the draft
resolution do not alter the situation. It was a hypocritical
statement, China did not take part in the voting when the
Council was adopting the resolutions submitted by two
Powers, two permanent members of the Council-the Soviet
Union and the United States, On that occasion its pretext
was that the resolution was being imposed by the two
“super-Powers”. That is the usual form of demagogic
slander to which the Chinese representatives resort in the
United Nations. But it is already old hat, and representatives do not wish to hear it.

45. In view of the fact that the present United Nations
observers in the Middle East all come from countries
comprising only one geographical group within the United
Nations-the
countries of Western Europe and such other
States as Australia and New Zealand-the need arises,for
the purposes of maintaining a proper balance and complying with the principle of equitable geographical distribution, to provide additional observers from among the
group of socialist countries and the group of non-aligned
States.

51. The present draft resolution was introduced not by
two permanent members of the Council, not by the
“super-Powers”, as China and certain other countries call

46. It is self-evident that a sim:bar approach should be
adopted in establishing the Unned Nations Emergency
Force. Due and serious attention must also be given not
only to the question of the composition of the Force but

1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Plenary Meetings, 2124th meeting, para.68.
5

would have spared us these painful hours to which the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt has referred.

the Soviet Union and the United States, but by eight
non-aligned countries, countries of the third world; but
China’s position remains unchanged. It was the same in
June and Jury when the eight delegations of the nonaligned
countries that are members of the Council introduced a
magnificent draft resolution which the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Egypt, as I have already noted, quite justly
described as a reflection of world public opinion on behalf
and in support of the Arab world. On that occasion the
Chinese representative voted with his hand under the table,
refusing to support this reflection of world public opinion
on behalf of the Arab world and in support of ‘the just
cause of the Arabs.

57. So we very quickly lost our illusions when we learned
that, despite the agreements, Israel was resuming the battle,
bombing the port of El-Adabiah, at Suez. Profiting from
the respite provided by Egypt’s respecting the cease-fire,
with a view to destroying the Egyptian army and, above all,
demoralizing the Arab population, Israel attacked on all
fronts, and strengthened its positions in flagrant violation
of the Security Council’s resolutions.
58. In a concern to fiid an adequate solution to the
painful problem which is before us and to succeed in
stopping the bloodshed and to lead the Security Council to
assume its full responsibility, my delegation, together with
the non-aligned countries members of the Security Council,
proposed the draft resolution in document S/l 1046/Rev.l,
which was brilliantly introduced last night by our colleague
the representative of Kenya. This draft resolution, which
has been the subject of long but fruitful consultations, will,
we are sure, receive the support of all the members of the
Security Council. Its application, in particular operative
paragraph 3, will give the Security Council an opportunity
to attain its objectives in the Middle East and will rekindle
hope for all those who have faith in the United Nations and
in its most important organ, the Security Council, whose
primary task is the maintenance of international peace and
security.

52. Nor did China take part in the vote on the two
resolutions submitted by the United States and the Soviet
Union which were adopted by the Council on 22 and 23
October. China is taking the same position now when the
eight non-aligned countries that are non-permanent
members of the Council have introduced their draft
resolution. Thus, it is not a question of who introduces
resolutions; it is a much more serious and deep-seated
matter than that. China does not support proposals aimed
at strengthening peace in the Middle East. Such proposals
are not in accord with China’s goals and aspirations. That is
the essence of the matter, and the Soviet delegation’s
analysis of China’s position on this important international
question at the previous meeting of the Council has been
fully borne out today.
53. Consequently, let me repeat that no anti-Soviet
nonsense or frantic anti-Sovietism on the part of the
Chinese representatives can conceal China’s true purposes
and intentions, and it is high time the Chinese representatives understood this.

59. My delegation hopes that, despite the reservations that
paragraph 3 has evoked from certain delegations, all
members of the Council-and in particular the permanent
members-will take care to ensure the strict application of
the draft resolution that we are about to adopt and that the
fmancial implications will not prevent the Secretary
General from implementing it.

54. Mrs. Jeanne Martin CISSE (Guinea) (interpretation
from French): The most recent developments in the conflict

60. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): In my previous
statement I mentioned the apprehensions of my delegation
when we voted in favour of resolution 338 (1973). We
suppressed those apprehensions and preferred to think that
the two super-Powers which jointly sponsored the resolution certainly must have considered and agreed on the
necessary arrangements for its effective implementation,
experienced as they are in matters of war and peace.
Developments have, however, led my delegation to a
different conclusion when resolution 338 (1973) had to be
followed by resolution 339 (1973). After the adoption of
resolution 339 (1973)-again, jointly sponsored by the two
super-Powers-which solemnly reiterates the request to the
parties to observe strictly the cease-fire on the basis of
resolution 338 (1973), we thought that the cease-fire would
be enforced, backed as it was by the authority of the two
powerful sponsors.

in the Middle East have given rise to two Security Council
resolutions 48 hours apart, adopted successivelyon 22 and
23 October as resolutions 338 (1973) and 339 (1973). The
adoption of those two resolutions by the Security Council
reflected the very firm determination of its members to
reach the final soIution of a war which has lasted too long
and which has cost many innocent human lives.
55. It remained obvious, however, that the haste, or rather
precipitateness, with which those two resolutions were
adopted would entitle people to entertain some doubts
about their effectiveness. And we must say this for no one
was unaware of the fact that the resolutions submitted
jointly to the Council by the two States which we have
come to call the two super-Powers-the United States and
the Soviet Union-contained a few gaps: their shape was
not clearly defined and the lines of demarcation on the
terrain of operations were not very clear, The absence of
any control organization for the cease-fire in the area of
hostilities certainly encouraged confusion; but, from that to
extending the conflict to its present limits reflects a
deliberate intention on Israel’s part to set itself up with a
chimerical empire.

61. We have been informed, however, that the reality is
different: that Israel has ignored the cease-fire, that
Israel-in the words of the Foreign Minister of Egypt-even
started a new war after the cease-fire based on resolution
338 (1973) was supposed to have come into effect.

56. We agreed to adopt those two resolutions without
going into depth in our consultations which probably

62. If the provision in paragraph 1 of resolution
338 (1973) cannot be enforced, then there is no realistic
6

possibility of putting an end to the fighting, let alone of
re-establishing lasting peace in the Middle East.

course of our debate last Tuesday that the dispatch of
additional observers might well prove an essential follow-up
to resolution 339 (1973). My delegation hopes that the
reinforcement of the observers in the field can take place
without delay. Thirdly, we entirely agree that a United
Nations emergency force should now be set up and that the
Secretary-General should immediately take steps to this
end. We assume of course that on the basis of operative
paragraph 3 the Secretary-General will keep the Council
informed of his plans and will consult the Council as
necessary on such important matters as the mandate of the
force.

63. Though resolutions 338 (1973) and 339 (1973) were
the joint initiative of the two super-Powers- an initiative
for which my delegation would like to express its appreciation, imperfect though many, including my delegation, may
consider it-upon
their adoption their enforcement
becomes the responsibility of the Security Council and not
only
of the two super-Powers. My delegation has constantly
expressed the view that the effective enforcement, the
effective implementation, of any resolution on the Middle
East will depend very much upon the political will and
co-operation of the permanent members, especially of the
two super-Powers, but this does not mean that we are
abdicating our responsibilities as a member of the Security
Council to them.

68. I want to make it clear, however, that the specific
exclusion of forces of the permanent members from the
present Emergency Force is in the view of my delegation
without prejudice to the composition of the peace-keeping
force which will be needed to guarantee a final peace
agreement in accordance with resolution 242 (1967). There
is a distinction between the Emergency Force at present
being set up to assist in ensuring the effectiveness of the
cease-fire and the later peace-keeping force to which I have
referred. As regards the latter, members of the Council will
know that my Government has intimated that it would be
willing to participate in such a United Nations peacekeeping force in the Middle East. That remains our
position.

64. It is upon the basis of those considerations that my
delegation has participated in the efforts of the non-aligned
members of this Council to try to make a positive
contribution
to the implementation
of resolutions
338 (1973) and 339 (1973) initiated by the two superPowers, None of us wants the fighting in the Middle East to
last a second longer than necessary. Indonesia’s position
with regard to the Middle East problem is known. I do not
need to repeat it. But we realize that in order to stop the
fighting it is essential that the contribution we make should
be acceptable to others who are not exactly of the same
view. That is why we agree that the wording of the draft
resolution should be as realistic as possible, avoiding putting
the blame on any party, though my delegation has its own
views concerning where the blame should be put. My
delegation is happy to be able to join the other non-aligned
members of this Council in sponsoring the draft resolution.

69. I wish to add one further point about operative
paragraph 3. My delegation interprets the phrase “under its
authority” in this paragraph as referring to the ultimate
responsibility of the Council for policy and not as assigning
to it the day-to-day operational control of the Force. It
would clearly be an impracticable arrangement for it to
attempt to exercise operational control.
70. Today we are dealing with an emergency situation. In
our understandable preoccupation with the cease-fire, the
reinforcement of the truce observers and the establishment
of an emergency force in the area, we must not lose sight of
our prime objective; this is to open the way for the urgent
pursuit of a just and lasting peace. Securing and maintaining
the cease-fire is no more than the first step towards the
implementation of resolution 242 (1967). It is essential
that an immediate start be made with this task, and I
should like to reaffirm that my delegation attaches the
highest importance to the provisions of resolution
338 (1973) in which this task is defined. I welcome the
request ln the present draft resolution that all Member
States extend their full co-operation to the United Nations
in implementing resolution 338(1973). This request my
delegation fully endorses. It will be a reflection on the
capacity of this Council to discharge its responsibilities if
we allow the momentum towards peace to slacken.

65. With regard to the setting up of a United Nations
Emergency Force, my delegation has agreed that others
rather than the two super-Powers and other permanent
members of the Security Council should provide units for
the Force. We hope that the non-aligned countries will be
able to contribute ln providing the necessary personnel.
Exclusion of permanent members from participating in the
force should not lead to difficulties with regard to the
fmancing of the operation. The operation should not suffer
from lack of funds, and we are looking especially to the
super-Powers to help provide the United Nations with the
necessary funds to guarantee the effective functioning of the
United Nations Emergency Force.
66. As was said by my colleague Mr. OderoJowi of Kenya
in his brilliant introduction of the draft resolution, the
draft certainly cannot entirely satisfy everybody in all its
details, but my delegation would like to express the hope
that the members will consider it acceptable in its totality
arld will vote unanimously in favour of it.

71. Mr. BOYD (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish):
On behalf of my delegation I should like once again to express
our grief and sorrow over the deaths and bloodshed that
have been occurring since war broke out in the Middle East
on 6 October last. In particular, we have deplored the loss
of innocent lives. On the very night of Saturday, 6 October,
we advised the President of the Security Council that we
would support a statement on his part that would stressthe
concern of the Council at the outbreak of hostilities
between Egypt, Syria and Israel.

67. Sir Donald MAITLAND (United Kingdom): My delegation agrees with the sponsors of the draft before US as
regards the immediate priorities. First, it is essential that
the cease-fire should be scrupulo~~~~lyobserved. Secondly,
there is a clear need for additional United Nations observers
in whatever numbers the Secretary-General and the Chief of
Staff of UNTSO consider necessary. I suggested in the
7

on alert. That action, according to the United States
authorities, is a response to military moves of a disturbillg
nature carried out by the Soviet Union. About two hours
ago the Secretary of State of the United States,
Mr. Kissinger, declared that in his opinion “the Soviet
Union has still not taken any irrevocable measures”. we
were greatly reassured when Secretary of State Kissinger
said that the United States did not want to have a
confrontation with the Soviet Union and that, in llis
opinion, the two nuclear super-Powers had a responsibi]ity
to create conditions for a world safer than the one we are
living in now.

72. With equal determination we supported resolutions
338 (1973) and 339 (1973) and the draft resolution which
has now been submitted for adoption. In our opinion, the
most appropriate plan of action to be followed by the
Council is the one we are about to take. Immediately after
the taking of this new step, which will serve to consolidate
the cease-fire, we hope that without delay the parties to the
dispute will, with the assistance of the United Nations,
reach agreements that will lead to the establishment of a
viable and lasting peace in the Middle East.
73. This is no time to engage in recrimination. The world
is aware of the present dangers. What it hopes for from us is
action that will halt movement towards a wider conflagration.

77. If a portion of the money devoted by the super.
Powers to armaments sent to the Middle East were instesd
spent on financing peace operations such as the Emergency
Force that we are going to establish, the possibility of a
satisfactory agreement by the parties to the dispute would
increase considerably.

74. At the Security Council meeting on 14 June 1973, the
position of Panama on the problems of the Middle East was
set out in very clear terms. On that occasion we said:
“We know that in matters of war and peace it is very
difficult to avoid an exacerbation of passions, while we
prudently try to find acceptable solutions. The Government of Panama, guided by the fundamental principles
that have always dictated our behaviour in the international field, principles such as that of the non-use of
force and the refusal to accept the negative results that
such use might produce, and as a good friend of the
parties in conflict, is desirous that a solution be reached
that will avoid future explosions of violence in the Middle
East.

78. With respect to the draft resolution in documeal
S/l 1046, sponsored by Guinea, India, Indonesia, Kenya,
Panama, Peru, the Sudan and Yugoslavia, which was so
eloquently introduced on behalf of all the sponsors by the
representative of Kenya, Ambassador Odero-Jowi, there is
every reason to believe that it will be adopted. If that
should prove to be the case-and that appears to be the
desire of the vast majority of the members of the Council
now-1 wish to state on behalf of my Government that the
Republic of Panama is ready to contribute actively to tile
peace force for the Middle East. To that end, we are
prepared to send a company, that is to say a military force
of approximately 200 units, made up of officers, troops
and other staff, which could be incorporated as quickly as
would be desired into the United Nations Emergency Force
that we are abo’ut to establish. In conformity with the
principle of geographical distribution, we trust that this
offer will be accepted. We were gratified to hear tlie
statement made along these lines by the representative of the
Soviet Union, Ambassador Malik.

“That is why we repeat that the Latin American draft
resolution seems to us to contain the necessary ingredients and constructive suggestions which might, in our
opinion, help us to interpret resolution 242 (1967) in a
clear and balanced way so that a just and equitable
solution can be found to the problems confronting the
Middle East. [1726th meeting, paras. 40 and 41.1
“Surely sufficient time has already elapsed for us to feel
deeply concerned over the fact that this objective has still
eluded peaceful achievement, and Panama firmly believes
that a just settlement of controversies of this nature must
be achieved without resort to the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence
of any State.” [ibid., para. 47:]

79. Mr. JANKOWITSCH (Austria): Since the early hours
of 22 October the Security Council has initiated a numbu
of urgent steps, thus fully assuming its primary task for tilt
maintenance of international peace and security. Resole
tion 338 (1973), adopted in the first hour of 22 October.
was an urgent call by the CouIlcil upon all parties to tllr”
present fighting to cease all firing and terminate all militav
activity. The resolution furthermore stipulated that sew
efforts should be made towards a just and lasting ~L’xI’,
referring to the implementation of Security Council rcs&
tion 242 (1967) and the start of negotiations betweell the
parties concerned under appropriate auspices.

75. I am speaking today as the representative of a
peace-loving people whose only wish is to contribute to
calling a halt to this bloody war which has already taken a
considerable toll. We were greatly encouraged by the
statement made a few months ago by the representative of
Israel, Ambassador Tekoah, in favour of a cease-fire,
negotiations and a peaceful agreement. We would add: a
just and equitable peace agreement would mean a lasting
solution to the delicate problems of the Middle East. We
now have an opportunity to achieve lasting peace in the
Middle East if we follow the provisions laid down by the
resolutions that we have recently adopted. In particular, I
refer to resolution 338 (1973), paragraph 3.

80. Austria gave its full support to that resolution and
welcomed the speedy manner in which it was adopted. r\s
my delegation stated on 9 October, the immediate cessatil!a
of hostilities was the primary concern of my Governmciil.
in order to stop bloodshed and destruction and a further
increase in the terrible toll of human life that the reedit
fighting had already taken. Our firm support for resolutitin
338 (1973) also resides in the conviction that no time mm1
he lost in substituting fur the military confrontation 3
peaceful arid constructive confrontation; which orlly th

76. We cannot, however, fail to mention today’s alarming
news that the United States strategic forces have been put
8

political process of negotiation and subsequent agreement
can provide; that the cease-fire must be more than a
temporary stalemate, a pause between renewed fighting;
and that it must be a genuine opportunity to advance
towards peace.

root of the present conflict will not be further widened and
that the beginning of a vast new peace-keeping effort will
be followed by the emergence of a newpolitical climate. In
a climate of war and military conflagration, efforts for
peace must be doomed to failure. Let us all, therefore, now
join forces to create the conditions and the climate that will
help the parties to come to an agreedsolution, the peaceful
solution of a conflict which has for so long been tlie dream
of peoples, and not the peoples and nations of the Middle
East alone.

81. It was a matter of deep regret for my delegation that
the call for a cease-fire made in resolution 338 (1973) was
not heeded. We therefore again gave our support to a
resolution seeking to put a definitive end to the fighting.
Resolution 339 (1973) provides for the first time adequate
machinery for supervising a cease-fire, and my Government
has welcomed the continued use of the objective and
impartial services of a group of highly qualified military
observers, dedicated to the single ideal of keeping the
peace.

86. The PRESIDENT:
Am I to understand that the
representative of the Soviet Union wishesto supplement his
earlier remarks on the draft resolution?
87. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Russian): 1 shall refer only to the
question of the financial implications of the draft resolution if it is adopted by the Council, One of the speakers
raised the question of the financial implications being borne
by two permanent members of the Security Council. I
cannot agree with such an approach to this question, which
seeks, as they say, to put these two permanent members of
the Council “in the same boat”.
(translation

82. The debate in the Council last night again focused on
the tremendous task ahead in ensuring full respect for the
cease-fire resolutions of the Council and the departure from
there, immediately and concurrently, to the concerted
search for peace, which is the second and equally vital
command of resolution 338 (1973).
83. We shall not fail, therefore, to support the draft
resolution which is now before us, the principal aim of
which is the full mobilization of United Nations machinery
to restore and keep the peace in the Middle East. As we
welcomed the earlier initiatives in resolutions 338 (1973)
and 339 (1973) we particularly welcome the present
constructive initiative which is at the heart of the present
draft resolution and we would like to express our appreciation to the sponsors for the long and painstaking efforts
they have made. We have no hesitation, as far as the terms
of the draft resolution are concerned, in supporting the
widest use of United Nations observers on both sides of the
lines as may be necessary to perform their task. In this
respect we have taken note of the detailed reports that the
Secretary-General has already provided to the Council,
which reflect the very careful and conscientious efforts
made by the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization over the past few days.

from

88. My second comment is that the cost to the United
Nations of maintaining the observersand the Force should
be borne by the aggressor who is to blame for the Council
being obliged to take these emergency measures.
g9. The PRESIDENT: May I ask the representative of
Guinea if she is insistent on speaking now? I have two more
names on my list of speakers.
90. Mrs. Jeanne Martin CISSE (Guinea) (interpretation
from Bench): If you will allow me to speak, Sir, I shall be

very brief. I would quite simply like to offer a correction to
what the representative of the Soviet Union said. I never
said that the responsibility lay especially with two permanent members, I still have my text here. I said the
responsibility was that of all the members of the Council,
and more particularly of the permanent members of the
Security Council.

84. We have no hesitation in supporting the decision for
the setting up immediately of a United Nations Emergency
Force. The history of United Nations crisis management
shows that past United Nations emergency forces have
rendered valuable services on many occasions and have not
failed to keep the peace over long periods. There is,
however, a lesson to be learned from the previous experiences-that the keeping of the peace must go hand in hand
with the relentless search for the basis of permanent peace,
and resolution 338 (1973) points to that double objective.
In this respect I do not have to stress the most positive
and favourable attitude my Government has always taken
in the past in regard to United Nations peace-keeping
operations and peace-keeping forces and the willingness my
country has never failed to express to make such contributions as appear necessary.

91. Mr, MALIK

of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I should like to make it clear
that I wasnot referring to the statement by Mrs. Cisse.
(translation

(Union

ji-om Russian]:

92. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): Now that the representative of the Soviet Union has made it clear that it was
not Mrs. Cisse that he had in mind I feel it is perhaps
necessary to clarify my remark. I said, that my delegation
was “looking especially to the super-Powersto hipprbvide
the United Nations with the necessaryfunds to guarantee
the effective functioning of the United Nations Emergency
Force.” It is certainly not my intention to ask the two
super-Powers to foot the bill for the emergency force.
93. Mr. PEREZ DE CUELLAR (Peru) (interpretationfrom
Spanislz): The draft resolution that we are about to vote
upon, co-sponsored by Peru, by strengthening the measures
for the application of the cease-fire,servesto fill the gaps in
resohrtions 338 (1973) and 339 (1973), which we voted on
hastily on 22 and 23 October. We feel that the setting up of

85. It is the sincere hope of my delegation that with the
adoption of the present draft resolution the moment of
peace in the Middle East will come nearer. It is our sincere
hope that the abyss of mistrust which was so much at the
9

ensuring the maintenance of peace, we feel that ne
individual members of the Council should be excluded. we
reserve the right to make the remarks and suggestions that
we may deem fit at the appropriate time, if that should be
necessary. 1 would merely recall here that in other
circumstances we have undertaken the commitment te
participate, if the case should arise, in a real peace-keeping
force. That commitment is still valid.

an emergency force is essential to achieving and maintaining
our goal, and, in addition, to reaffirming the authority of
the Security Council as established under the Charter. My
delegation believes that if the emergency force is to be able
to discharge its delicate responsibility, it should be set up in
accordance with criteria of geographical distribution and,
above all, of political balance.
94. It seems to us, in line with the strict precepts of logic,
that the same reasoning which has led us to, exclude
contingents of the permanent members of this Council
should lead us to considering, preferentially and in so far as
possible, contingents of countries that are not committed
to the large military political blocs.
95. In this connexion, my delegation is sure that the
report of the Secretary-General will give us further evidence
of his prudence and his skill.

102. For those reasons, my delegation requests a separate
vote on the part of paragraph 3 of the revised draft
resolution which deals with the composition of the forceto be quite specific, the words “except the permanent
members of the Security Counci”. We would have pre.
ferred not to see these words in the text.
103. I think I have sufficiently demonstrated that this
request is motivated by reasons of principle only, which are
of great importance in our eyes, and that it in no way seeks
to hamper or delay the decision to establish the Emergency
Force. I do not think that it is for the Council to decide
today on the conditions in which this Emergency Force will
be established and set up. It is for the Secretary-General to
make proposals to us on these various points in the report
he is to submit tomorrow to the Council. I have no doubt
that the Secretary-General’s proposals will be the subject of
unanimous agreement.

96. Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD
(France) [interpretation from
: At the request of Egypt, the Security Council met
yesterday to consider developments in the Middle East. The
consultations which took place yesterday evening culminated in the submission by eight delegations of the draft
resolution before us now. My delegation is ready to vote,
subject to the reservations I shall now explain, in favour of
the draft resolution, whose provisions are essentially in
keeping with the will expressed by the Council to put an
end once and for all to the fighting and to avoid any
resumption of it.
French]

104. In conclusion, my delegation would like to express
the hope that the provisions that this Council is about to
adopt will be such as to bring about a final end to the
fighting and to facilitate the initiation in the near future of
over-all negotiations on the basis of the provisions of
resolution 242 (1967). The implementation of that resolution and all of its provisions offers the best guarantee
against any further exacerbation of the conflict 51 the
Middle East which, as we now see clearly, constitutes a
serious threat to the peace and security of us all.

97. The first prerequisite is that the cease-fire established
by resolution 338 (1973) and reaffirmed in resolution
339 (1973) be scrupulously observed, and that the parties
withdraw to the positions they occupied on 22 October at
the time when the cease-fire became effective.
98. Secondly, the authorization given the SecretaryGeneral to increase the number of observers of UNTSO,
will enable the emergency establishment of an observer
mechanism which is of unquestionable utility.

105. The PRESIDENT:
Saudi Arabia.

99. Finally, my delegation fully supports the idea of
setting up, under the direct authority of the Security
Council, a United Nations Emergency Force whose mission
would be to ensure compliance with the cease-fire until
such time as other arrangements may be made within the
framework of a general settlement of the conflict.

1 call on the representative of

100. Referring to the second amendment mentioned this
morning by the representative of Kenya-that is to say, the
provision which would exclude participation by the permanent members of the Security Council in the composition
of the force-1 would like to say that my Government
considers that failure to involve the responsibility of
permanent members may weaken the impact of the
Council’s decisions.

106. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): In order that I may
be able to report to my Government on something which
still seems to be undecided, I should like to ask a question,
in view of what happened at the nineteenth session of the
General Assembly-and I do not have to go into details. To
be precise my question is this. Are all the Powers willing to
contribute to the financing of the United Nations emergency force? If all are not willing, we may have a situation
similar to that which obtained at the nineteenth session.
Could the Secretary-General give us an idea of what the
initial expenses would be-the initial expenses, I am not
talking about the year-in year-out expenses-perhaps for a
year, because I have to tell my Government. Maybe my
Government would take the same attitude as that assumed
by Mr. Malik, our friend from the Soviet Union.

101. As we see it, the dispatch of an emergency force is
not only military in significance; it represents a formal
commitment on the part of the permanent members and
thus an effective guarantee of the cease-fire. That is why,
when it comes to dispatching a force responsible not only
for ensuring compliance with the cease-fire but also for

107. He said that the aggressor should bear the brunt. And
you know whom he means by the aggressor-not me of
course. So this is a very important question which should
not be taken lightly, in view of what happened during the
nineteenth session. I had to intervene when our erstwhile
colleague Mr, Budo-who died, may God rest his soul in
10

peace-took the floor, and when the late Adlai Stevenson
started by saying that those who do not pay do not have a
right to vote. And, after we had consulted, the Albanian
representative talked about this matter. There was a big
hubbub in the General Assembly. They did not want the
Soviet Union, and I do not know whom else, to vote. Then
one of the permanent members of the Security Council
also, for reasons of its own, did not think that it should
contribute. But, finally, it waspressured into contributing a
token share in order to be able to vote.

114. The PRESIDENT: I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution as a whole.
A vote wastaken by show of hands,

In favour: Australia, Austria, France, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Yugoslavia.
Against: None.

108. I should like to know what the situation is. You are
rushing into something that you might regret. Will the
Secretary-General give us an idea of how much this Force
will
cost the United Nations? Have they consulted with the
Fifth Committee?
Those are pertinent questions. I am
talking as an old-timer. We do not want to have an impasse
like the one we had during the nineteenth session,
109. The PRESIDENT:

The draft resolution wasadoptedby 14 votes to none.2
One member (China) did not participatein the voting.

115. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the SecretaryGeneral, who wishes to make a statement.
116. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have noted the
request contained in the resolution which has just been
adopted that I should report within 24 hours on the steps
to be taken to set up immediately the United Nations
Emergency Force under the authority of the Security
Council. I wish to assure the Council that I shall do my
utmost to respond to that request within the time limit set
by the Council. I hope that my report may form the basis
for the agreement of this Council on the establishment, task
and conduct of the United Nations Emergency Force.

I call on the Secretary-General.

1 IO. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
In reply to the question of the representative of Saudi Arabia, I just want to
say that in my report to the Council tomorrow I intend to
give a first, approximate estimate of the expensesinvolved.
111. The PRESIDENT: May I ask the representative of
Kenya whether he is prepared to accept, on behalf of the
sponsors of the revised draft resolution, the request made
by the representative of France for a separate vote on the
words “except the permanent members of the Security
Council”?

117. With reference to paragraph 2 of the resolution, the
Council will find in paragraph 8 of document S/7930/
Add.2219, the measures which have been taken so far to
increase the number of United Nations military observers
on both sides. I shall be reporting to the Council further on
this matter.

112. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): I have no objection, and
I am sure that the sponsors of the draft resolution have no
objection, to complying with the request of the representative of France.

118. I have already circulated to the Council an exchange
of letters with the representative of Israel concerning the
observation of the cease-fire in the Syrian sector [see
S/11047]. From this correspondence it will be seen that
both parties have now agreed to the adjustment of the
observation machinery in the Syrian sector to the present
situation. I have instructed General Siilasvuo to proceed
immediately to implement the agreedplan.

113. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution proposed by eight members
and contained in document S/11046/Rev.l. In accordance
with the request of the representative of France, which has
been acceded to by the sponsors, there will first be a
separate vote on the words “except the permanent mem
bers of the Security Council” in operative paragraph 3.

119. The PRESIDENT: A number of representatives wish
to speak-some to explain their votes after the voting,
others to make statements, and still others to exercise their
right of reply. If there is no objection, I propose to suspend
this meeting until 4 o’clock.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

in favour: Australia, Austria, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Sociahst
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
IreIand, United States of America, Yugoslavia.
Against:
Abstaining:

The meeting wassuspendedat 3.15 p.m. and resumedat
5.05 p.m.

120. The PRESIDENT:
Egypt.

None.

I call on the representative of

France.
121. Mr. ABDEL-MEGUID
(Egypt) (interpretation from
French): The Security Council hasjust adopted a resolution

me member (China) did not participate in the voting.

which in our delegation’s opinion is of major importance.
We believe that, in so doing the Council is beginning to face

me words “‘except the permanent members of the
Security Council” were adopted by 13 votes to none, with
I abstention.

2 Seeresolution 340 (1973).
11

up to its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. For we know full well that
the situation in the Middle East has for many years now
constituted a constant threat to the peace in our region and
to international security.

129. In my statement yesterday, I stressed that the
Council, as well as all individual members, had the
inescapable responsibility, in a situation like the brie we are
faced with, to act on behalf of the whole of the United
Nations. The non-aligned members of the Council, imbued
with a sense of responsibdity and with a profound sense of
duty to do all they can to stop the aggression and help
those who respect and uphold the Council’s decisions,
decided to move. Finally, we were responding to the
requests of our non-aligned Arab friends and allies.

122. At this stage I should like to state on behalf of the
Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt that we accept
this resolution in the hope that it will be able to make an
effective contribution to bringing into force the decisions
already. taken by the Security Council. 1 should also like to
inform you of the decision taken by Egypt, in the context
of its territorial sovereignty, to grant the Emergency Force
set up in this resolution all the assistance and co-operation
necessary in order to enable it to discharge the tasks
flowing from its responsibility to put into effect the two
resolutions previously adopted by the Council.

130. The text of the resolution introduced so ably and
with such dedication by the representative of Kenya and
seconded by the representative of Guinea, reflected both
the requirements of the situation and the feelings of the
sponsors, that mere repetition of the provisions of resolu.
tion 339 (1973) was no longer sufficient. We stated also
yesterday what we thought the appropriate auspices should
be-namely, that the framework and responsibility of the
United Nations, of this Council, must be involved.

123. I would recall that resolution 338 (1973) states that
the Council:
/l%e speaker read out the text of the resolution.]

131. It is for those reasons that, after demanding the
immediate and complete observance of the cease-fire in
place as it existed at 1650 hours GMT on 22 October 1973,
the non-aligned resolution requested the Secretary-General
to increase the number of United Nations Military
Observers on both sides, decided to set up immediately a
United Nations Emergency Force, requested the Secretary
General to keep the Council urgently informed at ali times
on the implementation of this resolution and resolutions
338 (1973) and 339 (1973), and requested all Member
States to co-operate with him in their implementation.
Obviously, the setting up of a United Nations Emergency
Force is a major step, and one that brings back the United
Nations to a more active and direct role in one of its
primary tasks, peace keeping and peace making. In addition
to everything else, that is in conformity with the views of
the non-aligned countries expressed most recently at their
Algiers summit on reinforcing the role of the United
Nations in strengthening international peace and security.

124. But following Israel’s violation of the cease-fire, the
Security Council adopted resolution 339 (1973) in which it
“confirms
its decision on an immediate cessation of all
kinds of firing and of all military action, and urges that the
forces of the two sides be returned to the positions they
occupied at the moment the cease-fire became effective”.
125. This, in our opinion, is the first task which should
devolve upon the United Nations Emergency Force-since
the Israeli forces went beyond the cease-fire lines when the
cease-fire began, under resolution 338 (1973)-in pursuance
of the resolution that has just been adopted by the Council,
which requires that an immediate and complete cease-fire
be observed and that the parties return to the positions
occupied by them at 1650 hours GMT on 22 October 1973.
126. In giving its consent to the entry and operation of
the United Nations Forces, Egypt is acting within the
framework of the purposes and principles of the Charter
and of its various provisions. Our consent is given taking
into account the statement made by the representative of
Kenya, Ambassador Odero-Jowi, in the Council meeting of
24 October when he introduced this draft resolution on
behalf of the sponsors. We are convinced that the Security
Council, by the resolution that it has just adopted, has
embarked on a course designed to put an end to the
aggression committed by the Israeli armed forces since
5 June 1967 against Egypt and the Arab countries, which
still consider themselves bound by all of the resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly and the Security Council.

132. The resolution that has been adopted at the same
time introduces a political and physical United Nations
collective presence which will serve as an jnstrument
preventing possible major complications
and confrontations. In proposing their resolution, which was adopted
unanimously by the Council, the non-aligned members did
not indulge in any propaganda game. They wanted as
effective an action by the United Nations as possible in the
gravest of situations. That is why, despite their well-known
and well-founded feelings over Israel’s aggression and their
strong support for the right of Arab peoples to fight for the
liberation of their occupied territories they couched their
draft in very restrained language in order not to add any
difficulties or any obstacles to its timely, prompt adoption,
because that was our very first and most important
consideration.

127. The PRESIDENT:
I give the floor to the representative of Yugoslavia, who wishes to speak in explanation of
vote.
128. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia):
Having been, as the
representative of Yugoslavia, one of the eight sponsors of
the non-aligned resolution just adopted in the Council, I
shall now state very briefly our views on some major
aspects of the text submitted by the non-aligned countries,
members of the Council, on some of its basic elements, and
on the Council’s adopting it so promptly.

133. We are gratified at the positive response of the
Council-of all the members of the Council who voted for
our resolution and all of those who have made it possible
for the Council to take this important step. It is now for US
all, with the invaluable assistance of the Secretary-General
and his able and dedicated associates and staff, to make the
12

utmost efforts to assure and accomplish the speediest
implementation
of the Council resolution just adopted
340 (1973). We hope and appeal to all that the financing of
the new United Nations Emergency Force operation will
not face any undue difficulties, and we also trust that in the
setting up of the United Nations Emergency Force due
attention will be paid to the obvious need for proper
political and geographical representation to be reflected in
its composition.
134. The PRESIDENT: I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan in explanation of vote.
135. Mr. ABDULLA
(Sudan): I shall be very brief in
explaining the vote of the delegation of the Sudan on the
resolution which was just adopted by the Council.
136. f entirely agree with the explanation given by the
representatives of Kenya and Guinea of the eight-Power
draft, of which my country is a sponsor. I agree also with
them that this is a mild resolution, in the sense that it does
not
name names, especially with reference to the words
“repeated violations”. We all know that they have all been
committed by Israel, which has taken advantage of the
cease-fire called for by this Council and committed more
than one aggression since the adoption of the cease-fire
resolution.
137. We voted for the resolution just adopted because,
first, we think it is an attempt to reach an effective
cease-fire on both sides and it calls for the return of Israeli
forces to the positions occupied by them at 1650 hours
GMT on 22 October; secondly, it authorizes the SecretaryGeneral to provide an adequate number of observers; and,
thirdly, it calls for the establishment of an emergency force.
138. Those are what one might call primary objectives, as
they were described by the British delegation. But we think
that there are certain elements which ought to be satisfied
in this process. One of those elements is the complete and
total withdrawal
of Israeli forces from all the territories
they have occupied since the first aggression in June 1967,
and also the rights of the Palestinian people should be
restored.
139. Finally, we agreed to this resolution because it seeks
to achieve a just and lasting peace in the Middle East and to
save a situation which has already become dangerous not
only for the Middle East but for the entire world. The
objective of this resolution is to remove the impediments
which Israel has created and continues to create in spite of
all the efforts to achieve a just and lasting peace.
140. In all the aforementioned processes, the special
responsibility
of the permanent members of the Counciland more particularly of two of them, the United States of
America and the USSR, which initiated those processescannot be overemphasized.

same time, we consider that strict assurances and guarantees
of their absolute neutrality and disinterestedness should be
given.
142. The second part is the financial issue. My delegation
would be very happy if assurances could be given that there
will be no financial complications or controversy.
143. Finally, we agree with the United States delegation
that we should all consider the resolution just adopted as a
matter of highest priority, and we trust that the United
States of America wiI1 spare no effort in removing
impediments to the realization of the aims and intentions
of the resolution. We need not remind the United States
delegation and the Council that Israel has placed and
continues to place such impediments in the way of peace.
At the same time, we know that those who help it in its
vicious endeavours can also control its vicious ambitions.
144. Mr. SEN (India): Little doubt exists inside or
outside the Council of what has happened in the last three
days since we adopted resolution 338 (1973): Israel has
occupied still more Egyptian territory, ominous and frightful war clouds have gathered in many continents and no
effective measures have been taken to implement what we
understood to have been an understanding between the
United States of America and the Soviet Union. In these
circumstances, the Council met to discuss, on Egypt’s
initiative, measures it could take to restore peace in the area
and simultaneously to begin negotiations in terms of
resolutions for which we voted and which were adopted
during the last three days. In attempting to achieve those
objectives, we also wish to ensure that no party, taking
advantage of the cease-fire simply declared or actually
carried out, should increase its territorial gains, its negotiating position or its publicity campaign, either in what are
described as “enlightened media of information” or in any
other way.
145. We the non-aligned countries members of the
Security Council could easily assess the degree of blame of
those who went against the Council resolutions, but our
supreme consideration was that at this particular moment
we should concentrate on measures that would bring about
less tension, which has dangerously been generated. Our
resolution, presented in most moderate language, seeks first
and foremost to serve this immediate aim without in any
way detracting from the essential need to find a just,
peaceful and durable solution with utmost speed. We are
glad, therefore, that the draft resolution submitted by the
eight Powers and so convincingly introduced by my friend
and colleague the Ambassador of Kenya was unanimously
adopted.
146. My deIegation would like to make two comments on
the operative part of this resolution. It is our understand.
ing-although it hardly requires repeated emphasis-that the
United Nations military observers and the United Nations
Emergency Force will be operating on the sovereign
territories of Egypt and Syria and that nothing the Council
may do will detract, except with their consent,from the
exercise of that sovereignty. We are glad that, by implication and now by explicit statementof the delegationof
Egypt, such consentis forthcoming.

141. I should like now to comment on the composition of
the United Nations forces--whether they be observers, the
United Nations Emergency Force or other types of forces
which might be placed in the region. We think that they
should be selected-as suggested by the USSR and supported by others-on an equitable geographical basis. At the
13

147. However, we accept the introduction of these foreign
military personnel in the sovereign territories of Egypt and
Syria only as a prelude and necessary condition for
negotiations, which could and must lead to the relinquishment of all territories acquired by force and the establishment of durable peace in the area, enabling all the States in
that region to live in security inside their own borders. Any
final solution must, of course, respect the rights of the
Palestinian people. We view these United Nations forces in
the area as temporary measures which should be terminated
as soon as possible and, in any event, as soon as durable
peace is in sight.
148. My second comment relates to the financing and
other practical arrangements for the United Nations
observers and the forces. We are confident that money will
be forthcoming. Those who initiated the move in the
Council to bring about a cease-fire in the present conflict,
in conditions and circumstances we discussed a few days
ago, have some special responsibility in this respect, and in
several other respects as well, regarding the Middle East
problem.
149. In the last paragraph of the resolution, which calls on
all States to co-operate with the United Nations in this
urgent and delicate task, the sponsors had this aspect of
financial assistance of our decision very much in mind.
150. We are also hopeful that the Secretary-General will
give us concrete and practical proposals for the implementation of the Council’s decision. We regret that we have
given him only 24 hours to make his recommendations, but
we are confident that, with his usual sensitivity and
promptitude, he will fulfil his mandate. We look forward to
the Secretary-General’s initial proposals in a matter of
hours, so that the Council can continue to keep this
difficult and dangerous problem under close and constant
examination and supervison and take action as the everchanging situation requires.
151. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the representative of
Nigeria to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.
152. Mr. OGBU (Nigeria): Upon instructions of my
Government, I have the honour to bring to the attention of
the Security Council the following statement made by His
Excellency General Yakubu Gowon at 8 o’clock this
morning New York time.

Military Government of Nigeria wishes to express its full
support and solidarity with the Government and people
of Egypt in this momentous decision and reaffirm its full
understanding and endorsement of the recent cortflict
that led Egypt to take up arms in the defence of its
legitimate rights.
“The Nigerian Government had repeatedly stated that it
could not subscribe to any policy that confirms le8ti.
macy on the possession of territory by force of arms. 11
also recognizes that no people, and no nation, can
tolerate in silence the occupation of territory by foreign
forces. In this regard, the Nigerian Government has
repeatedly called upon the Government of Israel to
respect international opinion and morality, to withdraw
from the territory of Egypt, a member country of the
Organization of African Unity, which Israel forces
occupied by their pre-emptive sudden attack upon Egypt
in 1967.
“Since the outbreak of the most recent hostilities, the
Nigerian Government has also made it abundantly clear to
the Government of Israel that Nigeria could not tolerate a
situation in which the territory of a sister African country
would continue to be further violated. The Israeli
Government was specifically informed that, while the
Nigerian Government was, for the moment, prepared to
continue to maintain contact with Israel in the hope that
such contact would provide opportunity for counselling,
moderation and restraint, in the circumstances, Nigerian
opinion would not accept a situation in which Israeli
forces either attack the civilian population and urban
centres in Egypt, or any further incursion on Egyptian
sovereignty by an attempt to establish Israeli military
presence on the West Bank of the Suez.
“In the last few days, confirmation has been received of
the extent of Israeli incursion into the West Bank of Suez
and the occupation of a further area of nearly 500 square
miles of Egyptian territory, to which Israel could not, by
any stretch of imagination, claim a legitimate right. This
confirmation has now necessitated an immediate review
of Nigerian relations with Israel, since the action of the
Israeli Government, in this regard, in further occupying
large areas of Egypt and investing them with substantial
military forces indicates its contempt for African and
world opinion.
“The Nigerian Government has made it abundantly
clear that Nigeria is interested in supporting all legitimate
moves designed to achieve a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East, provided that the legitimate rights and
prerogatives of Egypt and all other Arab countries are
adequately protected in the arrangement for such a
lasting peace. Nigeria is convinced that the recent action
of Israeli forces in crossing the West Bank of the Suez aad
in taking advantage of the early stages of the cease-fireto
further extend and consolidate its hold on large areasof
Egyptian territory is not conducive to the promotion of a
peaceful and just settlement in the area and constitutes
ample evidence of bad faith on the part of Israel.

“Since the outbreak of war in the Middle East on
6 October 1973, the Federal Military Government has
maintained contact with all the parties, including the two
super-Powers, with a view to lending its support to all
efforts which would re-establish peace in the regio% The
Federal Military Government was, therefore, particularly
gratified to learn of the acceptance by the parties to the
conflict of Security Council resolution 338 (1973) of 22
October 1973, calling for a cease-fire. The Government
was particularly pleased to note the magnanimous and
far-sighted action of President Sadat of Egypt in readily
accepting the cease-fire proposal in the interest of genuine
peace in the Middle East, and with a high sense of
responsibility and outstanding statesmanship. The Federal

“Consequently, the Federal Military Government of
Nigeria has decided to break diplomatic relations with the
Government of Israel with immediate effect.”
14

153. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from Chinese):
The anti-China verbiage uttered by Mr. Malik before the
suspension of the meeting today is really beneath refutation. An appropriate reply to the Soviet representative
could be found in the 23 October speech of the Chairman
of the Chinese delegation at the 1748th meeting, as well as
in my previous statement today. Mr. Malik did his utmost
to propagate the “tremendous contribution” made by the
USSR in providing arms to certain countries. However,
everyQne is aware of its true aim-not to mention how hi&
a price and repayment it has extorted.

Security Council. His proposal is that, pursuant to resolution 340 (1973) which the Council adopted earlier today,
he be authorized by the Council, as an interim measure and
in order that the emergency force may reach the area as
soon as possible, to arrange for the contingents of Austria,
Finland and Sweden, now serving with the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus, to proceed immediately to
Egypt. He also proposed to appoint General Siilasvuo, the
Chief of Staff of UNTSO, as the interim Commander of the
Emergency Force and to ask him to set up a provisional
headquarters staff of personnel from UNTSO.

$54. Mr. Malik has again tried to sow discord in the
relations between China and the non-aligned countries. This
is of course futile. The Chinese delegation has clearly stated
its principled position today, during the Council’s discussions of the Middle East question in June, and during the
vote on the relevant draft resolutions. The numerous Arab
countries and people as well as the people of the third
world countries fully understand all this. The more lies
Mr. Malik tells, the more they reveal the ugly imperialist
features of the Soviet Government in giving sham support
to
the Arab and Palestinian people while actually selling
them out and in giving sham aid while actually trying to
control them.

161. Does any member of the Council have any objection
to the Secretary-General’s proposal, which is, ashe has said,
without prejudice to the more detailed and comprehensive
report on the Emergency Force which he will submit to the
Council on 26 October? Since there is no objection, I shall
take it that the Council now authorizes the Secretary
General to proceed in accordance with his proposal.
It was so decided.

162. Speaking now as representative of AUSTRALIA, I
wish first of all to recall that when I spoke in the Council
on 22 October [I 747th meeting] after the adoption of
resolution 338 (1973), I stressed the need for urgent,
diligent and faithful work to implement that resolution and
urged that the Council should stand ready at all times to
render the parties to the dispute all the assistancethey
might need to attain the objective of the resolution, which
is peace in the Middle East.

155. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Keria): I spoke earlier today on
behalf of the eight sponsors of the draft resolution which
the Council has now adopted as resolution 340 (1973). In
that statement I commended the non-aligned draft resolution to the unanimous support of the Council. I now take
this opportunity to thank all members of the Council for
their support in making it possible for that draft to be
adopted. I also thank the parties to the conflict for
graciously going along with the thrust and spirit of the text.

163. Resolutions 338 (1973) and 339 (1973) resulted
from initiatives-very welcome initiatives-by two of the
permanent members of the Council. We have just adopted a
further resolution, this time at the initiative of the eight
non-aligned members of the Council. My delegation was
glad to be able to vote in favour of that resolution and was
especially pleased that it gained such wide support. We
congratulate the non-aligned States for their willingness to
take up the work of moving forward from the foundations
of resolutions 338 (1973) and 339 (1973) and, of course,
resolution 242 (1967). Their resolution is moderate and
objective in tone and balanced and sensible in outlook. It
will be of material assistance in the primary task at this
stage of stabilizing and supporting the fragile cease-fire
ordered by the two earlier resolutions.

1.56. What now remains necessary is a determined effort
on the part of all concerned, including the Council, to
implement immediately resolution 340 (1973), along with
other pertinent resolutions of the Council on the present
crisis. We trust that there will not be any complications and
we hope that no complications will be introduced in any
way in the path to its genuine implementation, whether on
financial or any other grounds.
157.

Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
The delegation of the USSR
will ignore the latest instalment of the Chinese representative’s slanderous fabrications and does not consider it
necessary to respond to it.

(translation

from Russian):

164. My delegation has heard one line of reasoning in this
Council which has a good deal to commend it, that is, to
the effect that in ideal circumstances it would be possible
for us to sit down and negotiate and finally draft a
resolution of greater precision and perhaps greater long
term value. But, of course, the circumstances are not ideal
and time is not on our side. The Council has to act rapidly
to make sure that the cease-fire becomes fully effective and
in this situation to aim for too much precision could prove
to be counter-productive.

158. The PRESIDENT: I low call on the SecretaryGeneral who wishes to make a statement.
159. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
This afternoon I sent
a letter to the President of the Security Council which I
shall now read out.
f The Secretary-General read out the text of the letter,
which was subsequently circulated as document S/110491

165. My’ delegation believes that the real merit of the
resolution lies in its practical approach. To us, the steps it
requires are the right steps in the current situationimmediate observance of the cease-fire allied with additional measures likely to make it effective.

160. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have
heard the proposal of the Secretary-General as contained in
his letter of 25 October 1973 to me as President of the
15

workable mandate for such a Force, on the basis of whlclr
firm commitments could be sought from and made by
States Members of the United Nations.

166. Understandably, the proposal to establish a United
Nations Emergency Force has attracted the most attention
in this context. The Council, of course, has t‘aken only the
first step, that of agreeing to form such a Force, and
obviously many important matters of both a mechanical
and a substantive nature need to be resolved before the
Force can become an effective buffer between the parties
to the dispute. Other speakers before me have referred to
those difficulties and it is not necessary for me to add to
their comments, except to say that there may be merit in
adopting a flexible, pragmatic approach and not trying to
solve too many of the predictable problems at this initial
stage. The Council’s responsibility is, in any event, to lay
down policy and broad guidelines, not to decide every
detail of the establishment and operation of the Emergency
Force. The important thing, surely, is that the principle
should have been accepted and the initiative launched. In
the days ahead it will be our collective responsibility to
consider how best to fill out the initial steps which the
Secretary-General must now take into an acceptable and

167. It is only left for me to say that, as a Govecnnrcnr
which has given fulI and long-standing support to the
United Nations peace-keeping operations, involving among
other things the contribution of personnel to the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organisation, the Australian
Government applauds this initiative by the non-aligned
countries and would be willing to consider sympathetically
a request for a contribution to the Emergency Force under
appropriate conditions.
168. As there are no other speakers, I propose, as
PRESIDENT, to adjourn this meeting. The Council wilt
remain ready on immediate call as occasion demands,
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

16

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite:1
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Infotmez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
Q : Nations Unies, Section des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
KAK

IIOJIYWXTb

I13AAHHJl

OPI’AHII:

BAIJ.NEI

OB’liEAMHEHHMX

HAU(ZIA

HauuR
~omno
rcynurrb B KNWKHLIX MaraJWH~X A aretrrc~sa~
no ncex panonax
~npa. HaaoAuTe
cnpan~w
06 a3Aannax
a
m.merd KHB~~OM Mara3mre
WIIN: naumre
no anpecy:
Opranusauun
06~eamtenHbrx
Haqwn, Cewqna no nponame w3~anuA, Hbia-Hopx
mm Xeueaa.
EI3AaHm

COMO

Litho

in United

Nations,

OpraHuaaquu

CONSEGUIR

06ze~memmx

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero o dirijase
a: Naciones

New York

in other

Price:

$U.S. 2.00 (or equivalent

currencies)

73.82001--July

1979-%200
