42

General Assembly -

Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, as appropriate :
(a) To give high priority to the opening of information centres or arranging for adequate information facilities in the less-developed areas, particularly in the
newly independent countries and Trust and Non-SelfGoverning Territories, by effecting economies in other
directions ;
( b) To intensify his efforts to achieve a more effective regional representation at the policy-making level
of the Office of Public Information ;
(c) To report to the General Assembly at its sixteenth
session on the progress made in implementing the
present resolution.
954th plenary merting,
18 December 1960.

1559 (XV). Geographical distribution of the staff
of the Secretariat
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the geographical distribution of the staff of
the Secretariat,28
Recalling Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of
the United Nations,
Reaffirming the third paragraph of the preamble to
General Assembly resolution 153 (II) of 15 November
1947, namely:
"Whereas, in view of its international character and
in order to avoid undue predominance of national
practices, the policies and administrative methods of
the Secretariat should reflect, and profit to the highest
degree from, assets of the various cultures and the
technical competence of all Member nations",
Taking into account the various views expressed by
delegations during the discussion of this question.
Recognizing that the present method of determining
the desirable range of posts for each Member State on
the basis of the scale of assessments to the United
Nations budget needs review,
Noting the steady increase in the proportion of the
fixed-term staff of the Secretariat,
1. Requests the Committee of Experts appointed by
General Assembly resolution 1446 (XIV) of 5 December 1959 to study the categories of posts subject to
geographical distribution and the criteria for determining the range of posts for each Member State with a
view to securing a wide geographical distribution of the
staff of the Secretariat, taking into account, inter alia,
the relative importance of various posts, and to report
to the Assembly at its sixteenth session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his
efforts to implement the General Assembly resolutions
on the question of the geographical distribution of the
staff of the Secretariat ;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its sixteenth session on the
implementation of the above-mentioned provisions.
954 plenary meeting,
18 December 196fJ.
23 Jbid., agenda item 60, documents A/C.5/833 and Addl
and A/C.5/834.

Fifteenth Session

1560 (XV). Annual report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board

The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the annual report of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board ;24
2. Approves, with effect from 1 May 1960, the draft
agreement between the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development on the transfer of pension rights of
participants in the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund and of participants in the Staff Retirement Plan
of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development ;211
3. Approves, with effect from 1 May 1960, the draft
agreement between the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the International Monetary Fund on the
transfer of pension rights of participants in the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and of participants
in the Staff Retirement Plan of the International
Monetary Fund. 26
954th plenary meeting,
18 December 1960.
1561 (XV). United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the expert group 27
appointed by the Secretary-General to undertake a
comprehensive review of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 1310 (XIII) of 10 December 1958, the report
of the United Nations Toint Staff Pension Board 28 and
the proposals made by the Secretary-General, as a result
of those reports, in conjunction with the executive he:1ds
of the other member organizations and in co-operation
with the Board, 29
Agrees that the expert group has accomplished a
difficult task with skill and thoroughness, and places on
record its warm appreciation of the services of the
group;

I
PENSIONABLE REMUNERATION OF THE STAFF

1. Decides that, for the purposes of contributions
payable to the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund,
the pensionable remuneration of the staff with effect
from 1 April 1961 shall be established as follows:
(a) Base pensionable remuneration:
(i) For staff who are subject to the Staff Assessment
Plan under staff regulation 3.3, the base pensionable remuneration shall be the annual rate of the
United Nations gross salary, expressed in United
States dollars or such other currency as may be
agreed between the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board and the organization, applicable
to the grade and step (including any language
allowance) of the official, less one half of the
24 Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/4469 and
Corr.I).
25 Ib;d., Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 62, document A/C.5/846, annex A.
26 Ibid., annex B.
2 7 Ibid., agenda item 63, document A/4427.
28 Ibid., document A/4467.
29 Ibid., document A/4468.
