S/2021/1029

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 December 2021
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020)
and 2585 (2021)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the seventy-sixth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), paragraph 6 of resolution 2393 (2017), paragraph
12 of resolution 2401 (2018), paragraph 6 of resolution 2449 (2018), paragraph 8 of
resolution 2504 (2020), paragraph 3 of resolution 2533 (2020) and paragraph 5 of
resolution 2585 (2021), in the last four of which the Council requested the SecretaryGeneral to provide a report at least every 60 days, on the implementation of the
resolutions by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to entities of the
United Nations system and obtained from the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and other relevant sources. Data from entities of the United Nations system
regarding their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the months of October
and November 2021.

II. Major developments
Key points
1.
Violence continued in the Idlib de-escalation area in the north-west
of the Syrian Arab Republic, including airstrikes, mutual shelling and
limited clashes, amid continued high levels of coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) cases.
2.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights verified 78 incidents in which at least 97 civilians, including
7 women and 27 children, were killed as a result of hostilities. In addition,
at least 127 civilians, including 14 women and 37 children, were injure d.

21-18226 (E)

171221

*2118226*

S/2021/1029

3.
Uluk water station resumed pumping on 10 September and water
reached Hasakah city on 13 September. Since 19 November, the water station
had first operated at a lower capacity owing to insufficient electricity supply,
before completely stopping functioning on 26 November.
4.
Some 4.5 million people across the Syrian Arab Republic need
winter assistance, a 12 per cent increase from the previous year, with needs
exacerbated by protracted displacement, the economic crisis and the
COVID-19 pandemic. Humanitarian partners target 3.6 million people,
primarily in camps, shelters and informal settlements, in addition to those
in areas of high altitude and snowfall.
5.
COVID-19 transmission rates in the Syrian Arab Republic remained
high, exacerbating an already dire humanitarian situation. A surge since
the end of August led to more than 1,000 people testing positive daily.
Across the country, 2.9 per cent of the population is fully vaccinated.
6.
The economic crisis continued to affect civilians across the country.
The food security situation deteriorated. October marked the highest ever
recorded monthly price for a standard food basket since monitoring started
in 2013. Food prices are now 128 per cent higher compared with the same
time last year. Fuel supply decreased, leading to price increases and an
impact on the availability of transportation.
7.
Humanitarian assistance by United Nations agencies and their
partners continued throughout the Syrian Arab Republic. Assistance
included World Food Programme food assistance for 5.3 million people in
October and 5.2 million people in November, across all 14 governorates.
8.
The access landscape in the Syrian Arab Republic remains complex,
with different geographical areas and types of services requiring the use
of a variety of operating modalities. In the north-west, a second World
Food Programme cross-line delivery to a warehouse in Sarmada city took
place on 9 and 10 December, providing multisectoral assistance, including
food and nutrition assistance for another 43,500 people, as well as items
from the United Nations Population Fund, the World Health Organization
and the United Nations Children’s Fund. The United Nations further
developed a plan for regular and predictable inter-agency cross-line
operations into the north-west to deliver multisectoral assistance over a
six-month period. A total of 21 consignments consisting of 1,900 trucks
crossed into the Syrian Arab Republic from Turkey through cross -border
operations, all through the Bab al-Hawa crossing during the reporting
period. In the north-east, between January and October, 1,746 trucks
containing humanitarian assistance crossed lines, an average of 174 a
month. In October and November, the World Health Organization
delivered two cross-line airlifts of COVID-19 vaccines and routine
vaccines with a total weight of 6,784 kilograms, UNICEF supported crossline deliveries worth $4.9 million from 1 January to mid -November and
other United Nations agencies also provided cross-line assistance.

Humanitarian update
3.
Hostilities continued in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic, while
COVID-19 cases remained high. Airstrikes and intermittent shelling killed and
injured civilians, including women and children in the Idlib de -escalation area and
surrounding areas. On 20 October, shelling in Ariha town, Idlib Governorate, killed

2/23

21-18226

S/2021/1029

13 civilians, including 2 women and 1 girl, and injured 21 civilians, including
schoolchildren.
4.
Mutual shelling and clashes between armed opposition groups and government
and pro-government forces across contact lines in the Idlib de-escalation area
continued, especially south of the M4 highway in Idlib Governorate, Tall Rif‘at in
Aleppo Governorate, Ayn Isa in Raqqah Governorate and Tall Tamr in Hasakah
Governorate. More than 2.8 million people in the north-west of the Syrian Arab
Republic, many of them women and children, remained internally displaced. The
volatile security situation also affected women’s and adolescent girls’ access to life saving sexual and reproductive health and gender-based violence services.
5.
Attacks also had an impact on humanitarian operations during the reporting
period. In the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic, hostilities took place close to
United Nations and partner warehouses, delivery routes and distr ibution points.
Incidents were also reported along supply routes, including those for cross -line
convoys. On 11 October, an explosion occurred in Afrin city near Suq al -Hal market,
in the vicinity of a building of a World Food Programme (WFP) operating par tner. On
16 October, an attack took place 600 metres from the WFP warehouse in Sarmada,
damaging the building of an implementing partner. On 25 October, another attack
struck 200 metres from the premises of United Nations implementing partners in
Dana. On 4 November, a WFP cooperating partner suspended its general food
distributions in Bulbul, Aleppo Governorate, owing to security concerns. The
cooperating partner later resumed activities in the area on 22 November, following
extensive consultations with local authorities and stakeholders. Shelling in Afrin on
19 November affected one non-governmental organization (NGO) office and killed
and injured several civilians.
6.
Millions of people remain unable to have reliable access to sufficient and safe
water across the north and north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic. This is due to a
range of factors, including unprecedented low water levels of the Euphrates River,
erratic and low rainfall, operational capacity of Uluk water station and disruptions to
the water system. The prevalence of water-borne diseases in the affected areas has
risen sharply, placing additional strain on a public health system already debilitated
by years of crisis and overburdened by the COVID-19 pandemic. Poor rainfall and
drastically reduced irrigation have also led to the loss of crops and agricultural
livelihoods. The Duwaysat dam reservoir in west Idlib almost completely dried out in
November for the first time in three decades.
7.
Uluk water station resumed pumping on 10 September and water flows
subsequently reached Hasakah city. Technicians from the Directorate of Water
Resources had access to the station from 12 September onwards to carry out
maintenance work. Since 19 November, the water station had operated at low capacity
owing to insufficient electricity supply but, on 26 November, it stopped functioning
completely, directly affecting access to water for 500,000 people.
8.
Disruptions of potable and agricultural water continued to be reported in the city
of Bab and the surrounding areas, affecting some 185,000 people. Bab has been
among the top subdistricts reporting water-borne diseases across the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2017. The United Nations continued to advocate the
resumption of water supply to the city from the Ayn al-Baydah station.
9.
Some 4.5 million people across the Syrian Arab Republic urgently need winter
assistance, a 12 per cent increase from the previous year, with needs exacerbated by
protracted displacement, the economic crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic. In terms of
humanitarian needs assessments, 90 per cent of families report diminished access to non food items such as heating fuel, blankets and winter clothes. In the north -west,
1.7 million people, most of them women and children, are living in camps, often in
21-18226

3/23

S/2021/1029

overcrowded shelters, in valleys that flood or on rocky hillsides exposed to the elements.
Outside the camps, there are approximately 1 million more displaced people.
10. In the south, access to Dar‘a al-Balad and towns in Dar‘a has resumed. The
United Nations and its humanitarian partners are mobilizing rapid sectoral
assessments and resuming regular programming. Following a two -month interruption
due to an increase in hostilities, WFP recommenced monthly food distributions for
450,000 people. Civilian movement has also become relatively normal. Significant
damage to public infrastructure and residential buildings, as well as explosive hazards
and other safety concerns, continue to hamper returns and civilian movement. Some
3,700 displaced people have been unable to return to their severely damaged homes.
In Dar‘a al-Balad, some 1,200 residential buildings have been damaged or destroyed,
affecting approximately 18,000 people. This situation compounds an already dire
housing situation in Dar‘a Governorate, where 15 per cent of residential properties
had already been declared uninhabitable prior to recent hostilities.
11. Close to 57,600 people, 94 per cent of them women and children, remained at
Hawl camp as at 21 November. The security situation at the camp continued to
deteriorate, with 84 murders reported since January. On 12 November, armed men
attacked the reception area in Hawl camp, where 36 vulnerable people were taking
refuge, killing 2 Iraqi men and injuring others. Many women reported phy sical
violence and beatings in the attacks. The families remaining in the reception area have
been relocated, and the United Nations and partners provided essential non -food
items. The attack reportedly caused material damage to three ambulances, one field
hospital and one clinic supported by the United Nations Populations Fund (UNFPA).
Access to food, medical care, clean water, protection and other basic services
remained limited for camp residents. COVID-19 continues to be a concern in the
camp. Regular threats and attacks against humanitarian workers, including camp
management staff, forced some aid organizations to suspend programmes,
jeopardizing access to even the most basic services. The United Nations continued to
advocate the provision of security at the camp in a manner that does not endanger
residents or violate their rights and that does not restrict humanitarian access.
12. Da’esh, which has been designated as a terrorist group by the Security Council,
continued to launch attacks in areas across Dayr al-Zawr, Hasakah and eastern rural
Homs. Government and pro-government forces carried out counter-Da’esh operations
in multiple areas of the central Syrian desert. Separately, the Syrian Democratic
Forces continued their counter-Da’esh operations.
13. The United Nations remained without humanitarian access to the estimated
12,000 people living in Rukban. Residents of the Rukban area continue to live in dire
conditions, with limited access to food, water, health care and other basic services.
The United Nations continued to advocate immediate humanitarian access and
assistance to reach those who remained at the camp.
14. COVID-19 transmission rates in the Syrian Arab Republic remained high and
likely far beyond official records, with a case fatality rate recorded at 3.5 per cent as
of 13 November. The pandemic also continued to disproportionately jeopardize
women’s social and economic prospects. A fourth surge of COVID-19 cases since the
end of August led to more than 1,000 people testing positive daily. Monthly death
rates are at the highest level since the pandemic started in the country, while the
health-care system, already overtaxed by years of conflict, is unable to cope.
Laboratory capacity remains insufficient, and protective and medical equipment and
oxygen are in short supply. This spike is also affecting the ability of women and
adolescent girls to gain access to sexual and reproductive health services, including
maternal health.

4/23

21-18226

S/2021/1029

15. Vaccinations are under way across the Syrian Arab Republic. As of 13 November,
the country had received 3.96 million COVID-19 vaccines, including 2.1 million doses
between mid-October and early November. On 4 November, a COVAX-facilitated
shipment of 108,000 vaccines crossed into the north-west. On 5 November, the Syrian
Arab Republic received 1.35 million doses of COVAX-facilitated vaccines, to be
distributed through all governorates according to utilization rate and vaccine stock
available, including in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic. The vaccines are part
of a micro-plan for the entire country and complement the 358,000 COVAX facilitated
doses that crossed into the north-west on 3 September. A vaccine campaign, which was
rolled out by the Ministry of Health in November, will continue into December.
Although a lack of vaccines, logistical challenges, the security situation and vaccine
hesitancy continue to contribute to low vaccination rates, some improvement in the
vaccine pipeline is seen, in large part through the support of COVAX. Health partners
are now shifting from fixed vaccination teams to greater use of mobile teams to reach
communities. As of 13 November, only 2.9 percent of the population was fully
vaccinated, while 4.5 per cent of the population had received at least one dose.
16. The economic crisis continued to affect civilians across the country. According
to WFP, in October the food security situation reached its worst level in a year. More
than half of households surveyed reported inadequate food consumption, up by 11 per
cent since September. October also marked the highest ever recorded monthly price
for a standard food basket since monitoring started in 2 013. Food prices are now 15
per cent higher than six months ago, and 128 per cent higher compared with the same
time last year. This is attributable primarily to a decade of conflict and the economic
decline, compounded by fuel shortages and a worldwide 30 per cent increase in
commodity prices compared with the same time last year.
17. The fuel supply situation has continued to worsen across the Syrian Arab
Republic, with fuel shortages leading to an increase in fuel prices. Some public
transport drivers have therefore opted to sell their subsidized fuel allocations on the
informal markets rather than offer their transport services. Fuel shortages and
prolonged power cuts also affected basic service delivery, including in health
facilities. Compared with a year ago, the Syrian pound depreciated by 33 per cent.
The economic crisis and related cuts in family expenses often had a disproportionate
impact on women’s and girls’ mobility and access to basic services, including to
reproductive health and protection services.
Update on overall developments
18. The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria convened the sixth session
of the small body of the Syrian-led and -owned and United Nations-facilitated
Constitutional Committee in Geneva from 18 to 22 October. In line with the Committee’s
terms of reference and core rules of procedure, members of the small body discussed
draft constitutional texts pertaining to four principles: sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic; the army, armed forces, security and the
intelligence; the rule of law; and terrorism and extremism. However, the co -Chairs were
unable to agree on a mechanism to advance the discussion further.
19. Following the sixth session, the Special Envoy redoubled his diplomatic
engagement with the Syrian parties and regional and international interlocutors with the
aim of developing a common understanding on a working mechanism that would help
the Constitutional Committee to discharge its drafting mandate. In all his political
engagements, the Special Envoy also continued to reinforce the importance of a
nationwide ceasefire, action on the crucial file of detainees, abductees and missing
persons, and the importance of developing a package of concrete, mutual an d reciprocal
steps through the engagement of international actors to broaden the scope of the political
process and promote the implementation of Security Council resolution 2254 (2015).
21-18226

5/23

S/2021/1029

20. The Special Envoy and his deputy continued to engage the Syrian Women’s
Advisory Board, convening the group near Geneva during the reporting cycle. Urging
movement in the political process, members of the Advisory Board continued to
advise on the impact of the conflict on Syrians and reinforce the need for effective
institutional arrangements to guarantee the protection and full participation of women
in the future of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Protection
21. Civilians across the Syrian Arab Republic continued to suffer the direct and
indirect consequences of armed conflict and violence. From 1 October to
20 November, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) documented 78 incidents, in which at least 97 civilians, including 7 wom en
and 27 children, were killed as a result of hostilities. In addition, at least 127 civilians,
including 14 women and 37 children, were injured. Hostilities included airstrikes,
ground-based strikes, attacks carried out by improvised explosive devices, e xplosive
remnants of war, and armed clashes and targeted killings.
22. Military activity and violence perpetrated by parties to the conflict continued to
have a severe impact on civilians and civilian objects. Many of those attacks appeared
to be targeting civilians or were carried out near locations of a civilian character,
including residential areas and local markets.
23. In the south, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic continued its security
campaign across rural Dar‘a, reaching a series of new agreements with former
members of non-State armed opposition groups similar to the agreement reached with
local groups in Dar‘a al-Balad in September. Security incidents continued to be
reported. OHCHR continued to document incidents of targeted killings of civilians
and former members of non-State armed opposition groups. Most of those attacks
were carried out by unidentified perpetrators.
24. Parties to the conflict continued to arbitrarily detain individuals in areas under
their control. In most cases documented by OHCHR, detainees were denied
information about the reasons for their arrest and due process rights. The families of
detainees were denied information concerning their whereabouts, raising concern
that, in some cases, such detention may constitute enforced disappearance. Conditions
in detention locations often remained poor, with limited access to health care.
25. Parties to the conflict continued to systematically commit violations and abuses of
human rights, including killings, arbitrary deprivation of liberty, torture, ill-treatment
and kidnappings, and continued to violate civilians’ rights to freedom of movement and
expression, peaceful assembly and association. Women and girls continued to be at risk
of multiple forms of gender-based violence, including child marriage.
26. Ongoing hostilities continued to impede civilian access to health care and
education. Parties to the conflict continued to systematically harm civilians, including
those working in education, health services, the media and humanitarian operations.
27. During the reporting period, the country task force on monitoring and reporting
verified one incident of hostilities causing damage to educational facilities. On
20 October, artillery shelling damaged the Ma'arrzaf primary sc hool in Ma'arrzaf
town, Idlib Governorate. Additional incidents are yet to be verified as part of the
United Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism.
28. The Surveillance System for attacks on health care of the World Health
Organization (WHO) reported one incident affecting health care during the reporting
period. On 30 October, an improvised explosive device attached to a gynaecologist’s
car exploded in Sanamayn city, Dar‘a Governorate, critically injuring the doctor. In

6/23

21-18226

S/2021/1029

the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic, no attacks on health-care facilities were
reported during the reporting period.
Humanitarian response
29. Humanitarian assistance by United Nations agencies and their partners continued
throughout the Syrian Arab Republic (see table 1). Assistance included WFP food
assistance for 5.3 million people in October and for 5.2 million people in November
across all 14 governorates. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) supported 126 operational community/satellite centres and
engaged more than 2,800 outreach volunteers, providing integrated protection services
and assistance to 532,000 persons of concern. Explosive ordnance risk education teams
trained by the Mine Action Service delivered awareness sessions to more than 5,500
civilians in October, promoting safe behaviour to communities most affected by
explosive ordnance contamination. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
provided safe water to 928,000 people, improved access to sanitation services for
154,000 people and reached 155,000 people with health support in October. To support
winterization needs, UNICEF provided cash assistance to more than 7,100 families with
18,100 children in Aleppo, Rif Dimashq and Hama. The United Nations continued to
support the COVID-19 response across the Syrian Arab Republic, including by
enhancing surveillance and diagnostic capacity, procuring vital medical supplies and
equipment, supporting clinical readiness, protecting the delivery of essential health care services, supporting protective measures in schools, promoting vaccine acceptance
and supporting the roll-out of vaccinations.
Table 1
Average number of people reached each month by the United Nations and other
organizations through all modalities throughout the Syrian Arab Republic:
October and November 2021
Organization

Average number of
people reached monthly

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

123 300

International Organization for Migration

190 000

Mine Action Service

5 795 a

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

137 000

United Nations Children’s Fund

979 500 a

United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Population Fund
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

5 965
251 400
204 800

World Food Programme

5 247 000

World Health Organization

544 600

a

Data are for the month of October only owing to early cut -off time for the present report.

30. From inside the Syrian Arab Republic, assistance provided by United Nations
agencies included WFP food assistance for 3.9 million people in October and for
3.9 million people in November. UNHCR reached 274,000 people with protection,
shelter and core relief items. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations assisted 42,300 people through regular programming. UNICEF and WHO
supported the Ministry of Health in conducting a national polio vaccination campaign
in October, reaching close to 2.5 million children under the age of five in all
governorates of the Syrian Arab Republic. The Mine Action Service carried out 12
21-18226

7/23

S/2021/1029

assessment missions in western Ghutah, Rif Dimashq, in agriculture and residential
zones to mark areas for clearance, deployed an assessment team to Yarmouk camp,
south of Damascus city, and launched an education programme on risks of explosive
ordnance for camp residents. UNICEF provided mine risk education to 124,000
beneficiaries, safe water to 428,000 people in 7 locations and health services in 92
locations to more than 119,000 individuals, of whom 107,000 were children. The
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) provided cash assistance for 409,600 Palestine refugees, as well as food
and non-food items for 90,000 and 15,000 Palestine refugees, respectively.
31. Among the cross-border humanitarian assistance delivered in the north-west of the
Syrian Arab Republic, WFP delivered food assistance for 1.3 million people per month
in October and November. To respond to the urgent shelter needs of displaced people
and host communities, UNHCR assisted 84,000 people in Idlib and Aleppo Governorates
through 11 cross-border transhipments. The International Organization for Migration
brought multisectoral assistance to 237,000 people. In October, UNICEF reached
531,000 people through the cross-border mechanism, providing mine risk education to
10,000 beneficiaries, safe water to 500,000 people in 7 locations and health services in
11 locations to more than 36,000 individuals, of whom more than 17,000 were children.
UNFPA provided e-vouchers to more than 54,000 pregnant and lactating women to
purchase hygiene items and provided services for 6,600 women and girls on the
prevention and treatment of breast cancer. UNFPA also supported mor e than 502,000
women with lifesaving reproductive health and gender-based violence services.
Delivery and monitoring of cross-border assistance
32. As with aid programming from within the Syrian Arab Republic, cross -border
deliveries are conducted in line with humanitarian principles and based on
independent assessments of need. In response to needs identified in an annual
multisectoral needs assessment, as well as regular assessments during monitoring
operations, individual cross-border shipments are initiated by the United Nations and
coordinated with humanitarian partners.
33. Assistance delivered through the United Nations cross-border mechanism is
monitored throughout its delivery at four distinct levels: (a) at the border by the
United Nations cross-border mechanism; (b) at warehouses inside the Syrian Arab
Republic; (c) at distribution points; and (d) after distribution with beneficiaries. In
October and November, the mechanism monitored and confirmed the humanitarian
nature of 21 consignments consisting of 1,900 trucks. Some 78 per cent of the United
Nations assistance that crossed into the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic was
food aid, while non-food items, including shelter and winterization assistance,
represented 20 per cent of the total volume. The remaining aid included health
supplies, including COVID-19 vaccines, and school materials. United Nations
agencies’ transparency and accountability systems are adapted to individual
operational needs. Regular reviews are being conducted to ens ure that aid is going
exclusively to civilians in the greatest need. Systems are in place to identify and
respond to any reports of aid not reaching the intended beneficiaries.
34. These rigorous monitoring and oversight measures are further outlined in the
reports of the Secretary General to the Security Council reviewing cross-line and crossborder operations (S/2018/617) and (S/2020/401), as well as in his report reviewing
United Nations humanitarian operations in the Syrian Arab Republic ( S/2021/1030).
Cross-border distribution mechanisms
35. In the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic, humanitarian assistance is
provided through different cross-border distribution mechanisms. Food and non-food
8/23

21-18226

S/2021/1029

items are provided directly (in-kind assistance) or, in some cases, indirectly through
cash or voucher systems. Beneficiaries of in-kind food or non-food items are selected
according to needs-based assessments undertaken by humanitarian organizations and
based on agreed eligibility and vulnerability criteria. Humanitarian partners in the
north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic perform distributions at a specific time and
place, often monthly, at a market square or other central location, or through door -todoor distributions (owing in particular to COVID-19-related preventative measures).
People must show a proof of identification matching their name on distribution lists
verified by the implementing partners.
36. Humanitarian partners work through existing health structures to provide people
in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic with life-saving health care. In this
regard, the health cluster plays an essential coordination role in ensuring that medical
items are distributed on the basis of identified needs and existing resources. Regular
prioritization exercises are carried out to determine priority health facilities, based on
established criteria such as total population in the area, ratio of people per health
facility, primary health-care infrastructure and staffing, and functional referral and
surveillance systems. Input for monthly supply needs, utilization rates and gaps are
collected at the facility level, with the aim of identifying essential needs for life-saving
and sustaining medical care. WHO, on the basis of information collected through
regular reporting mechanism and ad hoc requests and of consultations with health
partners, including hospitals and cross-border NGOs, develops monthly distribution
schedules for essential medicines and medical items to ensure a continuum of care in
the region. Tools such as the Health Resources and Services Availability Monitoring
System are used to collect data from partners to capture the availability and capacity of
health services. To ensure effectiveness and quality of supply lines, WHO runs third party monitoring, tracking supply distribution until they reach the end user.
37. Other forms of assistance are provided through a wide range of services,
including but not limited to supplying existing medical facilities with essential health
items, schools with fuel, protection services for gender-based violence cases and
support for livelihood activities. Support also includes providing salaries to medical
workers and teachers.
Figure I
Number of beneficiaries targeted by the United Nations and its partners (see annex II)
through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, by cluster: October and November 2021
(monthly average)
(Thousands)

21-18226

9/23

S/2021/1029

Table 2
Number of beneficiaries targeted by the United Nations and its partners through cross border deliveries, by sector and by district: October and November 2021 (monthly average)

Governorate

District

Early
recovery/
livelihood

Aleppo

Afrin

870

–

133 075

–

–

–

–

Aleppo

Bab

1 327

–

–

–

375

–

–

Aleppo

I‘zaz

2 307

–

238 808

9 500

46 275

–

7 950

Aleppo

Jarabulus

161

–

–

–

750

–

–

Aleppo

Jabal Sim‘an

93

–

57 500

–

15 000

–

7 500

Idlib

Harim

3 647

–

1 191 130

591 900

67 125

17 370

38 550

Idlib

Idlib

1 208

9 000

124 715

–

35 250

–

23 750

Idlib

Jisr al-Shughur

–

–

–

–

10 800

–

–

Education

Food

Health

Non-food
items/
shelter

Nutrition

Water,
sanitation
and hygiene

38. The Russian Federation sent informational bulletins to the United Nations from
the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides and Refugee Migration Monitoring,
which outlined the provision of bilateral relief assistance. Other Member States also
continued to provide bilateral and other forms of humanitarian assistance.
Early recovery and livelihood activities
39. The United Nations and its partners support early recovery and livelihood
projects across five distinct domains: (a) repair and rehabilitati on of critical civilian
infrastructure; (b) removal of debris and solid waste; (c) income -generating activities
and market-based interventions; (d) vocational and skills training; and (e) social
cohesion and community interventions.
40. To reduce the impact of the economic downturn and the COVID-19 pandemic,
early recovery and livelihood partners provided a range of livelihood opportunities
during the reporting period. For example, cash-for-work schemes provided people
with an income while simultaneously supporting the rehabilitation of critical civilian
infrastructure, such as schools and hospitals, and providing opportunities to
manufacture critical items, such as face masks, locally. More than 1,650 people in
government-controlled areas took up temporary jobs, such as through cash-for-work
schemes, supporting more than 8,200 individuals, while 1,000 people benefited from
regular employment opportunities, supporting more than 5,000 individuals, and 1,300
people received vocational training. Through cross-border assistance, in Idlib and
Aleppo Governorates, early recovery and livelihood partners provided short -term
work opportunities for 1,100 individuals, benefitting 5,700 people in 16 communities
across 9 subdistricts, supported 267 people to start a busin ess benefiting more than
1,300 individuals and trained 2,100 individuals in 18 communities. In Afrin, 150
households received market-based assistance. To address the higher diffusion of
respiratory diseases during the winter and as part of COVID -19 prevention efforts,
early recovery and livelihood partners produced and distributed 3.3 million reusable
fabric face masks in Idlib and Aleppo Governorates.
41. Early recovery and livelihood partners also rehabilitated critical civilian
infrastructure to strengthen basic services, such as a health centre in Rif Dimashq and a
midwifery school and youth residency in Dayr al-Zawr, and removed debris and
provided waste management. Those activities benefited more than 500,000 people. Early
recovery and livelihood partners further removed more than 13,000 cubic metres of
debris in in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic, and rehabilitated 2 health
10/23

21-18226

S/2021/1029

facilities, in Darat Izzah and Bab al-Hawa in Idlib Governorate, and 10 education
facilities in three subdistricts in Aleppo Governorate. Moreover, access to basic utilities,
such as electricity, water and sewage systems, was restored for 3,800 households in 12
communities across eight subdistricts in Aleppo and Idlib Governorates. Early recovery
and livelihood partners further rehabilitated eight kilometres of access roads and
drainage systems in Idlib Governorate. In 2021, as part of the flood prevention efforts
ahead of the winter season, early recovery and livelihood partners rehabilitated some
100 kilometres of roads and related drainage systems in six Idleb subdistricts and five
Aleppo subdistricts, almost twice the amount, compared with 2020.
42. Several early recovery and livelihood projects are intended to strengthen social
cohesion at the community level. In government-controlled areas, early recovery and
livelihood partners strengthened social cohesion through 14 community initiatives,
engaging close to 1,400 people, while 6 community initiatives were conducted in four
subdistricts of Idlib and Aleppo Governorates.
43. The report of the Secretary General (S/2021/1030) in response to paragraph 2
of Security Council resolution 2585 (2021) provides further details on early recovery
projects in United Nations humanitarian operations.
Humanitarian access
44. The provision of humanitarian assistance requires timely, safe, sustained and
unimpeded access by the United Nations and all humanitarian partners to people in
need across the Syrian Arab Republic. Principled humanitarian action depends on the
ability to independently assess needs, to deliver assistance and to m onitor and
evaluate impact independently, including by engaging regularly and directly with
affected people. The access landscape in the Syrian Arab Republic remains complex,
with different geographical areas and types of services requiring the use of a va riety
of operating modalities. More than 1,800 United Nations staff members are based in
the country, with more than 600 deployed in humanitarian hubs outside Damascus, in
Aleppo, Dayr al-Zawr, Hama, Homs, Ladhiqiyah, Qamishli, Suwayda’ and Tartus. A
further 3,610 UNRWA staff members are deployed across the country. This
decentralized presence contributes to greater access to affected people. Across the
Syrian Arab Republic, humanitarian aid is distributed and implemented primarily by
national actors, including NGOs and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent.
Access in government-controlled areas
45. In government-controlled areas, communities and enclaves that remained
difficult to reach owing to administrative impediments and security approvals
included Shaffuniyah, Mayda‘a and Kafr Batna in eastern Ghutah, Bayt Jinn and
Mazra‘at Bayt Jinn in western Rif Dimashq, Hajar al-Aswad in Darayya district of
Rif Dimashq Governorate, Sukhnah in Tadmur district of Homs Governorate and Fiq
in Fiq district of Qunaytirah Governorate.
46. In Dar‘a Governorate, the United Nations and its humanitarian partners resumed
assistance, given that access had been restored and security conditions stabilized as
from September. Food distributions resumed, and health and nutrition services
through fixed and mobile clinics, as well as core relief items, were provided during
the reporting period. Humanitarian actors further assisted in the rehabilitation of
houses and restoring public services, including through rehabilitating three pumping
stations in Ashari, the Dar‘a al-Balad bakery and 11 damaged schools.
47. United Nations personnel and third-party contractors continued to travel to field
locations, along with national NGOs and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, to conduct
assessment, monitoring, logistics and administrative support missions. Between
21 September and 15 November, 1,610 regular programmatic movements took place
21-18226

11/23

S/2021/1029

with programme or blanket approvals. That represented a 23 per cent decrease compared
with August and September, when 2,097 such missions took place (see table 3). 1
Table 3
Total number of missions conducted with programme or blanket approvals a from within
the Syrian Arab Republic by United Nations agencies and third parties/facilitators, by type:
21 September to 15 November 2021
Type of mission

Blanket approval

Programme approval

Total number

Assessment missions

19

5

24

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

461

15

476

1 084

7

1 091

14

5

19

1 578

32

1 610

Monitoring missions
Security, logistics and administrative support missions
Total
a

Missions conducted with programme or blanket approvals do not require specific approval from the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs.

Figure II
Total number of missions conducted with programme or blanket approvals from within the
Syrian Arab Republic by United Nations agencies and third parties/facilitators, by
governorate: 21 September to 15 November 2021

48. For missions requiring specific approval by the Ministry of Foreign Aff airs, the
United Nations submitted 194 new requests, of which 160 (82 per cent) were
approved (see table 4). This takes into account the 10-day response period by the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and does not negatively count requests that were
submitted but are still under process.

__________________
1

12/23

United Nations personnel and third-party contractors operating at humanitarian hubs outside of
Damascus obtain “blanket approvals” to carry out movements as part of their regular
programming. These enable regular access and reduce bureaucratic requirements.
21-18226

S/2021/1029

Table 4
Missions from within the Syrian Arab Republic requiring specific approval by the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs: 21 September to 15 November 2021
Type of request

Number requested

Number approved

Percentage approved

Assessment missions

54

47

87

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

24

21

88

Monitoring missions

81

62

77

Security, logistics and administrative support missions

35

30

86

Explosive ordnance assessment missions

–

–

–

194

160

82

Total

Note: Missions by United Nations personnel departing from Damascus or travelling cross -line generally require
specific approval from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Figures outlined in table 4 are based on data internally
reported by United Nations agencies and reflect submissions made and approvals received within the
reporting period (21 September to 15 November) of the present report. These figures may therefore differ
from those recorded by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and with whom discu ssions are ongoing
to align methodologies.

Cross-line access in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic
49. Since April 2020, the United Nations has engaged with the various parties involved
to facilitate cross-line operations. Since July 2021, the United Nations has been in
regular contact with the various parties to identify an operational modality that is
agreeable to all sides and takes diverging views into account, including on who would
be involved in conducting cross-line deliveries and who would be authorized to
distribute the aid. All parties indicated support in principle for cross-line operations. Five
note verbales were sent to the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic containing a
request for access. Each received a positive response. Numerous contacts with
representatives of the Government of Turkey and local authorities in Idlib have taken
place as part of the access negotiations. However, obtaining all necessary approvals and
the corresponding security guarantees remained challenging in such an insecure
environment, leading to some of the delays that have been experienced.
50. Following access negotiations, two cross-line convoys have deployed. On
31 August, WFP successfully completed the first cross-line delivery of food and
nutrition assistance from government-controlled Aleppo city, Aleppo Governorate, to a
warehouse in Sarmada city, Idlib Governorate. The assistance delivered is sufficient for
43,500 people for one month. The second cross-line delivery took place on 9 and
10 December, following the necessary clearances received from all parties. It provided
multisectoral assistance, including food and nutrition assistance for another 43,500
people, as well as items from UNFPA, WHO and UNICEF to the warehouse in Sarmada
city. The convoy was initially scheduled for 9 to 11 November, then rescheduled to 28
to 30 November, pending receipt of security guarantees by local authorities, before being
successfully completed. Fewer than four days’ notice was provided to local authorities
to gather the security guarantees necessary for the initial convoy date.
51. The United Nations continues to engage with the parties concerned regarding
further cross-line assistance to the north-west from inside the Syrian Arab Republic
through inter-agency cross-line convoys. A plan has been developed for a series of
regular and predictable United Nations inter-agency cross-line operations to deliver
multisectoral assistance in the coming six months. The plan envisages regular
deliveries of cross-line aid to the identified locations, supported by monthly cross line convoys to stock warehouses. The plan focuses on the implementation of
unaccompanied humanitarian inter-agency crossline convoys to communities in
21-18226

13/23

S/2021/1029

prioritized subdistricts in Idlib and Aleppo Governorates, where 593,000 people in
need reside. Prioritization is based on the objective of maximizing impact. The six month plan was shared with all parties on 27 October.
52. On 17 November, WFP received the approval of the parties concerned to move
forward with its planned distribution modality for humanitarian items delivered cross line into the north-west at the end of August. Distributions through a local WFP team
are expected to commence in the second half of December. Under this direct
distribution model, WFP will distribute the transported commodities to beneficiaries,
with full WFP ownership and oversight. The local selection, recruitment and training
of the distribution team has commenced. The United Nations envisages replicating
this model for future United Nations cross-line missions, where feasible, allowing
assistance delivered through cross-line channels to be distributed under United
Nations ownership and supervision.
53. Notwithstanding the progress made in completing an initial cross -line convoy
and the steps made towards additional convoys and aid distribution, a range of
challenges still need to be overcome in order to achieve regular and sustained cross line operations into the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic. Receiving the
necessary and timely security guarantees from parties to the conflict remains critical
to ensure the safe passage of cross-line convoys and their personnel, while shelling,
airstrikes, landmines and improvised explosive devises represent real security threats
to humanitarian staff. A new system for distributions was set up because parties could
not agree on the use of existing delivery mechanisms. A commitment by all parties to
the non-interference in humanitarian activities of the cross-line delivery at all stages
is essential. Accountability to affected populations is also an important aspect that
needs to be considered, both in terms of ensuring community acceptance for the
deliveries, as well as engaging to minimize the possibility of negative responses of
neighbouring communities or other groups after the aid is delivered.
Cross-line access in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic
54. In the north-east, the United Nations and humanitarian partners maintained
regular and sustained humanitarian access in most parts of Hasakah Governorate and
some parts of Raqqah Governorate.
55. Efforts continued towards the delivery of sufficient and sustained medical
assistance to areas in the north-east outside of government control. In October and
November, WHO delivered cross-line shipments by road and air. This consisted of
one road convoy of five trucks, including medical items for haemodialysis, different
types of insulin, and COVID-19 testing kits and supplies, weighing approximately 50
tons for 96,200 treatment courses. WHO also delivered three airlifts, which included
vaccines for routine and COVID-19 immunizations. WHO cross-line supplies have
been based on need assessments, conducted jointly with health partners working in
the north-east. WHO reported no major operational or logistical challenges in those
deliveries. While the United Nations has continued to scale up deliveries of health
supplies to the north-east across lines of control, needs continue to outstrip the
response. As of October, only 1 of 16 public hospitals in the north -east was fully
functional, with 6 being non-functional and 9 partially functional. NGOs supporting
more than 110 health facilities across the north-east continued to face delays in
securing reliable supply chains, leading to shortages of essential medicines such as
paediatric medications, insulin and cardiovascular and tuberculosis medicines, as well
as a lack of laboratory supplies and treatment for acute malnutrition. Health-care
services continued to be affected by access challenges and underinvestment.
56. On average, WFP reached some 650,000 people in non-government-controlled
areas in the north-east each month with food assistance and other activities such as
14/23

21-18226

S/2021/1029

nutrition interventions and school feeding programmes. All food distributed to those
areas was delivered from WFP warehouses inside the Syrian Arab Republic and
dispatched onwards to WFP cooperating partners for distribution. UNICEF delivered
non-food items worth $600,000 to the north-east, including 100,000 sets of education
material, hygiene supplies worth $48,000 and 600 winter kits.
57. Other areas, including Manbij and Ayn al-Arab, remained difficult for United
Nations agencies to reach from Damascus, owing to the lack of agreement between
parties in control. Cross-line access continues to be restricted to the area between Ra’s
al-Ayn and Tall Abyad, with no United Nations cross-line aid deliveries currently being
conducted to this area. The United Nations requested cross-line access to the area in 2019
and 2020 to assess the situation but was unable to reach agreement among all the parties
on the composition of the mission. The last request for an inter-agency assessment
mission, submitted to the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic on 6 October, remains
pending. WHO and UNICEF requested access on 7 November to distribute COVID-19
vaccines; this request was approved by the Government on 6 December.
58. The most recent United Nations humanitarian convoy to Rukban from within the
Syrian Arab Republic was in September 2019. Access by commercial trucks, using
informal routes, has been sporadic. Since the decision in March 2020 by the Government
of Jordan to close the border as a preventive measure to contain the spread of COVID-19,
people from Rukban who require medical care have been unable to gain access to the
United Nations clinic on the Jordanian side of the border. Critical health cases continued
to be referred to Damascus, in coordination with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, but those
who left for treatment have not been allowed to return to the Rukban area.
Cross-border access in the Syrian Arab Republic
59. United Nations agencies and humanitarian partners continued to address the
logistical and operational challenges resulting from the reduction to one authorized
border crossing following the adoption of Security Council resolutions 2533 (2020) and
2585 (2021). All cross-border United Nations humanitarian assistance into the north west of the Syrian Arab Republic continues to be routed through the Bab al-Hawa
crossing, and 2,386 trucks carrying humanitarian supplies have used that crossing point
since the adoption of resolution 2585 (2021). Cross-border deliveries have significantly
increased again, commensurate with massive needs in the north-west.
60. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations as mandated under Security Council resolutions 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533
(2020) and 2585 (2021). The Monitoring Mechanism monitored and confirmed the
humanitarian nature of 21 consignments consisting of 1,900 trucks that crossed into
the country from Turkey in October and November, all through the Bab al -Hawa
crossing. That brought the total number of trucks monitored since the beginning of
operations to 52,202 (42,230 through Bab al-Hawa, 5,268 through Bab al-Salam,
4,595 through Ramtha and 109 through Ya‘rubiyah). There were no concerns or
questions regarding the humanitarian nature of those consignments. For every
shipment that crossed the border, the United Nations provided 48-hour advance notice
to the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, including information on the
humanitarian goods to be delivered, the number of trucks, the United Nations owner
and the destination (district). The Mechanism continued to benefit from the excellent
cooperation of the Government of Turkey.
Visas and registrations
61. The United Nations continued to work with the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to allow for the timely provision of visas to staff (see table 5).

21-18226

15/23

S/2021/1029

Table 5
Requests for United Nations visas: 21 September to 15 November 2021
Type of request

Number requested

Number approved

Number rejected

Number pending

115

76

2

37

Renewals requested during reporting period

168

113

–

55

a

72

27

2

35

59

59

–

7

Visas requested during reporting period
Visas pending from before reporting period

Renewals pending from before reporting period b
a
b

The United Nations withdrew eight pending visa requests before the reporting period.
Pending approvals since January 2021.

62. A total of 41 international NGOs are registered with the Government to operate
in the country.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
63. The United Nations and NGOs continued to implement programmes in areas
affected by frequent armed clashes, air strikes and regular exchanges of indirect
artillery fire and other types of attacks by or among parties to the conflict.
Humanitarian relief personnel also operate in areas highly contaminated with
unexploded ordnance, other explosive remnants of war and landmines.
64. Since the beginning of the conflict, hundreds of humanitarian workers have
reportedly been killed, including 22 staff members of the United Nations and of the
entities of the United Nations system, 20 of whom were staff members of UNRWA;
66 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; and 8 staff
members and volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. Many staff members
of international and national NGOs have also been killed.
65. A total of 17 staff members of the United Nations system (all from UNRWA)
were still detained or missing as of 23 November, including 3 detained in October.

III. Observations
66. Ten years into the conflict, life is becoming increasingly difficult for millions
of people in the Syrian Arab Republic. The socioeconomic situation continues to
decline, basic social services are strained and food insecurity is on the rise. And now,
exhausted by years of conflict, poverty and the COVID-19 pandemic, Syrians are
facing another bitter winter.
67. While meeting immediate life-saving needs remains the priority, early recovery
and livelihood activities across the entire country are critical to meeting these
essential needs in a sustainable and efficient way with finite resour ces. Preventing
gender-based violence and responding to survivors’ needs must be a priority, while
measures to address structural gender inequality, including prioritizing women’s and
girls’ economic and resilience needs, are equally critical. As families struggle to put
food on the table, I am concerned that too many will resort to harmful practices, such
as child marriage and sexual exploitation.
68. Notwithstanding the ceasefire agreement of March 2020 in the north -west and
more recent local agreements in the southern part of the country, civilians continue to
be killed and injured. I continue to be appalled by the blatant disregard for civilian
lives. All parties to the conflict must respect and protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure in accordance with international humanitarian law and take all feasible
16/23

21-18226

S/2021/1029

precautions to avoid, and in any event to minimize, incidental loss of civilian life,
injury to civilians and damage to civilian objects. I remind all States, in particular
those with direct influence over parties to the conflict, that they are bound to take
proactive steps to ensure respect for international humanitarian law, including as it
relates to the protection of civilians.
69. The United Nations is operationalizing a plan for regular inte r-agency cross-line
convoys to the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic. If implemented, this plan will
make cross-line operations more predictable and more effective. The United Nations
is doing everything in its power to ensure that these cross -line deliveries and
subsequent distributions take place. While important progress has been made to
expand the overall humanitarian response and facilitate cross-line access, setting up
regular and predictable cross-line operations remains complex, not least because it
involves crossing an active conflict line. I urge all parties to redouble their efforts to
facilitate United Nations efforts to deliver aid directly to the most vulnerable in a
timely manner, including by providing necessary permissions and security guarantees
in a timely manner.
70. While the United Nations continues its efforts to strengthen access into the
north-west from inside the Syrian Arab Republic, at this point such cross -line
convoys, even if deployed regularly, could not replicate the siz e and scope of the
cross-border operation. Cross-border assistance remains life-saving for millions of
people in need in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic. I reiterate my call upon
all parties to the conflict to allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of
humanitarian relief for all civilians in need, which is impartial in character and
conducted without any adverse distinction, in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
71. COVID-19 remains a grave concern across the Syrian Arab Republic. While the
vaccination roll-out is ongoing, I remain deeply concerned that only 2.6 per cent of
the population is fully vaccinated. The timely delivery of COVID -19 vaccines to the
Syrian Arab Republic using all access modalities remains essential. I reiterate my call
for a dramatic increase in the scale and pace of vaccinations to protect lives and
livelihoods.
72. In March 2020, I called for the waiving of sanctions that may impede access to
essential health supplies, COVID-19-related medical support or food in the Syrian
Arab Republic. It is encouraging that a technical dialogue between relevant Member
States and humanitarian actors regarding sanctions and humanitarian operations in
the Syrian Arab Republic is under way. I hope that the relevan t parties can find ways
to address the challenges that several humanitarian actors in the country face in
ensuring adequate and reliable access to financial services.
73. Growing needs unfortunately outpace our ability to respond. It is critical that
sufficient funding be secured to ensure that pipelines across the entirety of the
response will be fully covered. I call upon donor countries to pledge generous support
to the humanitarian response plan, which remains seriously underfunded, to allow for
the timely delivery of humanitarian assistance throughout the pandemic and its
aftermath. Communities are determined to restart their lives, yet desperately need an
end to the conflict, life-saving aid, early recovery support and respect for fundamental
human rights to do so. It is incumbent on all relevant parties to expand efforts to
provide Syrians in need with a more dignified life and a sense of hope for the future.
74. The Special Envoy continues his efforts towards securing the unilateral release
of persons arbitrarily deprived of their liberty, with priority given to women, children,
older persons and those who are sick. The majority are held by the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic. I call upon the Government and other parties to account for the
fate and whereabouts of those whom they are detaining and to allow humanitarian
21-18226

17/23

S/2021/1029

and human rights agencies access to all places of detention. All persons in detention
should be promptly informed of charges against them, afforded fair and prompt trials
and be released immediately if they are found to be detained arbitrarily. Deaths in
custody should be investigated promptly and transparently, identified perpetrators
brought to justice and the families of the deceased informed and compensated in cases
of wrongful death. A failure to address arbitrary deprivation of liberty would leave
credible justice, true reconciliation and sustainable peace elusive.
75. Continued impunity for serious violations and abuses of human rights and
serious violations of international humanitarian law remains of grave concern.
Perpetrators must be held accountable. I call upon all parties to the conflict, in
particular the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as all States, civil
society and the United Nations system, to cooperate fully with the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, in parti cular by providing
relevant information and documentation. Accountability for serious violations and
abuses of human rights and serious violations of international humanitarian law is
both a legal requirement and central to achieving sustainable peace in t he Syrian Arab
Republic. I reiterate my call for the situation in the country to be referred to the
International Criminal Court.
76. In view of the ongoing serious concerns repeatedly raised with regard to the
protection of civilians and other human rights concerns in the Syrian Arab Republic,
I continue to strongly urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, in line with
Human Rights Council resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22, to cooperate with the special
procedures of the Human Rights Council and with OHCHR, including through the
establishment of a field presence with the mandate to protect and promote human
rights.
77. I urge the Syrian parties to meaningfully engage in the wider political process
to implement Security Council resolution 2254 (2015) and to ensure that the
Constitutional Committee discharges its drafting mandate effectively. It is crucial that
consensus be established swiftly on a credible drafting mechanism to take the drafting
process forward and to enable a return to Geneva for a productive seventh session.
78. As hostilities continue to inflict harm on civilians in the Syrian Arab Republic,
a nationwide ceasefire is required more than ever. The efforts of the Special Envoy to
construct a process of concrete, mutual and reciprocal steps could help to build trust
and confidence and advance the political process in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
All parties to the Syrian conflict with the influence and authority to promote progress
towards peace bear a responsibility in this regard. The plight of civilians obliges all
concerned to take concrete steps towards a sustainable peace for the Syrian people,
who have endured unimaginable suffering for far too long.

18/23

21-18226

S/2021/1029

Annex I
Reported incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights: October
and November 2021 *
Idlib Governorate
• On 16 October, at least 10 civilians were killed and a food industry factory was
damaged when reported ground-based strikes hit several areas in the town of
Sarmada and the road linking between Sarmada and the border crossing of Bab
al-Hawa in northern rural Idlib.
• On 20 October, 13 civilians, including 2 women, 1 girl and 3 boys, were killed
and 21 other civilians, including 2 women and 1 girl, were injured by shelling
in Ariha city in southern rural Idlib. The shelling hit multiple residential areas
and local markets, including the main market, resulting in damage.
• On 27 October, a boy was killed and six other civilians, including two women
and four girls, were injured when a reported ground-based strike hit the Al-Khair
camp for internally displaced orphans and widows on the outskirts of Turmanin
town in northern rural Idlib.
• On 11 November, five civilians, including one woman, two boys and one girl,
were killed when a reported airstrike on the outskirts of Ma‘arratmisrin city in
northern rural Idlib hit a shelter used by displaced persons.
Aleppo Governorate
• On 12 October, five boys were injured when a reported ground -based strike hit
the village of Kafr Ammah in western rural Aleppo.
• On 12 October, a civilian man was injured when a reported magnetic improvised
explosive device, attached to the vehicle of a member of a humanitarian
non-governmental organization, detonated in the city of Bab in eastern rural
Aleppo.
• On 19 October, a female lawyer was arrested and detained in the vill age of Raju
in the Afrin area in north-west rural Aleppo. She was reportedly transferred to a
women’s prison in Ma‘arratah village near Afrin city.
• On 2 November, two girls and one boy were killed and three boys injured when
a hand grenade reportedly exploded in the village of Maghayir in Jarabulus area
in eastern rural Aleppo.
• On 3 November, two civilians were injured when a reported landmine detonated
in al-Kulyan Tahtani village in the Afrin area in north-west rural Aleppo.
• On 3 November, seven civilians, including one woman, were arrested and
detained in Iskan village in Jindayris district in Afrin area in north -west rural
Aleppo. The families of the detained were denied information concerning their
situation.

* The list of incidents exemplifies human rights issues of concern raised in the report. Owing to
the changing patterns of conflict and the loss of networks of credible and/or reliable sources in
many conflict-affected areas, however, verifying incidents is increasingly difficult. The list,
which contains only those incidents that were reported to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and that have been verified according to its methodology,
should not be considered comprehensive.
21-18226

19/23

S/2021/1029

Hasakah Governorate
• On 12 November, two Iraqi men were shot and killed and three Iraqi women
were injured when unidentified armed men stormed the reception area of Hawl
camp in eastern rural Hasakah.
Hama Governorate
• On 17 October, three civilian men were injured when a reported landmine
detonated near the town of Suran in northern rural Hama.
• On 23 October, a civilian man and a civilian woman were injured when a
reported ground-based strike hit a residential area in the village of Na'ur Jurin
in al-Suqaylibiyah area in north-western rural Hama.
Dar‘a Governorate
• On 30 October, two boys and one girl were killed when a reported landmine
detonated near the town of Kutaybah in eastern rural Dar‘a.
• On 12 November, a civilian (the secretary of the Syrian Arab Baath Socialist
Party) was shot and killed on the road of Mashfa neighbourhood in the city of
Sanamayn in northern rural Dar‘a.
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 16 October, a civilian man was killed during a house raid in the village of
Zirr in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 25 October, two boys were injured when a reported landmine detonated near
them in the city of Susah in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 27 October, a civilian man was killed, reportedly as a result of indiscriminate
shooting, during a house raid in the village of Sabha in eastern rural Dayr
al-Zawr.
• On 2 November, two civilian men were killed in a reported drive -by shooting in
the village of Hawayij Albu Mus‘ah in western rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 6 November, two civilian men from the same family were killed in a driveby shooting in the village of Abu Khashab in northern rural Dayr al -Zawr.
Raqqah Governorate
• On 7 October, two men were arrested and detained in the Sahlat al -Banat camp
for internally displaced persons in Tall al-Bay‘a area in north-eastern rural
Raqqah. The detainees’ families were denied information about their fate and
whereabouts.
• On 11 October, a civilian man was killed and another injured in a reported
shooting at a checkpoint between the town of Sabkha and the village of Ghanim
al-Ali in eastern rural Raqqah.
• On 11 November, a civilian man was injured during a reported exchange of
small arms fire in the village of Sharakrak village in southern rural Tall Abyad
area in northern rural Raqqah.

20/23

21-18226

S/2021/1029

Annex II
List of United Nations humanitarian cross-border operating partners

21-18226

1.

AFAQ

2.

ATAA Humanitarian Relief Association

3.

Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development

4.

Al Resala Foundation

5.

Al Sham Humanitarian Foundation

6.

Al-Ameen for Humanitarian Support

7.

Alseeraj for Development & Healthcare

8.

BAHAR

9.

BINAA for Development

10.

Basma for Relief and Development

11.

Basmeh & Zeitooneh for Relief and Development

12.

Big Heart Foundation

13.

Bonyan Organization

14.

CARE International

15.

Children of One World

16.

Deutsche Welthungerhilfe e.V. (German Agro Action)

17.

Doctors of the World Turkey

18.

GOAL

19.

Ghiras Al Nahda

20.

Global Communities

21.

Hand in Hand for Aid and Development

22.

Handicap International

23.

Hope Revival Organization

24.

Human Appeal Turkey

25.

Human Rights and Freedoms and Humanitarian Relief Foundation

26.

Humanitarian Initiative Association

27.

Humanitarian Relief Association

28.

Ihsan for Relief and Development

29.

Independent Doctors Association

30.

Insan Charity

31.

Insani Inisiyatif Dernegi

32.

International Humanitarian Relief Association

33.

Islamic Relief Worldwide

34.

KUDRA
21/23

S/2021/1029

22/23

35.

Maram Foundation for Relief and Development

36.

Massrat – The Establishment for Human Care and Development

37.

Medina Association

38.

Mercy without Limits

39.

Mercy-USA for Aid and Development

40.

Muzun for Humanitarian and Development

41.

NAS

42.

Nasaem Khair

43.

Norwegian Refugee Council

44.

Orange

45.

Orient for Human Relief

46.

POINT Organization

47.

People in Need

48.

Physicians Across Continents

49.

Qatar Charity

50.

Qatar Red Crescent Society

51.

REACH Initiative

52.

Relief Experts Association – UDER

53.

Relief International

54.

SANED Organization

55.

SENED Organization

56.

SKT organization

57.

Sadad Humanitarian Organization

58.

Saed Charity Association

59.

Shafak Organization

60.

Social Development International

61.

Solidarités International

62.

Space of Peace

63.

Syria Relief

64.

Syria Relief and Development

65.

Syrian American Medical Society Foundation

66.

Syrian Engineers for Construction and Development

67.

Syrian Expatriate Medical Association

68.

Takaful Alsham Charity Organization

69.

The HALO Trust

70.

The Mentor Initiative

71.

The Syrian Association for Relief and Development
21-18226

S/2021/1029

21-18226

72.

Turkish Red Crescent

73.

Ufuk for Relief and Development

74.

Union of Medical Care and Relief Organization

75.

Violet Organization

76.

War Child Holland

77.

Watan Foundation

78.

White Hands

79.

White Hats Organization for Sustainable Development

80.

Woman Support Association

81.

World Vision International

82.

Yol Rehberi Insan Haklari Dernegi

23/23
