ResolutiolLII adopted on the reporte of the Second Committee

67

Considering further that the development of each
country .depends primarily on the mobilization of its
resources and that intemational economic co-operation is a necessary component of that development,
Stating that an examination of the long-term trends
in the economic development of individual regions is
of great importance for securing ~ raI?id rat~ of economic development of all countnes, m particular of
developing countries, and that such an examination
will also contribute towards the elimination of the
negative phenomena in the economies of those countries and regions,
l. Recommends that the regional commissions
should prepare studies on the Iong-term trends in and
forecasts of the economic development of their respective regions, taking into account the national development programmes of individual countries of the
regions and the particular characteristics and priorities
of the regions;
2. Recommends further that the regional commissions should include in those studies specific conclusions on trends in the economic development of the
regions and on interregional economic co-operation;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare for
the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-third session, on the basis of the abovc-mentioned studies and
in consultation wi-th the Comrnittee for Develo.pment
Planning, a comprehensive report on the long-term
trends and forecasts in the economic development of
the various regions and their mutual relationship, including methodological guidelines for the further examination of such trends in the regions;
4. Decides to consider the subject of long-tenn
trends in the economic development of the regions as a
separa te item at its thirty-second session;
5. Invites Govemments of Member States to participate in the implementation of the present resolution.
2441st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

Bearing in mind also that in resolution 3362 (S-VII)
Govemments are invited to undertake adequate preparations and consultations in view of the importance
of the Conference,
Stressing that one of the fundamental objectives of
the United Nations is to promote full employment in
all countries,
Convinced that efforts to promote full employment
should be an integral part of over-all national development policies,
Convinced also that in the field of employment action should be taken at the intemational level to complement and reinforce measures taken at the national
level,
1. W elcomes the convening by the Intemational
Labour Organisation of the Tripartite World Conference on Employment, Income Distribution, Social Progress and the International Division of Labour in June
1976;
2. Notes with satisfaction that the main objectives
of the Conference are the promotion of a better understanding of the nature and magni.tude of employment
problems, the formulation of recc,mmendations for national strategies to cope effectively with these problems
and the identification and adoption of concrete proposals for action at the international level;
3. Endorses the requests addressed by the Economic
and Social Council in its resolution 1968 (LIX) to the
competent bodies of the United Nations and the specialized agencies to give their full co-operation in the
preparation of the Conference;
4. Urges all States participating in the Conference
to be represented at the highest possible level.
2441st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3509 (XXX). Tripartite World Conference on
Employment, lncome Distrihution, Social
Progress and the lnternational Division of

The General Assembly,
Considering that economic emergency situations creating widespread disruption affecting all sectors of society have frequently affiicted many parts of the world
and require immediate remedia! action to offset their
far-reaching and devastating economic, social and structural conscquences, partictfiarly for the poorest countries and the most vulnerabll:: people in those countries,
Considering further that ·such action, geared to the
immediate needs of the afHicted populations, is necessary
to sustain the lo~g-term development process in these
countries,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations system to respond to these situations in a comprehensiv,
and co-ordinated manner,
Bearing in mind the relevant principies and recou
mendations in section X of its resolution 3202 (S-VJ
of 1 May 1974,
Taking into account the r.elevant provisions of
resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
which it decided to examine and adopt at its thirti1
session appropriate measures concerning the econon
social and structural consequences of natural disast,
particularly in the least developed countries,
C onsidering that the EconoQlic and Social Cou
in its policy-making role has responsibility for
ordinating United Nations action in this field, ta

Labour
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1968 (LIX) of 30 July 1975 concerning the Tripartite
World Conference on Employment, Income Distribution, Social Progress and the lntemational Division of
Labour, to be held at Geneva in June 1976, and Trade
and Development Board decision 134 (XV) of 16 August 1975 conceming the impact on employment of intemational policy measures in the field of trade and
development, 711
Bearing in mind its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration
and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of
a New Intemational Economic Order, as well as its
resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States,
Recalling also its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, particularly sections 111 and IV thereof
· on science and technology and on industrialization,
711 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/10015/Rev.1), pa1t three,
annex I.

3510 (XXX). lmmediate needs resulting from
economic emergency situations

68

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

into account the relevant activities already undertaken
by the various organs of the United Nations system,
l. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the appropriate organizations of the United Nations
system and with a view to enabling the United Nations
system to <leal adequately with economic emergency
sitnations and to respond more effeetively to the resulting immediate needs of the aflected populations in
developing countries, to submit proposals to the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-first session, inter
alía, on:
. (a) Tu.: claboration of global criteria for identifying' such economic emergency situations;
( b) Toe possible establishment of procedures for
periodically reporting relevant information through
resident representatives of the United Nations Development Programme, in consultation with the Govemments
concemed, to a central focal point, to be established where appropriate, which will process such information;
(e) The possible elaboration of procedures for submission, on the basis of such information, of proposals
to the Economic and Social Council for the proclamation, where necessary, of a state of emergency with
economic, social and structural consequences;
(d) The strengthening of the co-ordinating mechanism of the United Nations system within its existing
financia! resources;
2. Invites the Economic ·and Social Council to consider, as a matter of urgency, the above-mentioned proposals by the Secretary-General and to invite the governing bodies of the United Nations agencies concemed
to provide it with any comments they may havc on this
matter.
2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975
3511 (XXX). United Nations Conference
on Desertification
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3337 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, in which it decided to initiate concerted intemational action to combat desertification,
Having considered the progress report of the Secretary-General76 and the,relevant parts of the report of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its third session77 on the implementation of General Assembly resolution 3337
(XXIX),
Noting decision 30 (III) of 30 ApriÍ 1975 of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme,78 in which it approved the proposals of the
Executive Director of the Programme on measures to
be taken in implementation of General Assembly reso~
lution 3337 (XXIX),
Noting also Economic and Social Council resolution
1958 (LIX) of 25 July 1975,
Stressing the need for additional research to clarify
a number of fundamental problems of desertification,
for the solution of which the requisite scientific knowledge is not yet available to the intemational community,
76 E/5689.
7 7 See Official

Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/10025), chap. Ill, sect. B.
78 /bid., Supplement No. 25 (A/10025), annex l.

Stressing further that the preparation of the United
Nations Conference on Desertification should provide
the intemational community with the basis for an
action-oriented, comprehensive and co-ordinated plan
of action, which should include the building up of indigenous and autonomous science and technology capacity in the areas concemed,
I. Requests the Secretary-General with the assistance of the competent bodies of the United Nations
concerned, particularly the United Nations Environment Programme, to intensify the efforts required to
ensure the appropriate preparation, at the technical
leve!, of the United Nations Conference on Desertification;
2. Reiterates its request to the United Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations Development Programme to provide the financia! and technical assistance necessary to ensure the satisfactory
preparation of the Conference, bearing in mind particularly the need to close the gaps in scientific knowledge
aqd technologies in this field;
3. Requests the Committee on Science and Technology for Development, with the assistance of the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and
Technology to Development, to include in its programme of work on arid areas, in pursuance of Economic and Social Council resolution 1898 (LVII) of
1 August 1974, proposals to close the gaps in scientific
knowledge,and technologies concerning desertification;
4. Decides that the cost of the Conference will be
borne by the regular budget of the United Nations;
5. Requests the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities to contribute to the financing of the demographic components of the studies prepared in implementation of General Assembly resolution 3337
(XXIX);
6. Requests the executive heads of the specialized
agencies to authorize their respective secretariats to
provide for their participation in the secretariat of the
Conference and in the ad hoc interagency task force,
in conformity with General Assembly resolution 3337
(XXIX);
7. Requests the Governing Council of the United
N ations Environment Programme to act as the intergovemmental preparatory body for the Conference and
to ~ubmit to the General Assembly at its thirty-first
sess1on, through the Economic and Social Council,
recommendations on th~ organization of the Conference.
2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975
3512 (XXX). Consideration of the economic and
social eituation in the Sudano-Sahelian region
stricken by drought and measuree to he
taken for the henefit of that region
The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant resolutions of the Economic
and Social Council and the General Assembly, particularly Council resolutions 1834 (LVI) of 14 May 1974
and 1874 (LVII) of 16 July 1974, and Assembly resolutions 3054 (XXVIII) of 17 October 1973 and
3253 (XXIX) of 4 December 1974,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1918 (LVIII) of 5 May 1975,
