United Nations

S/PV.4462

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4462nd meeting
Wednesday, 30 January 2002, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gayan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mauritius)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Franco
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Boubacar Diallo
Ms. O’Donnell
Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Granovsky
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Wehbe
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Williamson

Agenda
The situation in East Timor
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (S/2002/80 and Corr.1)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

02-23533 (E)

*0223533*

S/PV.4462

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in East Timor
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (S/2002/80 and Corr.1)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bangladesh, Brazil, Fiji, Japan,
Indonesia, New Zealand, the Philippines, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea and Spain, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Chowdhury
(Bangladesh), Mr. Fonseca (Brazil), Mr. Naidu
(Fiji), Mr. Satoh (Japan), Mr. Widodo (Indonesia),
Mr. MacKay (New Zealand), Mr. Manalo
(Philippines), Mr. Seixas da Costa (Portugal),
Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea) and
Mr. Arias (Spain) took the seats reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
decides to extend an invitation under rule 37 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. John
Howard,
Prime
Minister
of
the
Commonwealth of Australia.
There being no objection it is so decided.
His Excellency Mr. John Howard, Prime Minister
of Australia, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. John
Howard, Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of
Australia.

2

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Transitional Administrator for East Timor.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello to take a seat
at the Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. José RamosHorta, Senior Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Ramos-Horta to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2002/80 and Corr.1, which contain the
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor.
The Security Council will hear a briefing by
Mr. Vieira de Mello at this meeting. I understand that
he is also prepared to answer questions and provide
clarifications if need be.
Mr. Vieira de Mello: It is an honour to report to
the Council under your presidency this morning, Sir.
It is a pleasure to sit before the Council and the
Prime Minister, together with my friend and colleague,
José Ramos-Horta, to provide a briefing on the
situation in East Timor as its transition to independence
rapidly — indeed, it is now only 110 days away —
comes to pass.
With the approach of independence comes the
end of a quite remarkable chapter in the history of the
United Nations, one marked by an extraordinary
collaborative effort. That effort reflected is here, and
for this I must thank the Permanent Representative of

S/PV.4462

Mauritius and yourself, Mr. Minister, for the Council’s
decision to devote so much attention today to the
situation in East Timor. The presence here today also of
Prime Minister John Howard of Australia is yet a
further sign of the depth of support enjoyed by East
Timor.
On 20 May — independence day — East Timor’s
dogged and inspiring quest for self-determination will
have been completed. Our happiness, however, should
be and is tempered by the reality that independence
does not mark the end of East Timor’s struggles. Far
from it. As members know, the Constituent Assembly
began its work in September 2001. Today, after 20
weeks of active participation and intense debate, the
Assembly has achieved a mammoth task by reviewing
and approving most of the draft constitution.
Just before I left for New York I was invited to an
exchange of views with the Constituent Assembly. I
briefed them on the debate that we will have here
today, and on our hopes for its outcome — hopes that I
shall go into in some detail in just a moment. It will not
surprise the Council to hear that they raised with me
their concerns over border security, the future of
serious crimes prosecution, the ongoing downsizing of
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and our plans for a successor
mission. I also approved the Constituent Assembly’s
request for a further extension of its mandate until 9
March. I wholeheartedly encouraged, welcomed and
accepted that suggestion. It is in East Timor’s best
interest that the members of the Constituent Assembly
be given time to absorb the various internal and
external submissions they have received from different
sources. The additional time will also allow the
members of the Assembly to undertake a more
effective public consultation process.
Although the draft constitution is nearing
completion, the transfer of power from the United
Nations to the East Timorese people requires one final
institutional development: the election of the President.
On 14 April the people of East Timor will elect their
first President in a free and fair election with universal
suffrage, in a secret ballot, and on the basis of a single
national constituency. This time, the Timorese will be
playing a dominant role in implementing the elections.
There will be five electoral commissioners, three of
them East Timorese and two of them international. East
Timorese will head and staff all 13 district electoral
offices, assisted by international electoral officers in

logistics and other supervisory capacities. A few days
ago I issued invitations for international observers to
be present throughout the electoral process.
On 17 April the results will be announced, and
East Timor’s new President will be inaugurated just
after midnight on 20 May.
On the international front, foundations continue
to be laid for strong relations between East Timor and
Indonesia. As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
report, last November for the first time we hosted a
meeting of the Joint Border Committee, the third time
that body had met. I am sure that my colleague José
Ramos-Horta will give the Council more details on that
process.
Towards the end of February, Indonesia and East
Timor will also be holding high-level talks at Denpasar,
to be immediately followed by trilateral talks when
East Timor’s other immediate neighbour, Australia,
joins the table. The meeting will review progress made
on all bilateral issues that have been the subject of
negotiations between UNTAET and the East Timorese
leadership on the one hand and the Government of
Indonesia on the other over the past two years, and
some new issues, such as maritime delimitation, will be
discussed. We also hope to sign a number of
arrangements strengthening cooperation between
Indonesia and East Timor in areas such as postal
services and police cooperation. The trilateral talks will
likely discuss regional cooperation, including the
possible establishment of a South-West Pacific forum,
and regional security arrangements, economic
cooperation and development matters.
In addition, East Timor has also been invited to
participate in a ministerial-level regional conference,
co-chaired by Australia and Indonesia, on people
smuggling, trafficking in persons and related
transnational crime; that conference will involve
ministers from up to 40 countries in the region.
Key among the outstanding bilateral issues
requiring resolution at the Denpasar talks is the need to
normalize the land border between East Timor and
West Timor. We have already taken the first steps
towards delimitation of the border. A joint work plan
has been agreed upon, and the first joint
reconnaissance survey will be undertaken next month.
We are also working towards finalizing an arrangement
that will permit movement of people across the border

3

S/PV.4462

for customary and traditional purposes and for trade at
markets in the vicinity of the border.
I am happy to report that the security situation in
East Timor remains stable. The border with Indonesia
continues to be secure. There have been few sightings
of militia along the Tactical Coordination Line,
although unregulated markets are increasingly a
problem. Crime rates in East Timor are not increasing,
and the East Timor Police Service is growing into its
duties admirably. Nonetheless, hard-line militia
elements may still pose a long-term threat and, until
there is substantial progress in the establishment of an
operational East Timor Defence Force, the presence of
an appropriate military component will be necessary.
Likewise, until the national police force is fully
deployed, United Nations civilian police will need to
remain in East Timor to assist in training and in actual
enforcement.
Long-term peace and stability will depend on the
degree to which we can overcome the legacy of the
September 1999 violence through progress on the
return of the remaining refugees, by fostering and
facilitating reconciliation and by the effective
prosecution of serious crimes. Those efforts should be
viewed as interdependent.
In a boost to the reconciliation process, on 21
January I swore into office the seven National
Commissioners of the Commission on Reception, Truth
and Reconciliation. That was a major achievement —
and an arduous one, coming some 18 months after the
selection process began. As members know, the
Commission has three main functions: to seek the truth
about human rights violations in East Timor
perpetrated between April 1974 and October 1999;
secondly, to facilitate community reconciliation; and
thirdly, to report to the Government on its work. It is
not a substitute for justice, as serious crimes must
continue to be dealt with by the courts. Rather, it will
complement that process and avoid unduly burdening a
strained court system by dealing with lesser offences
through a community reconciliation process. In the
coming weeks the Commissioners will need to appoint
regional commissioners and their own senior staff.
Securing further donor support will also be critical to
the ability of the Commission to function as intended.
The sensitive task of reconciliation between East
Timorese on both sides of the border is progressing
through a unified reconciliation team on behalf of the

4

second transitional Government, with the full backing
of Chief Minister Mari Alkatiri, of Xanana Gusmão,
and of my own office. This important process was led,
until recently, by my former chief of staff, who has
now been replaced by the head of our Political Unit.
The justice system is still in a nascent state and
needs continued close attention. I know only too well
that this is an area in which we have faced particularly
significant problems, to an understandable extent since
there was nothing — nothing — left of a justice system
or its infrastructure in September 1999. Today, there
are only 25 East Timorese judges and 13 prosecutors,
the majority of whom have had only secondary
education and less than two years of training and
experience. On occasion, inappropriate sentences have
been handed down, leading to retrials. Cases of
intimidation during trials have occurred, in one
instance resulting in the closure of the Baucau
courthouse. The lack of resources, including
interpreters and court staff, has led to delayed hearings
and unduly prolonged detention of suspects.
Members of the Council themselves identified
shortcomings in the administration of justice in East
Timor, particularly in the area of the prosecution of
serious crimes, in their report of November 2000
following the Council’s mission to East Timor
(S/2000/1105). In line with our overall strategy, day-today management of justice has been devolved onto the
Government. Nonetheless, I still bear ultimate
responsibility for the administration of justice under
the UNTAET mandate. I have made and am making a
concerted effort to ensure that UNTAET cooperates
closely with the public administration to address the
problems faced within this sector and to ensure that by
independence we will be able to leave behind strong
institutions within the justice sector; these will be
critical for the stability of the new country.
To establish a balanced approach ensuring
equality between prosecution and defence, as well as
appropriate capacity for the courts to adjudicate, we are
looking particularly at the establishment of a legal aid
service, as well as at support for court administration. I
have proposed a set of immediate action points that
support both the Special Panels for Serious Crimes and
court administration more generally. They include
immediate recruitment of international judges,
recruitment of a Special Panels administrative
coordinator and a judges’ associate for the national
judges, as well as enhancement of the capacity of the

S/PV.4462

courts for simultaneous translation. We are proposing a
plan for the mobilization of external resources, which
will support the courts, particularly in the areas of
transcription services and equipment, witness expenses,
Internet access and library and research materials. An
action plan is to be developed to ensure a coordinated
approach to court listing, prison liaison, the publication
of court documents and resource mobilization.
I have also endorsed a plan to ensure the
establishment of a legal aid service. This has been
outstanding for too long and is particularly important
in the view of the current resource disparity between
the prosecution service and the office of the public
defenders. The establishment of the service will allow
for the creation of an independent statutory body,
which, although funded through appropriations from
the East Timor Public Administration, will also be able
to receive independent funding, human resource
support and other types of support.
Considerable improvements have been made in
the area of serious crimes prosecution in terms of
management of human and other resources. The Office
of the General Prosecutor, now headed by an East
Timorese prosecutor, is supported by an East Timorese
Deputy Prosecutor for Ordinary Crimes and a new
international Deputy Prosecutor for Serious Crimes.
The selection and management of staffing and
resources provided to the Serious Crimes Unit has been
enhanced in order to meet key goals for 2002 and, as of
this month, teams of investigators are being based in
several districts to promote greater efficiency and to
create a closer relationship with the communities in
which the investigations are undertaken. It is
anticipated that, over the course of 2002, these changes
should permit an increase in the number of indictments
over and above the 10 priority cases of crimes against
humanity. These tasks can be accomplished only with
the full funding of approved positions from the
assessed budget, as well as continued support from
donors for additional specialized expertise and
resources in such areas as forensic and investigation
experts, translators and transport.
In October 2001 my deputy met with the newly
appointed Attorney-General of Indonesia. At that
meeting it was agreed that regular monthly meetings on
justice should be held with a view to maintaining a
dialogue on issues of mutual concern. Following that
visit the new East Timorese General Prosecutor paid a
courtesy call on the Attorney-General of Indonesia, in

November. The first of the monthly meetings was
finally held in Denpasar in mid-January.
I very much welcome President Megawati’s
selection of 18 judges for the Ad Hoc Human Rights
Court. We are now keen to see the judges and
prosecutors sworn in, court staff recruited and a date
set for the commencement of the trials of the first
group of suspects, who were publicly identified in
early September 2000 by the then Attorney-General of
Indonesia, Marzuki Darusman. This is all the more
important given that it is now well over two years since
the destruction of 1999.
The recent Supreme Court decision in Jakarta to
increase, to between five and seven years, the
sentences of three of the men convicted of murdering
our colleagues from the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in
Atambua in September 2000 is a welcome move, going
some way towards demonstrating, in Indonesia, as in
the rest of the world, the opprobrium felt over those
foul acts.
Finally, progress has been reached in cooperation
on investigations into the killing of Private Manning of
New Zealand, with several accused now standing trial
in Jakarta for his murder. A similar model of
cooperation has been agreed on for the investigation
into the killing of Private Devi Ram Jaisi of Nepal.
Real momentum on cooperation with Indonesia in
the area of serious crimes remains elusive, however. It
is of the utmost concern that we have been unable to
ensure that the Memorandum of Understanding on
legal, judicial and human rights related matters, which
I signed with the Attorney-General of Indonesia in
April 2000, becomes fully operational.
In
the
remaining
four
months
before
independence, UNTAET, together with the ProsecutorGeneral’s Office, will continue to meet with the
Indonesian authorities to push for further progress on
serious crimes; these working-level meetings must
become a reality and take place on a regular basis. For
the people of East Timor, peace and reconciliation
efforts will mean little if the principal perpetrators of
atrocities committed in 1999 are not brought to justice.
Finally, I should say that we welcomed the visit
to East Timor and Indonesia of Ambassador Leandro
Despouy, the Chairman of the Commission on Human
Rights, who was effectively able to refocus the

5

S/PV.4462

spotlight onto the outstanding need for justice in the
area of serious crimes, whether that justice is to be
served in Dili or Jakarta. I hope that his efforts help us
attain concrete results.
Moving to the question of refugees, returns
increased during this reporting period, reaching a total
of some 192,000. This still leaves perhaps up to 60,000
refugees in West Timor. We will redouble our efforts,
in partnership with the second transitional government
and UNHCR, together with the civil and military
authorities in Indonesia, to encourage as many of the
remaining refugees to return to East Timor before
independence. Cross-border visits, such as the highly
successful visit of Xanana Gusmão to West Timor last
November, appear to be one of the most effective ways
of
countering
misinformation
and
fostering
reconciliation and repatriation. At the same time, we
have increased our efforts to provide clear, objective
information to refugees on the newly established
reconciliation commission. As for those responsible for
past criminal acts, we will ensure that they will be
treated fairly within the developing justice system of
East Timor.
While security and militia intimidation continue
to be factors inhibiting refugee returns, economic
factors, including lack of shelter and access to
pensions, are also significant deterrents. I have been
looking into ways to improve the shelter for returnees,
and I would like to highlight here that more resources
are needed to improve this aspect of life for the East
Timorese and for returning refugees, particularly
during the current rainy season.
It is also important that the arrangements entered
into between East Timor and Indonesia on pensions and
termination payments to former East Timorese
employees of the Government of Indonesia begin to
bear fruit. Just before I left Dili, we handed a further
20,000 registration forms to the Indonesian authorities,
and I am hopeful that the first pension and termination
payments in East Timor will be made in March 2002.
Those former Indonesian government employees
and pensioners who opt for East Timorese citizenship
will, however, stop receiving their benefits at
independence. That is why a special fund is being
established to offset those lost pensions. The special
fund was launched in Jakarta on 27 November 2001 as
part of the Joint Appeal of the United Nations and the
Government of Indonesia. I would like to thank the

6

Governments of Indonesia and Portugal, as well as the
European Community, which have pledged about $4.5
million for the fund thus far. The fund will, however,
require substantially more capital if we hope to
generate meaningful benefits for its 30,000 intended
beneficiaries. It will prove difficult to encourage the
9,000 remaining former government employees and
pensioners to return to East Timor, together with their
families, without this alternative. Support for the
special fund is thus another key priority over the next
60 days.
In December, a major breakthrough was reached
between East Timor and UNTAET officials, led by
Chief Minister Alkatiri, with industry currently
developing a major petroleum field in the Timor Sea. A
tax and fiscal package was agreed and will maximize
petroleum revenues to East Timor by allowing gas
development in the Timor Sea to go forward. This
development will proceed under the terms of the treaty
negotiated last year with Australia, which will enter
into force upon East Timor’s independence.
Overall revenues to East Timor from the
combined gas and liquids phases of Bayu-Undan — the
field under development — will be much larger than
previously forecast. However, revenues from this field
in the first few years may not be as high as initially
predicted because of the revised fiscal terms and also
because production is now more conservatively
estimated.
I should now like to turn to the successor
mission, a subject that continues to occupy much time
within UNTAET and the Second Transitional
Government. Our unprecedented advance planning has
resulted in a framework for the successor mission,
which is attached to the report of the SecretaryGeneral. In this simple proposal, the Secretary-General
delimits the scope of action for the future peace
operation, and, maybe more importantly, bases its
scope on the needs articulated by the future host
Government and current UNTAET managers. In other
words, it is a consensus document on which all parties
at the operational level are in agreement. The hope is
that such an exercise allows for a better synergy and
sense of a common goal in the successor mission. I am
confident that this is being achieved, and I commend it
to the Council for its consideration and approval.
Briefly, let me summarize the main contents of
the framework. First and foremost, the mission will be

S/PV.4462

guided by the principle identified in the Council’s
presidential statement of 31 October last, namely, to
ensure that all operational responsibilities are fully
devolved to the East Timorese authorities as soon as
this is feasible without jeopardizing stability and
progress made. The mission is expected to achieve its
core mandate in around two years from independence,
provided
the
fundamental
conditions
for
implementation continue to prevail.
In this regard, I would like to reiterate here an
important observation in the Secretary-General’s
report: that funding of the East Timor Police Service
and the East Timor Defence Force will be essential to
the achievement of the core mandate. As members
know, both are highly under-resourced and will require
bilateral and other voluntary assistance to be able to
function effectively.
The civilian activities of the mission will focus
on providing international civilian assistance for core
functions in public administration. As members know,
the civilian experts would provide crucial support to
the emergent East Timorese Administration. The
concept for this was extensively discussed at the last
Council meeting. Other civilian activities will include
providing assistance in serious crimes investigations,
as well as human rights mainstreaming.
On the police side, as I understand it, there is no
precedent for nationwide United Nations executive
policing responsibility in an independent State. In
short, overall command of the East Timorese police,
together with the United Nations civilian police
(CIVPOL), will rest with the international police
Commissioner. It has been clearly agreed, at a meeting
that I attended with Chief Minister Alkatiri just before
coming to New York, that once a unit is handed over to
an East Timorese officer, he or she will continue to
report up a single chain of command that, as I said, will
be led by the United Nations civilian police.
We — the Government and UNTAET both —
believe this is absolutely essential to ensure
coordination of police response in the field. During this
period,
shadowing
the
international
police
Commissioner
will
be
the
East
Timorese
Commissioner-in-training, whom I appointed in
October last year. We are working together with the
Government to ensure that on independence the
Government concludes with the United Nations an
agreement which will addresses the role of the police

component and its relationship with the new East
Timorese police force.
CIVPOL activities in the future mission will
focus on finishing the job of developing the East
Timorese police, which will be at a little more than half
its target strength on the day of independence. The East
Timor Police Service is expected to reach full capacity
by January 2004. A gradual handover of individual
police activities to the national units and districts,
under unified command, will begin in May this year
and likely end in January 2004. The handover will be
contingent upon a positive assessment of personnel and
institutional realities, and we are currently identifying
the specific criteria for appropriate United Nations
certification and accreditation.
Subject to the timely achievement of certification,
CIVPOL will start with a force of 1,250 at
independence and be reduced by an average of 5 per
cent every month, leaving about 100 officers by
January 2004 working in a purely advisory role. As
CIVPOL reduces its size, it will be increasingly
important for police-contributing nations to provide
senior police officers with capacity-building and
advisory skills. This will be absolutely critical to the
success of this component of the successor mission.
On the military side, the mission will continue
providing support for external security and territorial
integrity, initially with a force of 5,000. Once the
border areas are delimited and national border-control
structures are in place, the size of the military
component will be reduced, subject, needless to say, to
the overriding caveat of prevailing security conditions.
Furthermore, it will be vital for the mission to
ensure timely handover of responsibilities from the
military component to the East Timor Defence Force
and relevant Public Administration departments. As
with the police, UNTAET is working together with the
Public Administration of East Timor to ensure that
immediately
upon
independence
a
formal
understanding is in place to address clearly and
unambiguously the role of the United Nations military
and its relationship with the East Timor Defence Force.
The Secretary-General has recommended that,
before wrapping up UNTAET, our mandate be
extended until the date of independence, on 20 May.
This would allow UNTAET to make the necessary
preparations for the presidential elections and events
leading up to independence day, as well as going some

7

S/PV.4462

way to completing the priority tasks that I have just
outlined. I very much hope that you concur and make
such a decision in the coming 48 hours.
Nonetheless, we are continuing — and
determinedly so — with a simultaneous wind-down of
the mission to ensure we minimize trauma caused by
the end of UNTAET and the commencement of a
smaller, more limited mission. I am confident that we
will meet the Secretary-General’s commitment to a 75
per cent cut of international personnel in the Public
Administration by the end of our mandate. Following a
reduction of 35 per cent by November last year, we
will be reducing our staff by an additional 10 per cent
each month over four months starting tomorrow, 31
January — when 140 international staff members will
be leaving the mission — and continuing through the
end of April. This will ensure that our 75 per cent
reduction is achieved, leaving around 200 international
staff and 50 United Nations Volunteers in government
at the end of the mandate.
This downsizing process has been particularly
difficult, as the government bodies and ministries are
in dire need of international staff everywhere. Indeed, I
believe it was the Council’s support, in principle, for a
continued post-independence provision of critical
assistance to the East Timorese Government that
encouraged the ministries to make these difficult cuts,
these extremely difficult choices. As you know, the
resultant list of 100 posts falls within the areas of
finance and central services, justice, internal systems
and essential services.
Meanwhile, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and UNTAET, together with the
Government, have also agreed on job descriptions and
specifications for the posts, and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has prepared the United
Nations vacancy announcements, which can now be
viewed on the United Nations web site.
In addition, a recruitment process for the 100
functions is being designed. It is our goal to have
experts arrive in theatre early enough to overlap with
their international predecessors, unless current
incumbents are selected. In this context, I appeal for
continued support by the Council to ensure timely
action and an early mandate of the successor mission,
since this would allow our collective early planning
and preparations to bear fruit.

8

The East Timorese Government will also require
international assistance in support of social and
economic
development
and
poverty-reduction
programmes. The ongoing UNDP study has identified
some 200 such functions as crucial for that purpose,
and voluntary arrangements are being sought to meet
these requirements. Members of the Constituent
Assembly are rightly anxious to ensure that the
development of East Timor’s health and education
sectors, in particular, continues beyond independence,
and it is through these positions that we will be able to
help assuage these concerns.
To ensure the division of responsibility among
principal players who will assist East Timor in these
areas, I have been consulting with the United Nations
agencies and other entities, seeking their support in
principle to help fill the 200 civilian technical
assistance posts. These will also be circulated to
Member States.
We have also been reducing the number of
international posts outside the Public Administration.
Starting with my own extended office — which
includes public information, legal affairs, political
affairs, human rights and others — the reduction will
be in monthly tranches, resulting in an overall
reduction of 40 per cent by the end of April. Similarly,
our division of the UNTAET administration is cutting
back by 40 per cent.
Another element that is key to a smooth transition
is the incorporation within the Government of essential
common services and the transfer of United Nations
assets to the East Timorese Government in support of
those services. A preliminary list of assets for potential
disposal has undergone a financial-sustainability
review, and the final list of desired assets will be
presented
to
the
Advisory
Committee
on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions next month
for its consideration.
Finally, in the home stretch to independence, the
Government and I have asked for East Timor to be
deleted from the list of non-self-governing territories. I
expect the Government immediately to seek
membership in the United Nations. This territory,
which was an orphan of the United Nations, will then
become a full-grown member of our family.
As we approach the conclusion of this remarkable
exercise, I, on behalf of the East Timorese Transitional
Government and on behalf of José Ramos-Horta, invite

S/PV.4462

members of the Council to attend the Independence
Day celebrations. You visited once before, providing
welcome support in a most sombre time. We now very
much hope that you can visit in altogether more
uplifting circumstances. You will have good reason to
be proud.
The President: I thank Mr. Vieira de Mello for
his comprehensive briefing.
I wish to welcome the presence at the Council
table of Ms. Louise Fréchette, Deputy SecretaryGeneral.
The next speaker on my list is His Excellency
Mr. John
Howard,
Prime
Minister
of
the
Commonwealth of Australia.
Mr. Howard: I extend my congratulations to you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council. I also acknowledge the presence of
Deputy Secretary-General Louise Fréchette and also,
very particularly, Mr. José Ramos-Horta, with whom
my Government and the people of Australia have had a
significant association over the past few years.
I understand that this is the first time in some
years that an Australian Prime Minister has addressed
the Security Council, and I think it is appropriate that
the address takes place in the context of a debate on the
future of East Timor.
Australia was a founder Member of the United
Nations, and, in fact, provided the first President of the
Security Council. We continue to very strongly support
the relevant role of the Security Council in the modern
world. Its contribution to the emphatic response of the
world to the outrageous terrorist attacks in this city last
year is current evidence of that relevance, as indeed is
illustrated again by the debate today on Afghanistan.
Australia has been a strong supporter of the world’s
response to those terrorist attacks, and we were one of
the very first nations to send military forces to assist
the United States efforts within Afghanistan.
We strongly support the work done in the United
Nations to ensure there is a broad international front
against terrorism. It is critical that this international
cooperation be one of action as well as words. This is
what Australia will look to the Council for in
implementing its resolutions.
I want to thank Sergio Vieira de Mello for his
report in the name of the Secretary-General in relation

to the renewal of the mandate for East Timor until
independence. I take this opportunity to record
Australia’s admiration for his stewardship over the last
two and a half years. It has been an example of United
Nations work in difficult circumstances at its very best.
I also join others in saying how much we look forward
to East Timor assuming its independence in 110 days’
time. I shall be delighted, myself, to represent Australia
at the independence celebrations from 18 to 20 May.
East Timor has been a prime example of the
Security Council’s capacity to respond promptly and
decisively to pressing issues. The mandate that enabled
the deployment of the International Force in East
Timor laid the foundation for a successful and effective
long-term resolution to a difficult and chronic problem.
Australia is indeed honoured to have played such a key
role in that success.
Two years ago the Security Council entrusted the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) with a major and unprecedented
task. The success of UNTAET is manifest in East
Timor’s rapid move toward independence. I pay tribute
not only to Sergio Vieira de Mello’s own leadership,
but also to his UNTAET team, including the members
of the peacekeeping operation, the United Nations
civilian police, East Timorese members of the
Transitional Government and Secretariat officials here
in New York.
The renewal of the UNTAET mandate prefaces a
new phase of United Nations involvement in East
Timor. The Security Council must now give priority to
preparation and planning for the post-independence
United Nations mission. Decisions taken by this
Council in the coming months will have a crucial
bearing on the long-term success of East Timor. We
cannot rest on the successes — great though they
are — over the past two years, for without continued
support, they cannot be sustained.
East Timor remains a small, fragile country. A
start to reconstruction has been made, but there is still
a long way to go. Australia and other donors are
committed to East Timor’s long-term sustainable
development. But there also needs to be an assurance
of solidarity from the United Nations system.
The Council is well aware of the significant
contribution Australia has made to the United Nations
peacekeeping operation in East Timor through both
military and civilian police contingents. Over the

9

S/PV.4462

period from July 1999 to June 2001, Australia spent
Australian $1.4 billion on its military contribution. We
have also committed Australian $150 million for the
four years from July 2000 to help with reconstruction
and development in East Timor.
I want to inform the Council that Australia will
continue to play its part, both through the United
Nations and bilaterally, to support East Timor. We are
committed to a substantial bilateral assistance
programme to reduce poverty and build the capacity of
the East Timorese people to govern their country
successfully in a peaceful and democratic fashion. In
the Timor Sea Arrangement, we have agreed on a
generous arrangement for revenue from the Timor Sea
gas fields, which will make a big contribution to East
Timor’s future.
We look forward to working closely and
pragmatically with our new neighbours, both on
bilateral issues and, as fellow Member States of the
United Nations, in regional and global organizations. In
this regard, I am pleased that we shall begin trilateral
meetings between East Timor, Indonesia and Australia
on 26 February, when senior East Timorese
representatives will meet with representatives of my
Government and the Government of Indonesia in
Denpasar. The relationship between those three nations
is very important to the future of East Timor and its
people.
East Timor will, however, need more than the
help and goodwill of its nearest neighbours. A seamless
transition from United Nations administration to a
functioning post-independence Government is vital to
success in the long term. We should not by skimping
on resources undo the good work already done. It is
critical that the United Nations stay the course, and
Australia will play a significant part in the staying of
that course and leave East Timor well equipped to deal
with the challenges of independence. This is the best
guarantee of minimizing the country’s longer-term
reliance on international support.
Australia agrees that the United Nations role in
East Timor is not open-ended. The Security Council
must set in place an exit strategy that preserves the
international community’s investment in East Timor’s
future. That in turn will secure East Timor’s capacity to
function effectively over the long term.
I conclude by assuring the Council that Australia
will continue to play a significant part for so long as

10

that participation is needed. We will work closely with
the Council to support United Nations efforts and the
new East Timorese Government.
I record again the overwhelming sentiment of the
people of Australia in expressing to José Ramos-Horta
and through him to the people of East Timor our
goodwill for their future. There is concern and
sentiment in my country towards the East Timorese
people. We wish them well. We look forward to
working with Mr. Ramos-Horta as fellow members of
the international community and as participants in our
part of the world. I again congratulate Sergio Vieira de
Mello on his great stewardship, and I thank you,
Mr. President, most warmly for the privilege of
addressing the Security Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Howard for his
important statement and for the continued support of
his Government to East Timor.
His Excellency Mr. John Howard, the Prime
Minister of Australia, was escorted from the
Security Council Chamber.
The President: I now give the floor to Council
members.
Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Mr. President, I
can be relatively brief this morning, not least because
the representative of Spain will be speaking later in the
debate on behalf of the European Union. But, before
starting my statement, I did want to mark the presence
with us this morning of Prime Minister Howard of
Australia and of the Irish Minister of State for Foreign
Affairs. I think it was particularly apposite to have
Prime Minister Howard with us this morning in view of
the enormous contribution that Australia has made in
East Timor since the events of two years ago. And I
very much welcome the presence of our Irish
colleague, which I know symbolizes the tremendous
concern and commitment felt by the people of Ireland
for the situation in East Timor.
As always, Sergio Vieira de Mello’s briefing was
a masterpiece of the genre. I am very grateful to him
and to his team for giving us such a useful, exhaustive
and comprehensive report on what has happened in the
territory since we last met. I particularly welcome the
progress he was able to report on a number of areas,
and I would strongly endorse what he had to say about
the criminal and justice systems, the importance of
getting this right and the progress that has been made

S/PV.4462

with the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation. It will come as no surprise to Council
Members that the United Kingdom remains very
concerned about serious crime issues throughout the
panoply of the United Nations activities, and East
Timor must be no exception in this regard.

the independent East Timor should have the support of
all the people of the territory. I hope that it will be
possible to take account of all the suggestions that have
been made and put forward to an appropriate degree,
including those from some of the more minor political
parties.

On the first part of the work we have before us
today, we strongly support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that the mandate of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) should be extended to 20 May. Together
with the delegation of Singapore, we have been
working on a draft resolution to put that into practice,
and I think I can assure Mr. Vieira de Mello that action
on this will be taken well before the end of this week. I
anticipate no problems whatsoever.

As Prime Minister Howard just said, East Timor
will need more than the help and good will of its
nearest neighbours. We look forward to the completion
of the National Development Plan. This will provide
the basis for donors to determine the scope of their
future support to an independent East Timor and, not
least, will help define disbursement mechanisms.
Indications of future support for East Timor will, we
understand, be sought at the May Donors Conference.
It goes without saying that donors will appreciate the
early completion and dissemination of the development
plan in order to prepare for that Conference. The more
time that can be allowed for preparation, the better the
eventual results will be.

On the next stage of our remit, we welcome very
much the outlined proposals for a successor mission for
a limited period after independence, as set out in the
Secretary-General’s report this time, and we look
forward to receiving more specific proposals from him
as we move towards independence.
For the follow-on mission, we support the
recommendation that a number of key civilian
positions be funded from assessed contributions for a
limited period. These positions will, after all, be crucial
to the stability of the new administration. They have
already been advertised, and it is important that
recruitment takes place in good time to ensure a
smooth hand-over of responsibilities at the time of
independence. I would add in parentheses that I think
the decision taken by the Secretariat to go ahead and
advertise these posts in advance of formal approval of
the successor mission is admirable and fully in line
with the general thrust behind Lakhdar Brahimi’s
report on peace operations and a real gesture of the will
and determination in the Secretariat to ensure that
United Nations operations in these sorts of areas can be
made to run as smoothly and seamlessly as possible.
On the political front, we very much welcome the
announcement of presidential elections, which will take
place in April this year. We urge all parties to conduct
the election campaign in a peaceful and transparent
way. And, in a slightly different part of the political
forest, we hope that the extension of the constitutional
process to allow broader consultation on a number of
proposed amendments to the Constitution will be put to
good use. It is very important that the Constitution of

I have two other points to make, and then I will
finish. First, it is good that refugees have continued to
return since the August election, but we remain deeply
concerned about the plight of the remaining refugees in
West Timor. We understand that there could be up to
80,000 of them. I would like, here and now, to urge the
United Nations and the Government of Indonesia to
complete the negotiations for the Memorandum of
Understanding to enable international agencies to
return to East Timor and facilitate the resettlement of
the remaining refugees.
Finally, I would like to make it very clear that the
United Kingdom remains fully committed to
supporting the East Timorese people and the United
Nations to create a stable, independent and democratic
State. I am happy to be able to say that a Minister from
the Foreign Office will attend the independence day
celebrations in Dili on 20 May and that the United
Kingdom will retain a diplomatic presence in Dili after
independence.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
We also welcome Ms. Louise Fréchette, Deputy
Secretary-General, and Mr. John Howard, Prime
Minister of Australia, to today’s important debate.

11

S/PV.4462

We also wish to express our satisfaction at the
excellent work undertaken by UNTAET in East Timor.
Allow us further to convey our thanks and appreciation
to Special Representative Sergio Vieira de Mello and to
all the staff of UNTAET for their efforts to implement
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
We cannot fail to welcome Mr. José RamosHorta, Senior Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of East Timor.
Syria has followed the long road taken by the
parties concerned towards 20 May 2002 and wishes to
express its appreciation for the roles of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples and of the Constituent
Assembly through its decision to convene direct
presidential elections on 14 April this year. We believe
that this is an excellent initiative and a decisive step on
the road to East Timor’s independence.
We welcome the elements in the report on
progress achieved towards independence, particularly
concerning constitutional and legislative measures,
security conditions, the implementation of policies to
encourage economic and social development, the issue
of relations with Indonesia, East Timor’s closest and
historically most important neighbour, and steps taken
by both parties to build mutual relations.
We would express our appreciation to the
Indonesian Government for its determination to fulfil
its commitments and for the measures it has taken to
that end. In this regard, we believe that special
relations should be fostered between Indonesia and
East Timor, focusing on the best possible future for the
peoples of both countries.
We are satisfied at the increasing role being
played by the Administration in East Timor in
governing the daily affairs of that country. We also
express our appreciation for the encouraging results
achieved by the Administration in economic and social
development, particularly in generating income,
improving the situation of poverty and unemployment
and reforming the country’s infrastructure, while
stressing the need to focus on the role of women in
peace and development in East Timor.
We stress the references in the report to the urgent
need for resources to provide the necessary technical
support for the development of the judiciary and the

12

Police Service, as well as to international security
assistance, which has a crucial role to play in
promoting stability locally and regionally. We welcome
the
accelerated
return
of
refugees
despite
misinformation and propaganda campaigns and hope
that all obstacles in the way of the return of those
refugees will be eliminated.
We fully understand that the future of East Timor
can be guaranteed only by full reconciliation among all
Timorese. We believe that this is crucial to the stability
of the country. We also believe that development can
be achieved in East Timor through such national
reconciliation. The United Nations experience in East
Timor is a success story by any standards and we hope
that all the aforementioned efforts will be crowned
with success and ensure the best possible future for the
people of that country.
We support the recommendations in the report on
extending UNTAET’s mandate until the date of
independence on 20 May 2002 and on the successor
mission and its mandate to support the Administration
in the post-independence period. We also wish to
express our support for the independence of East
Timor. We wish the people of that emerging country
every success in the future.
Ms. O’Donnell (Ireland): I thank you, Sir, for
calling this open meeting today. I would like to
welcome our guests, Mr. Ramos-Horta, Senior Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of East Timor, and
Mr. Vieira de Mello, the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative. I am very pleased that the Prime
Minister of Australia, Mr. Howard, has addressed this
meeting. His presence and his important and committed
intervention this morning demonstrate the continuing
significance of international engagement on East
Timor, both for the country itself and for wider
regional reasons. Australia has played a critical role in
assuring the security that has facilitated the transition
of East Timor to independence.
Ireland associates itself fully with the statement
which will be delivered shortly by the representative of
Spain on behalf of the European Union.
This is the final time that the Security Council
will be asked to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET). The next time the Council takes action on
East Timor, it will be to decide on the successor United
Nations mission to work with the Government of an

S/PV.4462

independent East Timor. What a heart-warming thought
that is for all of us.
On this occasion, the Secretary-General has
recommended that the Council extend the mandate of
UNTAET until 20 May. Ireland is happy to support this
recommendation and we look forward to the SecretaryGeneral’s proposals for the important United Nations
post-independence presence. Ireland, of course, will be
represented in East Timor on 20 May. It will be a day
of great celebration and happiness indeed in Ireland.
We are watching in great admiration as the people
of East Timor progress towards independence. The
latest report of the Secretary-General on UNTAET
gives a clear sense of the real advances being made.
The setting of a date for the presidential election, the
establishment of an independence day and the solid
work of the Constituent Assembly are all welcome
signs of a political system that is very quickly finding
its feet. The Secretary-General’s report on the
development of the country’s public administration
points to important areas where the East Timorese
people have assumed ownership, particularly in the
education and health sectors. We note, too, that the
East Timorese people will also be taking a predominant
role in preparing and holding the election that will soon
decide the country’s first President.
A further development which Ireland strongly
supports is the recent swearing-in of the members of
the
Commission
for
Reception,
Truth
and
Reconciliation. We very much hope that the
Commission will be able to assist the people of East
Timor to achieve accountability through truth-telling
and healing through reconciliation. Its work will take
many years, but we believe it can be an important part
of the effort to forge a more stable future for the
country and, in due course, bring closure to the many
injustices of the past.
Also of critical importance is the relationship
between East Timor and Indonesia. We wish to see
both countries working to improve links and to resolve
outstanding bilateral issues, including the delineation
of the border and cooperation on bringing to justice
those responsible for serious crimes.
Today we mark further confident steps away from
the traumatic events of September 1999 in East Timor,
which followed the people’s decision by a large
majority to seek their future as an independent nation.
The firm conviction of the Security Council at that

time; the exceptional work carried out by United
Nations personnel over more than two years since; and
the bravery, perseverance and well-known resilience of
the East Timorese people have brought us to the point
where the Secretary-General can convey the positive
news contained in his recent report.
That said, Ireland is convinced of the need for a
strong United Nations role after independence.
Continuing United Nations involvement is contributing
importantly to the incremental advances being made in
East Timor, and we believe this involvement must be
maintained. We are very conscious that, because of the
terrible circumstances that arose following the popular
consultation of August 1999, the institutions of State
are being constructed from the very foundations up.
This presents enormous challenges and opportunities
for the people after independence — challenges and
opportunities which the international community,
including the United Nations, must assist them in
facing.
The Secretary-General has highlighted those
priority areas where the East Timorese Government
will require support and guidance until mid-2004. The
creation of a critical mass of indigenous administrative,
military and policing expertise will require further
support from the international community.
We are especially mindful of the size of the task
involved in building national defence and police
forces — all the more so for a new, small, developing
State which so recently suffered such violent
confrontations. We note the headway being made in
relation to the East Timor Defence Force and Police
Service, and we commend it, although we have to
expect this to be a gradual and incremental process.
We welcome also the fact that the SecretaryGeneral’s approach to future United Nations
involvement in East Timor remains consistent with the
strong proposals outlined last October. We agree that
this United Nations presence should be a robust one.
We also agree that, together with bilateral and other
multilateral arrangements, the United Nations can and
should play a major role in ensuring that the rewards
flowing from the hard work of UNTAET can be
maintained and increased for the benefit of the people
of East Timor.
Ireland is one of those already involved in a range
of development cooperation programmes in East
Timor. We have done so since 1999, and last year we

13

S/PV.4462

opened a representative office in Dili. Our experience
there has shown us that bilateral aid is crucial to the
future development of East Timor.
East Timor has already been identified by
Ireland’s development aid programme as a priority for
reconstruction and rehabilitation. Ireland Aid, which
has opened our office in Dili, is implementing an initial
country strategy designed to support the transition to
democracy and general rehabilitation activity in East
Timor. The field experience that is being acquired
through the implementation of this strategy will
provide the basis for the development of a full country
programme in due course.
Our experience on the ground has also shown us
that the unique dimension of the engagement of the
United Nations in the administrative and security tasks
is also still required. The Organization will have a vital
role in maintaining progress in East Timor towards an
effective Government and full independence for the
first time after four centuries of external rule.
In a matter of months, the Security Council will
consider the application of East Timor for membership
in the United Nations. The Council will, during the
coming period, have a unique opportunity to shape
positively the future of this new Member, in full
collaboration with its citizens. Ireland will do its level
best to ensure that after 20 May, the United Nations
presence is one that best suits the requirements of the
Government and people of East Timor. That is, we
believe, the best way to consolidate the progress that
the Organization and the people of East Timor have
built together.
Mr. Williamson (United States of America): I
would like to thank Mr. Vieira de Mello for his good
work and for his report this morning.
The briefing heard this morning illustrates yet
again that East Timor is on the right track. I take
advantage of the presence of Cabinet Minister RamosHorta to ask him to convey to the members of the
Constituent Assembly our commendations for the
progress they have achieved thus far in moving through
the difficult process of drafting a first constitution. At
the same time, I would urge them, all East Timorese
involved in the political process, and the United
Nations to stay on track for the elections in April and
independence on 20 May.

14

The United States supports a rollover of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) through May, as proposed in the
draft resolution we expect to approve tomorrow. In
April, once United Nations planning and East Timor’s
political developments become clearer, the Council
should begin work on a resolution establishing the
post-independence role of the United Nations, already
foreshadowed in the presidential statement we adopted
in October 2001.
I would like to reaffirm the support of the United
States for the successor mission concept, as discussed
in October and fleshed out more extensively in the
most recent report. At the same time, I would like to
stress that neither UNTAET nor a successor United
Nations mission can eliminate all the challenges that
face an independent East Timor, as with those that any
developing nation will face in meeting the needs of its
citizens and achieving economic prosperity.
United Nations peacekeeping is not a substitute
for, or a short cut around, the long-term development
process. In his most recent report, the SecretaryGeneral speaks of independence day, 20 May, as a new
starting point from which the international community
and an independent East Timor will need to forge a
new kind of partnership. We look forward to East
Timor’s moving into normal relationships with the
international community and assuming responsibility
for its own affairs, within the context of a decreasing
peacekeeping role and an increasing traditional
development framework. To get there, the United
Nations and the East Timorese need to work with the
widest range of bilateral donors, interested agencies
and non-governmental organizations to ensure that
other appropriate mechanisms of support are put in
place as the extraordinary measures financed through
peacekeeping assessments progressively diminish
within the next two years.
The United Nations must help this process by
staying on schedule with the downsizing it has set for
itself between now and independence, and I laud
Mr. Vieira de Mello for doing that so well. The
Organization must do so by carefully planning to move
from the independence day successor mission numbers
to a goal of zero peacekeeping finance support by mid2004.
We welcome ongoing efforts to reduce
UNTAET’s military force level to 5,000 by May, and

S/PV.4462

we support plans to downsize the United Nations
civilian police (CIVPOL), keeping the focus on
executive policing and the increasingly important work
of training the East Timor Police Service. The progress
made with the East Timor Police Service and Defence
Force is an example of how to move East Timor
towards
self-reliance,
transferring
operational
responsibilities to East Timorese authorities as quickly
as possible.
The United States pledges to continue its bilateral
support for East Timor, as well as its support within the
United Nations context. We also look forward to
working with an independent East Timor to help
develop the entrepreneurial and commercial activities
that will be crucial to its prosperity. And we look
forward to independence, not because of some
celebration, as there is too much work ahead to
celebrate too long, but because East Timor’s progress
is truly historic.
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Before I begin my
prepared text, I would like to make a few preliminary
observations.
We began our discussions this morning in this
Chamber with a very important meeting with
Mr. Karzai, the head of the Interim Authority in
Afghanistan. It is no secret that the United Nations
faces formidable challenges in Afghanistan, and none
of us knows what the results will be like. I mention this
because, if indeed we do succeed in East Timor after
having faced many serious challenges two years ago,
this success in one corner of Asia — the south-eastern
corner — will have, we hope, a ripple effect and also
contribute to the success of another, probably even
more challenging, assignment — the one that we are
taking on in Afghanistan.
We also want to join our colleagues, of course, in
paying tribute to Australia for the contribution it has
made to East Timor, and we certainly welcome the
important speech that was made by its Prime Minister
when he addressed us this morning.
We also welcome the presence of Ms. Liz
O’Donnell, Minister of State of Ireland, particularly
because Ireland’s contributions to East Timor have also
been exemplary.
We would like to begin by thanking the
Secretary-General for his excellent report. It is both
comprehensive and detailed, and it makes a strong case

for the way ahead for the United Nations role in East
Timor. We welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Sergio Vieira de Mello, and the
Senior Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
East Timor, José Ramos-Horta, back to the Council.
We thank Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello for his briefing,
which was, as usual, insightful and useful. We are
confident that Mr. Ramos-Horta’s briefing will be
equally insightful and useful. It might actually be
helpful if he could respond to some of the comments
made this morning, as part of a dialogue that we should
have with the East Timorese in the build-up to
independence.
We fully support the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET). East Timor today, standing at the
threshold of independence, is a very good example of
what the United Nations can achieve. Indeed, what the
United Nations has accomplished in East Timor is
remarkable by any standard. Indeed, it is hard to find a
good historical comparison. From scratch, the United
Nations has, in less than three years, helped to restore
peace and normalcy to a shattered land, nurtured a
nascent East Timorese Government and put in place a
democratic process that saw the peaceful and
successful elections of the country’s very first
Constituent Assembly. For this we must acknowledge
the efforts of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
and, of course, of our good friend Sergio Vieira de
Mello, as well as those of UNTAET and all of those
who have worked tirelessly to bring East Timor to
where it is today.
But — and I am glad that the Australian Prime
Minister also made this point — it is clear that the
United Nations has unfinished business in East Timor.
Despite the remarkable progress made since October
1999, there is still much of the United Nations mandate
that is left uncompleted. The Secretary-General, in his
latest report, stated that
“the comparative fragility of the political
foundations of this new country, its very limited
pool of professional and administrative expertise,
lack of strong independent security mechanisms
and nascent state of economic development mean
that East Timor will continue to require
significant assistance from the international
community well after independence, in order to
ensure stability and realize the potential for

15

S/PV.4462

progress that has been generated over the past
two years”. (S/2002/80, para. 4)
East Timor’s independence, therefore, does not
mark the end of the United Nations engagement in East
Timor. On the contrary, it signals the beginning of an
important new phase of United Nations involvement —
one where the United Nations and the international
community must make secure the gains achieved for a
lasting period.
Of course, it is not anyone’s intention that the
United Nations should linger on in East Timor for any
longer than necessary. We do believe that East Timor
needs a good exit strategy. But the United Nations
cannot ensure the continued success of its good work in
East Timor unless its Members are fully committed to a
smooth and successful transition. It is all too easy to
succumb to the mistaken persuasion that the United
Nations should disengage as rapidly as possible simply
because the situation in East Timor now appears to
have stabilized. This is an overly simplistic and
dangerous view. There are enough examples in recent
history to warn us of the dangers of precipitate exits,
for instance, Afghanistan — the subject of our first
meeting this morning — and Somalia.
Should the situation in East Timor unravel as a
result of the United Nations haste to depart, we will
again find that the cost of prevention would have been
much less than that of the cure. As I had pointed out at
our last meeting on this issue, in October 2001, what
the United Nations has achieved in East Timor has
come about only through hard thinking, shrewd
judgement, hard work, dedication and commitment. I
wish also to reiterate that we should never take this
success for granted, because it is a remarkable —
perhaps even exceptional — story. It is therefore the
Council’s job to continue to make the right decisions in
order to ensure that it gets the job in East Timor done
right today so that it does not have to return tomorrow.
How the United Nations handles East Timor after
independence will have wide-ranging consequences for
our region as a whole. East Timor’s future and that of
our region are inextricably linked. East Timor is,
therefore, for us and for others in the region, not just
another abstract agenda item but a question of vital and
immediate strategic importance. A stable East Timor
can contribute to the stability and security of the region
and complement the region’s efforts to prevail over the
political and economic problems it faces. It would be

16

remiss of us to let East Timor run the risk of becoming
a failed State. The stakes are too high, both for East
Timor and the region. The Council has recognized and
affirmed the need for a substantial international
presence in East Timor after independence. It must now
sustain and build on that momentum to ensure that the
United Nations effectively follows through on its
commitment to fulfil its responsibilities in East Timor.
The Secretary-General has put forward a set of
recommendations for the United Nations successor
mission in East Timor, and the Council broadly
endorsed those recommendations in an October 2001
presidential statement. With the renewal of UNTAET’s
mandate — which, as Ambassador Eldon said, the
United Kingdom and Singapore have worked on, and
which we hope will go through smoothly this week —
we now look forward to more specific proposals from
the Secretary-General on the follow-on United Nations
peacekeeping operation and to a thorough discussion of
these proposals in due course.
Finally, I wish to conclude by referring to a small
point that came up in the Council’s debate on East
Timor on 31 October last year — that is, the discussion
between France and Singapore on this issue. I am
pleased to inform the Council that France and
Singapore have had a healthy exchange of views on our
respective contributions to East Timor. We have agreed
that both countries have contributed significantly to the
territory, both in the early days of INTERFET as well
as in the period of UNTAET. We also agreed that
France and Singapore have a common interest in
ensuring that East Timor becomes a true success story
of the United Nations. France and Singapore will work
closely together to achieve this conclusion.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): First of all, I would like to
welcome Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and Mr. José
Ramos-Horta once again to the Council. We are very
much impressed by all of the work they have
undertaken. It seems to us that, in spite of the
challenges, East Timor is on the right track.
We are very encouraged by the continued
progress made. The United Nations is getting closer to
fulfilling the goals set forth by the Council in its
resolution 1272 (1999), and the downsizing of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) is on schedule. There is, however,
still some way to go, and the continued support of the

S/PV.4462

international community in fostering long-term security
and stability is therefore required.
East Timor is in the process of transforming itself
into an independent country. This places significant
challenges Before its leadership. During the Oslo
donors conference of December 2001, we were
encouraged to see the Transitional Government taking
the lead in the discussions and clearly displaying
ownership of the process. We have confidence in its
plans and strategies for the management of an
independent East Timor.
The drafting of the constitution is well under way,
and we trust that the popular consultation will further
contribute to a document establishing a unitary
democratic State based on the rule of law and the
principle of separation of powers. As far as the April
presidential elections are concerned, we are convinced
that UNTAET and the East Timorese will ensure that
they take place in a transparent and peaceful manner.
As we have repeatedly stated, Norway attaches
great importance to the instigation of criminal
proceedings against persons responsible for serious
crimes. We therefore welcome the first conviction for
crimes against humanity delivered by the Special Panel
for Serious Crimes last December, which clearly
demonstrates that such crimes will not go unpunished.
Another
fortunate
development
is
the
inauguration of the truth and reconciliation commission
earlier this month. As we have witnessed in other postconflict societies, the search for truth and
reconciliation is not a soft option, but a huge challenge.
However, this is the only way to freely and genuinely
move forward into the future as a united nation. In the
light of the financial constraints experienced by both
the Special Panel for Serious Crimes and the truth
commission, my Government will consider the
possibility of providing additional funds for these
processes.
We also welcome the recent appointment by the
Indonesian Government of the 18 judges to serve on
the ad hoc tribunals for serious crimes committed in
East Timor during 1999. We expect the trials to
commence shortly so that justice for the East Timorese
is served in a complete and holistic manner. Allow me
to add that we are pleased to note that the bilateral
relations between East Timor and Indonesia are
improving. This is crucial for the prosperous
development and the long-term stability of the region.

In addition to the assistance provided by the
United Nations through a successor mission to
UNTAET, East Timor will be in need of bilateral
development assistance in the crucial years following
independence. We are prepared to contribute our share
in this regard, and we urge other donors to live up to
their commitments as stated during the Oslo donors
conference.
We are impressed by the work done by the United
Nations, the World Bank, the International Monetary
Fund and the Transitional Government to develop
sustainable fiscal and development strategies for the
new nation. These are crucial steps in order to promote
a smooth United Nations exit and to foster long-term
stability. During the Oslo meeting, the Transitional
Government urged donors to provide budgetary support
for the years 2002 to 2005. Norway acknowledges the
need for such support, and we are confident that the
Government will establish the required modalities on
the recipient side.
As we have previously stated, Norway supports
the Secretary-General’s recommendations as to a
successor mission with military, civilian and civilian
police components, funded by assessed contributions.
We look forward to engaging in a more in-depth
discussion on the exact mandate and size of the
successor mission this spring.
Let me end by once again thanking the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative for the
excellent work done so far in East Timor. We support
the Secretary-General’s recommendation to extend the
mandate of UNTAET until 20 May 2002. We also very
much look forward to being present at the first donors
meeting to be held in Dili, as well as to the celebration
of independence on 20 May this year.
Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I also join in the expressions of appreciation extended
to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, particularly for the
excellent briefing and report he has given us on East
Timor’s process of independence and on the
participation and presence of the United Nations in that
country after 20 May 2002. I also wish to acknowledge
and welcome the presence of Mr. José Ramos-Horta,
Senior Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
East Timor. My country also appreciates the
participation of the Honourable John Howard, Prime
Minister of Australia, in this discussion, and we

17

S/PV.4462

welcome the presence of Ms. Liz O’Donnell, Minister
of State for Foreign Affairs of Ireland.
We join all those who, at this table and beyond it,
have expressed their views in support of maintaining
international cooperation to consolidate the peace
process that will lead to the emergence of a new
independent State, consistent with the will expressed
by the people of East Timor. The international
community and this Council should be very proud and
pleased when East Timor joins the international family
as an independent nation next May.
However, we believe that the months prior to the
official declaration of independence remain critical for
guaranteeing the stability and security of this new
State, particularly in the holding of presidential
elections next April. Therefore, we believe that the role
of the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) is fundamental for maintaining
the stability of the process and avoiding the emergence
of troubles onto the political scene.
Mexico welcomes the progress made by
UNTAET to lay the political foundations of a new
State. We commend that body’s contribution to national
reconciliation, the assistance afforded for the creation
of operational machinery to bring about a new
administration. The rule of law, the administration of
justice, respect for human rights, border security, the
advancement of the national reconciliation process and
the return of refugees in conditions of security and
dignity — those are all matters of special importance
that will require international support and priority
attention from the new Government. This international
support, we believe, should continue under the
leadership of the United Nations.
The prosperity of the new State will, in great
measure, depend on the efficiency, determination and
honesty with which justice is administered and with
which violence and crime in East Timor are suppressed
and punished.
We support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General contained in his report (S/2002/80),
both with respect to the extension of UNTAET’s
mandate and to its reconfiguration. We await with great
interest the detailed proposals of Secretary-General
Kofi Annan for UNTAET’s successor mission. We
believe that the presence of the United Nations
following the independence of East Timor should
continue to preserve the three key elements set forth in

18

the
Secretary-General’s
priorities:
a
military
component, a civilian police component and, of course,
a civilian component of support for the transition to the
new governmental administration. All of this should be
done within a time period that will not jeopardize the
stability and progress that have been achieved.
We reiterate our support for basing the successor
mission
on
the
principle
that
operational
responsibilities should be devolved to the East
Timorese authorities as soon as is feasible through an
ongoing process of mission assessment and downsizing
over a period of two years starting from independence.
Mexico believes that, in addition to taking
account of the views of the East Timor authorities,
countries that contribute troops to UNTAET should
also be consulted during the reconfiguration period
before and after independence. To ensure the success of
our exit strategy, their opinions must be taken into
account with respect both to the drawdown of troops
and to the situation on the ground. We hope that those
countries will contribute their experience to the
training of the East Timor Police Service, with a view
to ensuring a more secure environment.
Mexico believes, too, in the need for ongoing,
close dialogue between the new East Timor authorities
and Indonesia. Progress is needed on resolving pending
issues such as border delimitation including maritime
boundaries,
fighting
cross-border
crime
and
establishing a framework of political, economic and
educational cooperation that would bolster friendship
between the two nations.
In that context, Mexico hails the establishment of
an Ad Hoc Human Rights Court in Indonesia to deal
with violations that took place in East Timor in 1999.
The political will of the President of Indonesia was
reflected in her appointment of 18 judges, who will
join the 12 recommended by the Indonesian Supreme
Court. We hope that the work of the Human Rights
Court will progress with the speed warranted by the
situation.
As others have said at today’s meeting, East
Timor provides one of the best examples of the
possibility of putting together an integrated strategic
partnership to resolve a conflict in keeping with the
maintenance of international peace and security and,
beyond that, to make possible the orderly birth of a
new nation which, we hope, will become a proud, fullfledged Member of the United Nations. The presence

S/PV.4462

of the United Nations as a prominent actor in the
political process that will culminate in the emergence
of the new State has been facilitated by the experience
and technical capacity of the multilateral system as a
whole.
Cooperation between East Timor and the
international community must be tightened in order to
maintain stability, help remove threats to internal and
external security and, above all, promote the economic
and social development of East Timor. The efforts of
the United Nations system, and its advocacy and
coordination with the participation of other States, are
essential to promote public and private investment in
the economic development of East Timor. This
economic and social development and the well-being
and prosperity of the citizens of East Timor will be the
foundation of the independence and self-determination
of East Timor and the source of their viability.
Let me conclude, Mr. President, by thanking you
for the outstanding way in which you, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mauritius, have guided the work of
the Council.
The President: I thank the representative of
Mexico for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I welcome Mr. José Ramos-Horta and ask him
to convey our greetings to the other representatives of
the people of a State that we hope will very soon
become a Member of the United Nations. My special
thanks go to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello not only for
his excellent introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2002/80) but also for the fine
work that he and his team have done and are continuing
to do in East Timor. Their work is the basis of the
success that we are all hailing today.
As an associated State of the European Union,
Bulgaria fully supports the statement that the Spanish
presidency of the Union will make later today. I should
like now to make some very brief comments in my
national capacity. First, Bulgaria welcomes the
unquestionable success of East Timor for the United
Nations and the international community. That country,
with its nascent democracy, is on the right path. That is
not to minimize the enormous difficulties it will have
to confront. Others have spoken of these today: sources
of concern include the fragile security situation and the
question of the return of refugees.

But my delegation has no doubt that on 20 May a
new State and prospective Member of the United
Nations will be born. To be sure, the presidential
elections set for 14 April will be a moment of truth for
this nascent democracy. But 20 May will see the birth
of the new State. It is my country’s position that United
Nations involvement cannot cease on 20 May. The
challenges facing East Timor are of such magnitude
that we cannot afford to disengage the Organization
from that country at such a crucial moment in its
history.
Bulgaria believes that the United Nations must
deploy the full range of its agencies and its capacities
to foster true success in building the new State. In that
connection, the proposals of the Secretary-General set
out in the annex to his report (S/2002/80) are entirely
consistent with our wishes. These, of course, need to be
more clearly spelled out before independence.
Accordingly, Bulgaria will give its full support to
the draft resolution now being prepared. Here, we
thank the delegations of Singapore and of the United
Kingdom for their work. We shall vote in favour of
extending the mandate of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor until 20
May.
Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The tone of today’s discussion has, of course,
been set by the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on East Timor. We support the basic provisions
of the report and its conclusions, including the
recommendation to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) for a final period, to 20 May 2002.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s conclusion
that the people of East Timor and the international
community have reason to be proud, given everything
that they have achieved to date. We commend the work
done by UNTAET, carried out under the wise and
effective guidance of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Sergio Vieira de Mello, as well as
the progress achieved towards establishing statehood in
the territory through independence.
We welcome in particular the successful
Timorization of authority in the territory — in our
view, that is the only true path towards building an
independent, stable State. On the whole, we believe
that the United Nations has played a key role in
resolving the crisis in East Timor; now we must

19

S/PV.4462

envisage the evolution of the role of the Organization
within the international community’s post-conflict
presence in the new State. In this regard, we fully agree
with the approach set out by the representative of the
United States of America. We believe that the scale,
configuration and time frame for the future
international presence should be determined by
analysing the real needs of East Timor, as well as the
pace of developments in the situation on the island,
taking full account of the position of the Government
of the country.
We support in principle the idea that the overall
duration of the future mission should not exceed two
years. We are convinced that in helping to establish an
independent State we need to involve a broad spectrum
of organizations and agencies from within the United
Nations system. At the same time, regional structures,
international financial institutions and individual donor
countries should bolster the efforts of the United
Nations, which will have to play a coordinating role in
this process.
We also believe that as State structures are
established in East Timor, the international presence
should gradually be wound down. All of these
processes, including the transition from UNTAET to
the new form of the United Nations presence, should be
smooth and carefully regulated so that the
achievements of the United Nations in East Timor can
continue successfully.
In the light of the points that I have just made, we
support the thrust of, as well as the specific ideas
contained in, the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral. We pay tribute to the Secretariat and
UNTAET for the enormous amount of work that they
have done in developing ideas regarding the future
United Nations presence. In this context, however, we
must once again note that so far we have not been
given a unified, comprehensive concept of future
international assistance by the United Nations to East
Timor. We are focusing on that issue because we are
convinced that, without such a concept, the future
activities of the United Nations in East Timor will be
based, at best, on mere serendipity, rather than on well
calculated, long-term strategies.
It is clear to us that a responsible approach to this
matter would require not only expertise, but close
coordination of action with all the international players
that will be providing assistance to East Timor. We are

20

not talking about giving additional work to any United
Nations or international institutions; we are saying that
we need to ensure a well-organized, well-thought-out
division of labour between them, in accordance with
their relevant competences.
We hope that the Secretary-General’s detailed
proposals to the Security Council will be submitted in
good time — ideally by early April — so that the
Security Council can elaborate the mandate for the new
mission without undue haste, and thus help to foster a
smooth outcome to the situation after East Timor gains
independence.
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in
French): My delegation would like first of all to
congratulate Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for East
Timor, and to thank him for his very informative
statement. My delegation also welcomes the presence
at this Council meeting of the Prime Minister of
Australia, The Honourable John Howard; we would
like in particular to thank him for his important
statement, reflecting his country’s invaluable
contribution to the development of East Timor.
My delegation would like to extend a special
welcome to the Foreign Minister of East Timor. His
country will gain its independence on 20 May 2002; 20
May is also Cameroon’s national holiday. On 20 May
2002, therefore, our two countries will be celebrating.
In anticipation of that happy event, Cameroon, which
looks forward to welcoming East Timor to the great
family of the United Nations, would like to assure the
Minister of its desire to maintain relations of
confidence and close cooperation with his country.
On 31 October 2001 the Security Council
accepted the recommendation of the Constituent
Assembly to the effect that the independence of East
Timor should be proclaimed on 20 May 2002. My
delegation is impressed by the work that has been
accomplished since that time by the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
As the report of the Secretary-General states, important
progress has been made in the political sphere and
concrete results have been achieved in the complex
task of setting up a public administration for East
Timor. The situation with regard to security has
continued to improve, and policies favourable to
economic and social development are being
implemented.

S/PV.4462

We note some specific instances of those concrete
advances and results. The first is the holding on 14
April of the election of the first President of an
independent East Timor.
The second concrete, positive case in point is that
the constitution of a new State is being worked out, a
constitution that is establishing a unitary, democratic
State, based on the rule of law and the principle of the
separation of powers.
The third concrete, positive achievement is that
the administrative structures are being strengthened,
particularly with the creation of an Inspector General’s
Office, and measures are being undertaken by the
Timorese Government to accede to a number of
international instruments and organizations once
independence is declared.
The fourth positive example concerns the
repatriation of refugees. Cameroon welcomes the fact
that such repatriation is continuing. As Mr. Vieira de
Mello said earlier, there have already been 192,000
returns, with only 60,000 refugees remaining in West
Timor. We believe that in order to encourage the
process of repatriation, protection and follow-up
measures should be envisaged and enhanced. In this
respect, I join in the appeal made earlier by the United
Kingdom.
The fifth positive point concerns the relations
between East Timor and its neighbours. Cameroon has
been following this issue with the greatest interest,
since harmonious relations between Indonesia,
Australia and East Timor are of crucial importance for
this young State. We were reassured by the information
provided on future meetings to lay the foundations for
those relations and the prospect of the creation of a
South-West Pacific forum. We extend our best wishes
for success, in that regard, to the trilateral meeting of
26 February 2002 between Indonesia, Australia and
East Timor.
As we have seen, important advances have been
made that are inexorably leading to the independence
of East Timor. But the objectives that the Security
Council has set are still far from being achieved. It is
necessary to maintain a peacekeeping operation before
and after independence, and we add our voice in this
respect to the very eloquent argument made by the
Ambassador of Singapore for the United Nations to
remain in East Timor. He expressed with particular
eloquence the concerns and consequences to which we

would lay ourselves open in the event of an untimely
withdrawal.
We also think that the East Timor Public
Administration is still greatly dependent on the
resources of UNTAET for its operations. The
international community should therefore seek the
means to meet its needs after independence, lest too
great a downsizing of the means available for
government action become a destabilizing factor. In
that regard, we appreciate the plan for the successor
mission to UNTAET, which provides for the
maintenance of the United Nations peace mission to
ensure East Timor’s stability.
As for international assistance in the area of
development and poverty reduction, we welcome the
initiative undertaken by UNTAET and the United
Nations Development Programme to develop plans
with a view to proper management of the State’s
resources.
To conclude, Cameroon associates itself with the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that the
Security Council extend UNTAET’s mandate.
Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this meeting on the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), whose
success is cause for satisfaction for the international
community.
I take this opportunity to express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General for the high quality of his
report and to pay due tribute to Mr. Vieira de Mello for
the work he has accomplished within UNTAET.
My delegation welcomes the presence here at the
start of the meeting of Mr. John Howard, Prime
Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia, whose
country has made a substantial contribution to the
maintenance of peace and stability in East Timor.
I would also like to welcome Mr. Ramos-Horta,
Senior Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
East Timor, who is one of the tireless architects of the
East Timorese people’s struggle for self-determination.
The positive outcome in resolving the issue of
East Timor is to the credit of the international
community as a whole, and specifically the United
Nations. The efforts undertaken in the political,
economic, social, security and humanitarian areas are,

21

S/PV.4462

in the view of my delegation, invaluable and should be
encouraged.
Regarding the political aspect, my delegation
welcomes the discussion and approval of most of the
new draft constitution, and hopes that the discussion
will be concluded on time in order to enable its final
adoption.
We appreciate the dialogue under way between
East Timor, Indonesia and UNTAET. We encourage the
continuation of this dialogue in order to reach a final
settlement of all the problems that have not been
resolved. In this respect, my delegation anticipates with
interest the results of the high-level meetings planned
for February 2002.
My delegation expresses the wish that the
presidential elections and the declaration of
independence, to take place in April and May 2002
respectively, be carried out peacefully and
democratically.
My delegation also greatly appreciates the actions
taken to find a solution to humanitarian problems,
particularly with regard to refugees. In this respect, we
welcome the establishment of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation, which must be
supported.
With regard to security, we note with satisfaction
that reported crime remains low. However, vigilance
and deterrence measures must be maintained and
reinforced.
With regard to violence against women and
children, my delegation supports the proposal on
multisectoral interventions. We think that such
interventions could, within a complementary
framework, be coordinated by the Division for the
Advancement of Women of the United Nations
Secretariat, the United Nations Children’s Fund and the
United Nations Development Fund for Women.
The establishment in September 2001 of the
Planning Commission is an excellent initiative. It
should speed up the completion of the final version of
the National Development Plan. The international
community’s support is essential for the formulation of
a Land and Property Code, which will enable the
settlement of legal disputes and encourage investment.
My delegation supports the provisions of section
III of the report on UNTAET’s successor mission. We

22

especially endorse paragraph 75 of the report and urge
the international community to consolidate past
achievements by providing the necessary support of
financial and human resources.
We welcome the fact that planning by the
Integrated Mission Task Force continues at
Headquarters and by integrated planning teams in the
field. Coordination between these teams will make it
possible to elaborate strategies guaranteeing a better
follow-up by the United Nations Mission after
independence.
The drafting of laws and the establishment of
democratic institutions is one thing. Respect for them
is quite another. Progress towards democracy can be
strengthened
only
through
solid
educational
programmes for the East Timorese. That is why my
delegation suggests organizing an international donors’
conference, preferably before the declaration of
independence. Such a meeting would mobilize
resources and direct them to programmes that have
been previously selected.
My delegation supports the Secretary-General’s
initiative underlining that international assistance for
East Timor must be transformed as quickly as possible
into a more normal formula for development aid.
In conclusion, my delegation approves the
recommendation on the extension of UNTAET’s
mandate as indicated in paragraph 104 of the report.
We await with interest the Secretary-General’s
proposals for UNTAET’s successor mission after
independence.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank Mr. Vieira
de Mello for his comprehensive and encouraging
briefing. We also welcome the presence of Mr. John
Howard, the Prime Minister of Australia, and thank
him for his important statement. We also welcome the
Senior Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
East Timor, Mr. José Ramos-Horta, for his presence at
the Council’s meeting.
Since our last meeting on the situation in East
Timor, more progress towards independence has been
made. The East Timorese Public Administration
continues to play an increasing role in running the
daily affairs of the country. The defence and police
forces are developing according to schedule, and the
security environment is improving.

S/PV.4462

After the Constituent Assembly announced that
the formal declaration of independence would take
place on 20 May 2002, Mr. Vieira de Mello announced,
a few days ago, that the presidential election will be
held on 14 April. We hope and believe that, like the
election of the Constituent Assembly last August, the
presidential election will also be held in a free, fair and
orderly manner and that the outcome will be accepted
by all sides, which is extremely important for a smooth
transition and for lasting peace and stability after
independence.
We noted with satisfaction that the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), in the light of the development of the
situation, has reduced its presence there in a planned
manner.
We appreciate the huge amount of work done by
Mr. Vieira de Mello and UNTAET under his leadership
in helping the people of East Timor achieve
independence. We also admire the tireless efforts of the
people of East Timor aimed at controlling their own
destiny.
On the other hand, as pointed out by the
Secretary-General in his report, the situation in East
Timor is by no means all peace and prosperity. As a
nation State, it has only a very limited pool of
professional and administrative expertise, and it still
has some security problems. East Timor’s development
in all its aspects will continue to require international
assistance. Therefore, in order to ensure continued
stability and development in East Timor and the
successful completion of the United Nations Mission, it
is necessary to maintain an appropriate presence in
post-independence East Timor and to devise a
comprehensive and sophisticated exit strategy. This is
the consensus reached by the international community,
including the members of the Security Council.
The Secretary-General in his report has provided
a detailed description of the post-independence
international
presence,
which
includes
three
components: military, police and civilian. It proposes a
framework for UNTAET’s successor mission. We are
of the view that the Secretary-General’s analysis is
based on an objective assessment and that his proposals
are practical, since they provide us with a good basis
for our future work on the mandate and the
configuration of the successor mission. We support the
relevant proposals of the Secretary-General. We also

agree with his view that the successor mission needs to
ensure that all operational responsibilities are fully
transferred to the East Timorese authorities as soon as
is feasible without jeopardizing the stability and
progress achieved.
Finally, we can agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation of extending the present
mandate of UNTAET until 20 May 2002. We are
looking forward to the specific ideas and
recommendations of the Secretary-General regarding
the successor mission.
Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to express thanks for this
morning’s statement in this Chamber by His
Excellency John Howard, Prime Minister of Australia.
Australia has been at the forefront in supporting the
independence process in East Timor. We all recognize
this.
We also welcome Mr. José Ramos-Horta and the
Minister of Ireland, Liz O’Donnell. We are also
grateful for the information presented by Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, whom we congratulate once again for
the work he has done.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge the efforts
by the Indonesian Government aimed at cooperating
constructively in the solution of the problems in East
Timor. We express the wish that Indonesia and East
Timor will be able to develop mutually beneficial
neighbourly relations.
This morning, in this Chamber, we heard
Mr. Hamid Karzai, Chairman of the Interim
Administration of Afghanistan. Mutatis mutandis, I
believe that one can engage in a certain parallel
between the role of the Security Council and the
international community in the political processes of
both situations. Both cases are in the limelight of
international attention and there are great expectations
that the near future for both will be one of well-being,
prosperity and independence for their populations.
Both cases have undergone a process of transformation
in which the Security Council has played a critical role.
In both cases, hopes for a better future emerge from the
catharsis of having known violence. Both cases
represent the expectations as to what the international
community can and should do to create a better world.
In East Timor, the countdown has begun. The
Constituent Assembly decided that direct elections

23

S/PV.4462

should be held to choose the first President of East
Timor on 14 April 2002. That date is only 73 days from
today. The Constituent Assembly finished the process
of considering the draft Constitution, and subsequently,
20 May was chosen as the date of independence for
East Timor. That ceremony will enjoy the presence of
numerous presidents and heads of State, as well as
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, thus marking the great
significance of that occasion and its truly historic
import. I would like to suggest that we seek a
mechanism so that the Security Council can be
represented at that ceremony through its President,
which at that time will be Singapore, or through the
presence of one of its highest-ranking members.
Following the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral in the report before us, the Council members
have decided to wait for his next report in order to take
a decision with respect to the successor mission.
However, I would like to offer a few comments based
on our view on this matter.
First, we firmly believe that the international
community must continue supporting East Timor after
independence in order to consolidate the process and
not jeopardize the excellent work done by UNTAET in
preparing the new East Timorese Administration.
Secondly, we support the basic components of the plan
for the successor mission, which proposes a
continuation of the United Nations peacekeeping
operation, appropriately downsized, including military,
civilian police and small civilian components and a
group of experts to provide assistance to the new
Administration in East Timor. It is clear that the new
Administration will need to be consistent with these
proposals.
Thirdly, we would stress that all the operational
responsibilities must be transferred to the East
Timorese authorities, taking due care not to endanger
stability and the progress achieved. This is a critical
stage. It will be necessary to be on the alert and to
evaluate each step in order to avoid setbacks in the
process.
Finally, we reiterate that there cannot be full
reconciliation unless those responsible for atrocities are
brought to justice. To that end, progress must be made
without delay.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I was
just saying to my neighbour and friend, Ambassador
Franco, that he took the words right out of my mouth. I

24

wanted to congratulate you, Mr. President, for having
organized this morning two debates that are two
important symbols of the role that the United Nations
can play in helping peoples in dire straits to affirm
their rights and achieve their aspirations. It is fortunate
that we had these debates one after the other this
morning. I do not want to extend this parallel further,
because Ambassador Franco said this in Spanish and
made the point better than I could in French.
I, too, would like to say how much we
appreciated the presence of Prime Minister John
Howard at this table, and I pay tribute to the role that
Australia has played throughout this great adventure in
East Timor since the very first days of the International
Force in East Timor (INTERFET). As was the case in
previous meetings, I would like to warmly welcome
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, and I thank him for his
usual clear, precise briefing. It has perfectly covered
the outstanding work done by the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
under his effective, inspired guidance.
I would also like in the most warm and friendly
way to once again welcome to this table our friend José
Ramos-Horta, the East Timorese Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation. The success of the transition
to independence owes a lot to him; it was he, in fact,
who was, and remains, the architect of the integration
of the future independent East Timor into the regional
environment. In the space of just a few months, he has
successfully presided over the normalization of
relations with the Government of Indonesia and, in
particular, relations with President Megawati.
Later in this debate a statement will be made on
behalf of the European Union. France fully supports
that statement, and as we are one of the last speakers in
this debate, I will limit myself to just a few comments.
Today’s debate is occurring at a turning point in
the history of Timor. UNTAET will continue its
mandate until 20 May, independence day. A resolution
will be adopted tomorrow for that purpose. UNTAET
will thus confirm what has been unanimously
welcomed as one of the great success stories in the
history of the United Nations.
UNTAET has, in exemplary fashion, discharged
the various elements of its mandate. The political and
administrative transitions are taking place smoothly;
security has now been established throughout the
territory; the process of reconciliation is well under

S/PV.4462

way; and, finally, the conditions for economic revival
are now present, and the first figures attest to this fact.
But the history of East Timor does not stop there, of
course. Another success story remains to be written:
that of the post-independence period. The logic of this
will be different, as the Secretary-General stressed in
paragraph 101 of his report:
“it is important that international assistance to
East Timor revert to a normal development model
as soon as feasible”.
The form of the future international presence has
been largely drafted. It seems satisfactory, with a twoyear time frame, a civilian presence geared towards
some key needs of the Timorese Administration, and a
military presence which will be gradually reconfigured
in order best to meet the needs of the Timorese: 5,000
men on independence day, and after that it will be
undoubtedly between 2,500 and 3,000.
All these issues will be addressed in the next
report of the Secretary-General, scheduled to be issued
in April following the Timorese presidential elections.
After that, our Council will adopt a resolution that will
be of particular importance because it will establish the
integrated United Nations mission. In this context, we
deem it desirable for our Council to hold its next
debate in the presence of representatives of the United
Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund, as it has done
repeatedly in the past.
A threefold partnership should be established,
first, among the United Nations bodies, in which the
General Assembly would have an important role to
play in formulating peace-building strategies; secondly,
between the Security Council and the troop
contributors, which must be properly consulted, in
accordance with the innovative formula contained in
resolution 1353 (2001), in private meetings with the
Council; and, finally, between the Security Council and
the other stakeholders, including such international
financial institutions as the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank; such regional organizations
as the Association of South-East Asian Nations and the
Asian Development Bank; bilateral donors and private
corporations. We must establish global partnerships,
pursuant to the wishes of Secretary-General Kofi
Annan.
In a word, in conclusion, we must all together
pursue our efforts to ensure that independent East

Timor is and remains a fine example of the successful
establishment of a State in accordance with the wishes
of its people and with the decisive support of the entire
international community.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Mauritius.
The important statement made this morning by
the Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia,
The Honourable John Howard, shows the interest
which East Timor’s neighbour takes in its future. Let
me, on behalf of my Government and on my personal
behalf, congratulate Mr. Ramos-Horta, Senior Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, and the people of
East Timor for the considerable progress achieved on
the path to independence. We wish to assure him of our
full cooperation.
I join other delegations also in thanking
Mr. Vieira de Mello, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for the comprehensive briefing he
gave this morning.
I would also like to express my profound
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his valuable
report.
My delegation echoes the appreciation and
satisfaction expressed by other delegations for the
positive developments in East Timor. We commend the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
outstanding leadership. His exemplary efforts and
excellent work deserve all our gratitude and praise. We
also extend our gratitude to the entire staff of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) for preparing the newly born State
for a peaceful and smooth transition to independence.
The United Nations justly deserves all the merit
for conducting a successful operation in East Timor
and to take credit for this historic success. The painful
past is gone and the people of East Timor must derive
immense satisfaction from the thought that their quest
for
self-determination
was
legitimate
and
unquestionable. We must now look to the future with
hope and determination that East Timor will emerge as
a full-fledged nation ready to assume its rightful place
in the international community and to chart a way for
the welfare, development and prosperity of all the
people of East Timor. Mauritius has been closely
associated with the liberation struggle of the East
Timorese people and it is with a great sense of

25

S/PV.4462

satisfaction that we welcome the successful outcome of
that struggle. As a small island State, we are happy that
another island State of similar size will be joining the
United Nations family.
My delegation is pleased to learn that the
Assembly is in the process of reviewing the draft
constitution, which will lead the island to a unitary
democratic State based on the rule of law, the principle
of separation of powers and all the institutions that
foster an accountable and responsible Government. We
are happy to note that the Timorization process in the
economic and administrative sectors is also on the right
track.
Like other members, Mauritius fully supports the
recommendations of the Secretary-General on the
renewal of UNTAET’s mandate until 20 May 2002. In
view of the success achieved so far, there is no scope
or room for any mistake. It is the duty of the United
Nations to ensure that everything is done to complete
the process in time. Nothing should jeopardize this
process. If we are to consolidate our gains and realize
the legitimate aspirations of the East Timorese to
attaining statehood, we must ensure that the transition
is seamless, smooth and obstacle-free.
At this juncture, East Timor needs assistance at
all levels in order to instil confidence in the people and
to encourage them to forge ahead in shaping the
destiny of their own country in accordance with their
culture, tradition and political history. It is therefore
essential that international assistance to East Timor
revert to a normal development level as soon as
feasible.
The United Nations, with the help of UNTAET,
has given birth to a nation. The international
community should now continue nurturing it and
prepare the small island nation to operate as a viable
State. This is the crucial phase in the political history
of any country, especially a newborn one. We must
therefore ensure the success of the new State by
maintaining security and by building a sustainable
administrative and economic base, as mentioned in
paragraph 98 of the Secretary-General’s report. It is
extremely important that East Timor continue to
benefit for some time to come, especially after its
independence, from United Nations assistance in the
form of civilian expertise in various fields of
administration and other sectors.

26

We are happy to learn that the presidential
election is scheduled for 14 April. We hope that the
maturity shown in the election last August will
continue to prevail and that democracy will be given
another positive push forward in East Timor.
It is undeniable that peace and stability hinge on
the level of security in any State. The risk of both
political and criminally driven violence should at all
costs be avoided. It is therefore important for
competent and adequate police units and law
enforcement officers to establish and maintain law and
order. We note with satisfaction that training
programmes for civilian police, as well as for the East
Timor Defence Force, are being accelerated.
My delegation also appreciates the fact that the
rate of refugee returns has increased and that nearly
7,000 refugees returned to East Timor over the past
period, bringing the total returns to 192,000. We hope
that those remaining in the camps of West Timor will
soon join their fellow brothers and sisters in
independent East Timor. We believe that the voluntary
returnees need necessary assistance and support for
rehabilitation and should be given the opportunity to
serve their country in any appropriate capacity. We call
on the international agencies and bilateral donors to
continue supporting the rehabilitation programme in a
sustained manner.
The significant and historical achievement in East
Timor would not have been possible without the
unflinching support of the Government of Indonesia.
We highly commend the consistent and continuous
dialogues between Indonesia and UNTAET/East Timor,
paving the way to peaceful coexistence. We applaud
the initiatives of the Indonesian Government to hold
talks at the ministerial level with UNTAET/East Timor,
aimed at providing an appropriate forum to reassess
and build upon the progress achieved and to explore
ways and means of resolving any outstanding matters.
We note the issue of the presidential decree of 12
January regarding the appointment of 18 judges to the
Ad Hoc Human Rights Court and the recent talks held
between Indonesian and East Timorese justice officials
with a view to promoting legal and judicial cooperation
between the two sides. We welcome the ongoing
discussions at the level of the Joint Border Committee
on the question of the Tactical Coordination Line. We
hope that this issue will be addressed as soon as
possible to the satisfaction of both parties.

S/PV.4462

My delegation welcomes the formal setting up of
the East Timorese Commission for Reception, Truth
and Reconciliation last Monday. Like the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission in South Africa, this
Commission will serve as an important forum for
undoing the wrongs and paving the way for a clean
Administration. We welcome the appointment of seven
Timorese commissioners and we wish them all the best
in their new responsibilities. We are grateful to the
multilateral and bilateral donors for their pledges and
we encourage them to continue supporting the
Commission.
The moment has come for the Security Council to
send an unequivocal signal to the people of East Timor
and to the international community that a rightly sized,
strong and continued presence of the United Nations
will have to be maintained for a period of two years
from the date of independence to ensure the stability of
East Timor. In this regard, we endorse the plan for a
successor mission providing for a continued and
appropriately reduced United Nations peacekeeping
mission in the post-independence era. The mandate
outlined in the annex to the report is pragmatic and
realistic.
There is no doubt that East Timor will emerge as
a strong, viable and prosperous nation with the
assistance of the international community, and that it
will stand ready to shoulder its responsibilities on its
own after the departure of the successor mission.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Mr. José Ramos-Horta, Senior
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of East
Timor.
Mr. Ramos-Horta: I am very grateful for the
opportunity to share once again with the members of
the Council our views on the situation in East Timor.
Before proceeding further, I would also like to
note and express my sincere appreciation for the
presence at the meeting this morning of the Prime
Minister of Australia, John Howard. His presence here
underlines Australia’s commitment not only to the
United Nations and international cooperation, but also,
and in particular, to the people of East Timor. The
Australian Government and people have been very
generous and committed in a multidimensional way to
the well-being of East Timor, providing for their needs

with regard to security, economic well-being,
reconstruction and so on. We are very touched that the
Prime Minister of Australia took the time to be here
this morning.
We would also like to express our sincere
appreciation to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and to the
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Ireland,
Ms. Liz O’Donnell, for their presence. We wish to ask
the delegation of Ireland to convey to the Minister our
sincere appreciation, and to ask the Australian
delegation to convey to the Prime Minister our most
sincere appreciation, for their presence.
In addition, we bring to the members of the
Council the warmest greetings of Mr. Xanana Gusmão;
Mr. Mari Alkatiri, Chief Minister; and the two Bishops
of East Timor, Monsignors Carlos Belo and Basílio do
Nascimento.
I would like to express to you, Mr. President, our
special appreciation for your country’s role over the
years in support of our struggle for self-determination.
We have a particular admiration for the way Mauritius
has succeeded in building its economy and a multiethnic society into a prosperous country. Mauritius has
managed to develop its economy from one based
largely on agriculture to a healthy, middle-income,
diversified economy with growing industrial, financial
and tourism sectors. I hope that East Timor will be able
to follow that example. Perhaps with Mauritius’s help,
we will succeed in doing so.
Since I last addressed the Council, much has
happened in East Timor. I can only add that we can
verify positive news in many sectors, notably in the
security sector. As Sergio Vieira de Mello reported,
there have been hardly any incidents along the border
between East and West Timor; the last reported
incident occurred in June last year. Credit for this is
due partly to the Indonesian authorities, who have
taken a firmer stand in disarming the militias and also
in encouraging and supporting the return of the
refugees to East Timor.
Because Sergio Vieira de Mello made such a
comprehensive statement, I believe that most of the
content of the speech I had prepared has already been
covered. Therefore, I will share informally with the
Council some of my personal observations on the
situation in East Timor.

27

S/PV.4462

First, I would like to respond to a comment by the
representative of the United Kingdom. We take it that
what he suggested is that the development plan we are
trying to put in place be made available to the donor
countries in a timely manner, before the donors
conference. We will do our best to see that each donor
country has the document well in advance of the
conference.
The process of designing a blueprint for the
economic development of East Timor is quite a unique
experiment in our country. It is probably one of the few
exercises in national planning and development in
which civil society, represented by the churches, nongovernmental organizations and intellectuals, have the
opportunity, together with the Government, to reflect
on the priorities and needs of the country before such a
development plan is approved and implemented. That
is what we are trying to do in East Timor. The process
is a partnership between the United Nations, the World
Bank, the United Nations Development Programme,
the East Timorese Government and a civil society
commission, led by Mr. Xanana Gusmão himself.
As I mentioned earlier, the rate of reported crime
in East Timor continues to be among the lowest in the
world. In a recent conversation, the Police
Commissioner of East Timor reported that throughout
2001 there were only four reported cases of murder,
none of which was politically motivated. This is in a
country where unemployment is very high and poverty
is rampant — a country still recovering from the
trauma of past violence.
However, one area that is not encouraging is that
of domestic violence, in particular against women. East
Timorese leaders are puzzled that our society was able
to conduct itself with great civility during the election
process in July and August, without a single violent
incident, and that the crime rate is among the world’s
lowest, while the rate of domestic violence is
surprisingly high. Perhaps this increase actually
reflects the higher rate at which such crimes are now
reported in the police and justice system, and that
domestic violence had existed previously but had gone
unreported. With a dynamic press in East Timor today,
with institutions and with more trust in the police and
justice system, women are coming forward to report
cases of violence. We will work hard in the coming
days, weeks and months to eradicate this shameful
aspect of our reality in East Timor.

28

We are very pleased at some developments in the
preparation of our police force. There are now 1,400
trained police officers deployed all over East Timor.
Their presence throughout the election process in July
and August, in particular on the day of the election, 30
August last year, was very illustrative of the successful
preparation of the East Timor Police Service. However,
this is also the case with the East Timor Defence Force.
The East Timorese people are very proud of the fact
that today we have a battalion that was competently
and professionally trained by Portugal and Australia,
with significant contributions from New Zealand, the
Republic of Korea and the United States.
Recently, the naval component of our Defence
Force took possession of two modified Albatross patrol
boats donated by Portugal. We do not intend,
obviously, to have a navy. The need for these boats is
very clear. We are an island; we have a large economic
zone; we have rampant illegal fishing in our waters;
and we also have an obligation to contribute to the
region in terms of preventing piracy, human smuggling,
drug trafficking and so on. Thus we are making
enormous efforts to try to set up a modest navy
component to control our waters.
Although the downsizing of the peacekeeping
force is a positive indicator of our progress — as has
been mentioned, by May there will be no more than
5,000 members of the peacekeeping force in East
Timor — we are still concerned, and here we have to
be realistic, about the ability of some former militia
elements to destabilize the country. We are thus very
pleased with the proposal made by the SecretaryGeneral in his report to continue the present
peacekeeping force and civilian police in East Timor
for some time to come.
There has been much progress also on the
refugee-return front. There are still 40,000 to 70,000
refugees living in camps in West Timor. Mr. Vieira de
Mello’s assessment is an accurate one in terms of the
reasons why there are still so many thousands of
refugees in West Timor. There are still some rumours
circulating about retaliation against refugees when they
return, which is absolutely untrue. In the past two
years, since 2000-2001, there have been four or five
reported cases of returning refugees being assassinated
out of the almost 200,000 who have now returned. We
are doing our best to educate and inform our people in
West Timor about the reality in the territory.

S/PV.4462

On the question of justice and reconciliation, it
has been widely reported that last week members —
National Commissioners — of the East Timorese
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
were sworn in. This is an important task. They have an
enormous responsibility to establish the truth about the
human rights violations that occurred between 1974
and 1999. We emphasize that the Commission will look
back as far as 1974, before Indonesian intervention in
East Timor. Crimes did not occur only after Indonesian
intervention in East Timor.
I have said repeatedly that the East Timorese side
must have the courage and humility to acknowledge
our own responsibility for the tragedy that befell our
people. It would be far too easy to look only at the
alleged crimes and the violence that took place after
1975. So from the very beginning we have argued that
the work of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
should go back to 1974.
We are also optimistic and pleased with the work
of the Serious Crimes Panel. Although it had major
problems with funding and personnel, the Panel has
done outstanding work in terms of indictments and
charges. Some have argued — and if we believe my
friend Sergio Vieira de Mello’s propaganda — it has
been more successful than better-funded war crimes
tribunals elsewhere, in the Balkans and so on.
Although it started with enormous difficulties, such as
lack of funding and of resources, the work of the
District Court that handles serious crimes has been
very impressive in this regard.
The Constituent Assembly, as the Council is
aware, has 12 politically active parties. We started off
with 16 parties. In a country of 900,000, we managed
to have 16 political parties. The United States, with
almost 300 million, has two political parties. France
has, I think, five or six political parties. But in East
Timor we had 16. During my travels around the
country, our people asked me why we had so many
political parties in such a small country. We blame it on
Sergio Vieira de Mello and on the United Nations, but
we told our people that they themselves were the best
judges, that on 30 August, they would go to vote; that
some parties would survive and others would not; and
that in the years to come, some would emerge and
many more would disappear. The people handed down
their verdict: on 30 August, only 12 parties survived.

The system devised by the United Nations in East
Timor was, in retrospect, the best one, in that it
favoured the smaller parties as well. Without that
system of proportional representation, there would not
have been 12 parties. We would not have such an
inclusive, multiparty representation in the Parliament.
We were worried that, with so many political
parties, the Constituent Assembly would be bogged
down in endless debate. But so far the work of that
Assembly has been, for the most part, going smoothly.
We are taking the advice of our friends from around the
world in improving the draft that has now been
concluded. We are allowing one extra month, so that
we can get more input from the people throughout the
district. We are listening to the comments and
criticisms of our friends, so that our very first
Constitution in 500 years will be a model one —
something of which we can really be proud.
On 14 April, we will be holding the presidential
elections. In most countries, there is never a lack of
candidates. In our country, we have to try to persuade
people to run for President. So far we have only one
known candidates, but we hope that there will be at
least two or three more.
I should now like to refer to relations between
East Timor and Indonesia. Sergio Vieira de Mello
already spoke in detail about some aspects of the
question. I should like simply to add that, in the history
of decolonization, seldom has there been, in post-war
relations between two countries that separate from each
other, such a quick process of reconciliation and
normalization of relations. In some cases it has taken
generations to heal the rift between some newly
independent colonies and the former colonial powers,
and in some cases it has taken many years for even
formal relations to be established.
In this regard, we can say, with a sentiment of
enormous friendship towards Indonesia, that the
Indonesian side has shown its maturity and its grandeur
in also putting the past where it belongs and in forging
a new relationship with East Timor. If we remember
the past 25 years, then we will understand the
remarkable success that the two sides have achieved.
This, in large measure, is also a tribute to our brothers
and sisters in Indonesia. We are also grateful to
Australia and Indonesia for inviting East Timor to be
part of the South-West Pacific forum, which is yet

29

S/PV.4462

another indication of the willingness on the part of
Indonesia and Australia to embrace East Timor.
On the issue of justice and accountability for
others in Indonesia responsible for the violence in East
Timor, we are encouraged by the steps taken so far by
the Government of President Megawati Soekarnoputri.
In the wider region, our neighbours of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN)
continue to offer very important support to East
Timor’s reconstruction and development, capacitybuilding and security. We have now initiated formal
contacts with our ASEAN neighbours and the ASEAN
secretariat, hoping that East Timor will be able to sign
the ASEAN Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in SouthEast Asia on independence day or soon after that.
I would also like to mention that on the day after
our independence, on 21 May, we will be hosting in
Dili, for the first time, a meeting of the heads of State
and
Government
of
the
Portuguese-speaking
community. Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, GuineaBissau, Mozambique, Sao Tome and Principe and
Portugal have been with us for the past quarter of a
century. On 21 May 2002, East Timor will formally
join the Community of the Portuguese-Speaking
Countries.
We are also working hard in the process of
identifying international treaties to which East Timor
should accede once it attains independence. The
Foreign Ministry is working in close consultation with
other Ministries, the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor and United Nations
agencies to prioritize and prepare the necessary steps.
It is our intention, at independence or shortly
thereafter, that East Timor will accede to the greatest
possible number of international human rights treaties.
In this regard, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation is closely watching the drafting of the
Constitution to ensure that nothing in the Constitution
violates any of the treaties to which East Timor is
likely to become a party. As Sergio Vieira de Mello
mentioned, we want East Timor to join the United
Nations as soon as possible, either on the first day of
independence or soon thereafter.
Planning for independence is under way.
Celebrations will take on 20 May. The SecretaryGeneral has invited all countries around the world to
attend. We hope that all will attend, but if everyone

30

actually attends, that could pose the worst logistic
nightmare for East Timor, because we are not exactly
Mauritius or Fiji or Namibia, with infrastructures. But,
at the same time, we would like everybody to respond
positively to the Secretary-General’s invitation. We
would not go so far as to say to bring sleeping bags and
lunch boxes, but we will do our best to welcome
everyone, in our poverty and modesty, but with the
greatness of the hearts of the people of East Timor.
A great deal has been achieved in the very short
time of two years, since UNTAET was put in place.
Anyone who visited East Timor in 1999 or 2000 would
be amazed at the progress we have made.
Reconstruction has begun. Family houses are being
rebuilt everywhere. New shops are opening all the
time. Agricultural output has reached the level of 1999,
and more children are now enrolled in schools than
before 1999. In 2001 we enjoyed 18 per cent economic
growth in real terms. The previous year we posted 15
per cent growth. However, economic growth will slow
down considerably in the course of this year.
We are confident, nevertheless, that East Timor
will have a viable, sustainable economy. Reference was
already made to the potential revenues from oil and
gas. Tourism will also thrive once we have created the
necessary infrastructures. But in the short term, East
Timor will need the Council’s assistance, and we ask,
on behalf of the second Transitional Government and
the entire country, that this Council endorse the
concept of a successor mission, which has been
carefully thought out and planned by my UNTAET
colleagues. In this way, the gains that have resulted
from the Council’s tremendous commitment to East
Timor will be consolidated and maintained in the
crucial years to come.
The President: It is now 1.35 p.m. I think it is an
appropriate time to break for lunch. But I wish, before
we suspend the meeting, to remind all remaining
speakers that we have a very heavy workload in the
Security Council today. We have to complete
consideration of East Timor and also the special
meeting that we started yesterday on Africa. We also
have consultations on the Middle East. So I will urge
all remaining speakers to be as brief as possible in
order to enable us to complete our work for today. We
will resume at 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.35 p.m.
