General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

106

ANNEX

2. The University shall derive its revenues from voluntary contributions made by Governments, by intergovernmental organizations
and by foundations and other non-governmental sources, and from
tuition and related charges.
3. The University may decide freely on the use of the financial
resources available to it for the execution of its functions, in accordance with financial regulations formulated and approved by the
Council.

International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade
CONTENTS
Paragraph.,

Sectwn

I.

Preamble.

1:16

Article /9

II.

Goals and objectives

17-51

Amendments

111.

Policy measures

52-168

I. Amendments to the present Charter which are compatible with
the basic aims and purposes of the University and with the International Agreement for the Establishment of the University for Peace
may be proposed to the Council by:
(a)

A Stale party to the Agreement:

(b)

The Rector;

(c)

Any other member of the Council.

2.

Amendments shall require a two-thirds majority of the members of the Council for adoption.
3. The States parties to the International Agreement for the Establishment of the University for Peace shall be notified without delay
if any amendment to the Charter is adopted by the Council.

A

International trade

B.

lndustriali,alion ..

72-80

C

Food and agriculture

81-95

D.

Financial resources for development

96-114

E.

International monetary and financial issues

115

F.

Technical co-operation

116

G.

Science and technology for development ..

117-125

H.

Energy .

126-127

Transport

128-133

Economic and technical co-operation among
developing countries

134-135

K

Least developed countries, most seriously affected countries, developing island countries and
land-locked developing countries . .

136-155

L.

Environment .

156-158

M

Human settlements

159-160

N.

Disaster relief

0.

Social development

Appendix to the Charter
General principles formulated by the Commission on the University for
Peace established by the General Assembly pursuant to its resolution
34 / 111 of 14 December I 979
I. The persistence of war in the history of mankind and the growing threats against peace in recent decades jeopardize the very existence of the human race and make it imperative that peace should no
longer be viewed as a negative concept, as the end of connict or as a
simple diplomatic compromise, but rather that it should be achieved
and ensured through the most valuable and most effective resource
that man possesses: education.
2.

IV.

52-71

161
162-168

Review and appraisal of the implementation of the
new International Development Strategy..

169-180

Peace is the primary and irrevocable obligation of a nation and

the fundamental objective of the United Nations: it is the reason for its
existence. However, the best tool for achieving this supreme good for
humankind, namely education, has not been used.
3. Many nations and international organizations have attempted
to attain peace through disarmament. This effort must be continued:
yet facts show that man should not be too optimistic as long as the
human mind has not been imbued with the notion of peace from an
early age. It is necessary to break the vicious circle of struggling for
peace without an educational foundation.
4. This is the challenge that now faces all nations and all men as
the twenty-first century approaches. The decision must be made to
save the human race, which is threatened by war, through education
for peace. If education has been the instrument of science and
technology, there is all the more reason to use it to achieve this
primary right of the human being.

35/56.

International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade

The General Assembly
l. Proclaims the Third United Nations Development Decade, starting on I January 1981;
2. Adopts the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade, as
set forth in the annex to the present resolution.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December I 980

I.

PRLAMBl.E

I. In launching the Third United Nations Development Decade,
starting on I January 1981, Governments rededicate themselves to the
fundamental objectives enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. They reaffirm solemnly their determination to establish a new
international economic order. To this end, they recall the Declaration
and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order"' of the sixth special session of the General
Assembly, the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States," and
the resolution on development and international economic cooperation'" adopted hy the Assembly at its seventh special session,
which laid down the foundations for the establishment of the new internatianal economic order.
2. The adoption of the International Development Strategy for the
Second United Nations Development Decade" was an important step
in the promotion of international economic co-operation for development. However, the limitations of a strategy, when conceived within
the framework of the existing system of international economic relations, soon became obvious. Inequities and imbalances in these relations are widening the gap between developed and developing countries, constitute a major obstacle to the development of the developing
countries and adversely affect international relations and the promotion of world peace and security. Midway through the Decade, the
world community called for a fundamental restructuring of international economic relations and embarked upon its quest for a new international economic order.
3. The goals and objectives of the International Development
Strategy for the Second Development Decade remain largely unfulfilled. In addition, the present negative trends in the world economy
"' Resolutions 320 I (S-YI) and 3202 (S-YI).
'"•Resolution 3281 (XXIX).
"Resolution 3362 (S-VII).
''' Resolution 2626 (XXV).

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

have adversely affected the situation of developing countries and. as a
result, have impaired their growth prospects. Developing countries
have been hit particularly hard by the continuing economic crisis owing to the greater vulnerability of their economies to external factors.
The present difficult international economic environment has particularly aggravated the special problems facing the least developed
countries and other developing countries, particularly those in the
special categories, where development needs and problems are
greatest, and the poorest sections of the population. The stark reality
confronting mankind today is that close to 850 million people in the
developing world are living al the margin of existence-enduring
hunger, sickness, homelessness and absence of meaningful employment.
4. The international economy remains in a state of structural disequilibrium. It is characterized by a slower growth rate accompanied by
a continuing trend of high inflation and unemployment, prolonged
monetary instability, intensified protectionist pressures, structural
problems and maladjustment and uncertain long-term growth
prospects. In an interdependent world economy. these problems cannot be solved without resolving the particular problems facing the
developing countries. Furthermore, accelerated development of
developing countries is of vital importance for the steady growth of the
world economy and essential for world peace and stability.

5. The current difficulties should not deter the world community
from the imperative to restructure international economic relations.
The challenge of development calls for a new era of effective and
meaningful international co-operation for development responsive to
the needs and problems of the developing countries.
6. The International Development Strategy for the Third United
Nations Development Decade is an integral part of the continuing efforts of the international community to accelerate the development of
developing countries and to establish a new international economic order and is directed towards the achievement of its objectives. These call,
in particular, for equitable, full and effective participation by developing countries in the formulation and application of all decisions in the
field of development and international economic co-operation with a
view to bringing about far-reaching changes in the structure of the present international economic system on a just and equitable basis and
the full and permanent sovereignty of every State over its resources
and economic activities.
7. The new International Development Strategy aims at the
promotion of the economic and social development of the developing
countries with a view to reducing significantly the current disparities
between the developed and developing countries. as well as the early
eradication of poverty and dependency, which. in turn, would contribute to the solution of international economic problems and
sustained global economic development, and would also be supported
by such development on the basis of justice, equality and mutual
benefit. The International Development Strategy is a vast undertaking, involving the entire international community, for the promotion
of international development co-operation.

8. The development process must promote human dignity. The ultimate aim of development is the constant improvement of the wellbeing of the entire population on the basis of its full participation in
the process of development and a fair distribution of the benefits
therefrom. In this context, a substantial improvement in the status of
women will take place during the Decade. In this perspective.
economic growth, productive employment and social equity are fundamental and indivisible elements of development. The International
Development Strategy should, therefore, fully reflect the need for the
adoption of adequate and appropriate policies, to be defined by each
country within the framework of its development plans and priorities,
for movement towards the realization of this ultimate goal of development. The pace of development in the developing countries as a whole
should be accelerated substantially in order to enable them to achieve
these objectives.
9. The primary responsibility for the development of developing
countries rests upon those countries themselves. Effective action by
the international community, however, is indispensable for the creation of an environment that is fully supportive of the national and
collective efforts of the developing countries for the realization of their
development goals. For their part, the developing countries will continue to place increasing emphasis on collective self-reliance as a
means of accelerating their development and contributing lo the establishment of a new international economic order.

107

I0. The most pressing problems and deteriorating situations of the
least developed countries require particular attention, and special and
effective measures will be taken for the elimination of the basic constraints facing these countries and to ensure their accelerated development. Likewise. specific measures and actions will be taken lo meet
the special and pressing problems of the land-locked, island and most
seriously affected developing countries.
I I. Specific regional problems of developing countries. where they
exist and are included in regional development strategies, such as the
Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia
Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa,'" will also be taken
into account through effective and adequate measures within the
framework of the general policy measures adopted in favour of all
developing countries.
12. Urgent action should be taken by all the members of the international community to end without delay colonialism, imperialism.
neo-colonialism, interference in internal affairs, apartheid, racial discrimination, hegemony, expansionism and all forms of foreign aggression and occupation, which constitute major obstacles to the economic
emancipation and development of the developing countries.

13. Full respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of every countr). abstention from the threat or use of force
against any State. non-interference in the internal affairs of other
States and the settlement by peaceful means of disputes among States
are of the utmost importance for the success of the l nternational
Development St rat~gy. There should be concrete progress towards the
goals of general and complete disarmament under effective international control, including the urgent implementation of measures of
disarmament. which would release substantial additional resources
which could be utilized for social and economic development. particularly for the benefit of the developing countries.
14. It is essential lo mobilize public opinion in all countries, particularly the developed countries, in order to obtain their full commitment to the goals and objectives and the implementation of the present
Strategy. Recognizing the important role of legislative bodies in contributing to realistic preparation and effective implementation of
national economic and social development plans. the support of members of legislative bodies will be essential for the implementation of the
International Development Strategy.

15. Organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system will assist appropriately in the implementation of the Strategy
and in the search for new avenues of international co-operation for
development.
16. Governments designate the decade starting on I January I 981
as the Third United Nations Development Decade and pledge themselves. individually and collectively, to fulfil their commitment lo establish a new international economic order based on justice and
equity. They subscribe to the goals and objectives of the Strategy and
firmly resolve to translate them into reality by adopting a coherent set
or interrelated. concrete and effective policy measures in all sectors of
development. These goals and objectives and policy measures are set
out below.

II.

(iOAI S \NllOHJH TIVIS

17. The International Development Strategy for the Third United
'-Jations Development Decade, as an integral part of the efforts of the
international community to establish a new international economic order, aims at the accelerated development of the developing countries.
In contributing to the solution of international economic problems. it
will greatly help sustained global economic development and promote
the achievement of the ultimate aim of development-the improvement of the conditions of all. It will involve and require changes in the
world economy and in the economies of the developed and developing
countries themselves: and it calls for institutional and structural
changes in international economic relations. In an interdependent
world economy. it is the responsibility of all Governments to contrihute to the achievement of the goals and objectives of the Strategy.
fhe experience of the 1970s clearly indicates that the goals and objectives of the world community can only be attained through a substantially greater effort in the 1980s than was made in the Second United
Nations Development Decade.
18. Particular attention should be given lo the need for accelerated
development of the lea,l developed countries and other developing

·" See A 1 S-1 I 14. anne, I

108

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

countries, particularly those in the special categories, where the
development needs and problems are greatest. Special and effective
measures should be taken to alleviate their pressing problems and
lessen the basic economic constraints facing them.
19. Accelerated development calls for a more equitable distribution of economic opportunities among nations. In an interdependent
world this will be a source of economic strength. It entails changes in
the patterns of global production, consumption and trade arising in
particular from the industrialization of developing countries: it requires effective control by those countries over the use of their own
resources; and it calls for changes in the framework of international
economic relations so as to ensure the equitable, full and effective participation of those countries in the formulation and application of all
decisions in the field of international economic co-operation for
development.
20. Each developing country will set its own target for growth in
the light of its particular circumstances. In order to achieve the goals
and objectives of the International Development Strategy, the average
annual rate of growth of gross domestic product for the developing
countries as a whole during the Decade should be 7 per cent, and in the
early part of the Decade, as close as possible to this rate. This target
and those derived from it are a broad indication of the scope of concerted efforts to be made during the Decade at the national and international levels. On the basis of regional needs, circumstances and patterns of growth, more specific regional goals may he elaborated in the
framework of the regional commissions. Special efforts are required to
ensure that the low-income developing countries attain the average
rate of 7 per cent.
21. If the average annual rate of growth of population in the
developing countries were to remain at about 2.5 per cent, an average
annual increase of 7 per cent in gross domestic product would lead to
an annual increase of about 4.5 per cent in per capita gross domestic
product. This would double income per capita in developing countries
around the middle of the I990s. Such a growth in income is necessary
if real progress is to be made towards raising substantially the share of
the developing countries in world production of goods and services
and towards eliminating the growing gap between the standards of living of developing and developed countries. Such growth is equally essential if the people of developing countries are to benefit from
development through expanding employment opportunities, rising
levels of income and consumption, better housing and expanding
facilities for health and education. Accelerated growth in the developing countries is also needed in order to support national policies aimed
at achieving a more equitable distribution of income and benefits from
development. Further, such growth will contribute significantly to a
more balanced growth of the world economy.
22. An acceleration in the tempo of production in developing
countries will require a rapid expansion and diversification of their international trade. For developing countries in general, exports and imports of goods and services should expand at annual rates of not less
than 7.5 per cent and 8 per cent. respectively. The attainment of such
rates of growth and the improvement of the terms of trade of developing countries will necessitate equitable participation of developing
countries in international trade, inter a/ia, through improved market
access for their products, and extending to them special and preferential treatment where feasible and appropriate, in the context of the
general effort to liberalize world trade, particularly in their favour,
and vigorous efforts to resist protectionism. as steps towards
promoting equity in trade relations hetween the developing and
developed countries. The industrialized countries will take fully into
account the industrialization and development objectives of the
developing countries when shaping their trade policies, in particular
by continuing and accelerating the implementation of effective adjustment policies based on mutual benefit and dynamic comparative advantage.
23. The acceleration of production will require that gross investment reaches the level of about 28 per cent of gross domestic product
by 1990. The developing countries, therefore, must fully mobilize their
domestic financial resources. To this end, for developing countries in
general, gross domestic saving should be increased to reach about 24
per cent of gross domestic product hy 1990. The developing countries
that have a saving ratio of less than 15 per cent should make vigorous
efforts to raise it to 20 per cent as early as possihle. The countries that
have or will soon have a saving ratio of 2() per cent should raise it
significantly during the Decade.

24. The rising investments and imports needed for an acceleration
of growth commensurate with the attainment of the goals and objectives of the International Development Strategy require a substantially
greater flow of financial resources in real terms to developing countries. In this context, recent major proposals made by heads of State
and Government, and other important proposals to increase substantially concessional and non-concessional flows in real terms to
developing countries, should be given urgent consideration by the international communit). A major objective of the Decade must be to
make possible in the context of continued changes and improvements
in the international financial system an enhanced flow of financial
resources on terms and conditions that are better attuned to the
development aims and economic circumstances of developing countries. A rapid and suhstantial increase will be made in official development assistance by all developed countries, with a view to reaching and
where possible surpassing the agreed international target of 0.7 per
cent of the gross national product of developed countries. To this end,
developed countries "hich have not yet reached the target should
make their best efforts to reach it by 1985, and in any case not later
than in the second half of the Decade. The target of I per cent should
be reached as soon as possihle thereafter. The efforts of developed
countries will be greater. the lower their relative performance.
Developing countries in a position to do so should also continue
to provide assistance to other developing countries. Within the
framework of this general increase to all developing countries, and in
order to meet the most pressing problems and correct the deteriorating
situation of the least developed countries and developing countries in
the other spedal categories where the development needs and
prohlems are greatest. the flows of official development assistance will
increasingly he directed towards those countries.
25. Efforts should he made to encourage an increase in net flows
of non-concessional capital which is required for the over-all financing
needs of the developing countries, taking into account their national
plans and legislations.
26. In order to create conditions more favourable to the development of the developing countries and the growth of the world
economy in general, efforts to increase the responsiveness of the international monetary system lo the needs and interests of the developing
countries should be intensified through further reform of the system to
he pursued and carried out expeditiously early in and throughout the
Decade to the benefit of the entire international community. To these
ends, the international monetary system should provide for the
equitable and effective participation of developing countries in decision making. taking into account, inter a/ia, their growing role in the
world economy, as well as a symmetrical and efficient adjustment
process, stability of exchange rates of international currencies, and
further strengthening and expansion of the special drawing rights as
the central reserve asset in order to ensure better international control
over the creation and equitahle distribution of international liquidity.
In stipulating the conditions attached to the use of its resources, the
International Monetary Fund will pay due regard to the social and
political domestic objectives of member countries, to their economic
priorities and circumstances. including the causes of their balance-of.
payments problems. The international and multilateral financial institutions are urged to continue to expand and improve their lending
facilities, and to create new ones where necessary. with a view to
assisting their member,. including in particular the developing countries which face halancc-of-payments difficulties.
27. The persistence of inflation in the world economy, particularly
in developed countries, impedes growth and development and renders
the situation of developing countries even more precarious. The rate of
inflation should be substantially reduced and its adverse effects should
he mitigated as far as possible so as to help to ensure a sustained, increased and real economic growth. particularly in the developing
countries. Rapid economic growth in developing countries will help
rationalize productive structures and decrease inflationary pressures.
2X
Hunger and malnutrition must be eliminated as soon as possihlc and certainl) hy the end of this century. Substantial progress
should be made during the Decade towards food self-sufficiency and
food security in developing countries so as to ensure an adequate level
of nutrition for everyhody. Agricultural production in developing
countries as a whole should expand at an average annual rate of at
least 4 per cent so that it will he possible to meet the nutritional needs
of the populations, to enlarge the base for industrialization and the
diversification of eco11cllnic structures, and to redress current imbalances in world production. The share of developing countries in
world exports of food and agricultural products should increase sub-

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

stantially. To those ends, developing countries should continue to
strengthen the formulation and implementation of food and
agricultural development plans within the framework of their national
development priorities and programmes. These objectives should be
supported by additional external resource transfers in the context of
over-all greater flows of financial resources to developing countries.
An improved international framework for the agricultural development of developing countries is also necessary, including increased
market stability, greater security of agricultural supplies and, in order
to enlarge the export potential of developing countries, improved
access for their agricultural products to world markets.
29. Developing countries as a whole should expand manufacturing
output at an average annual rate of 9 per cent, thereby making a
significant contribution during the Decade towards raising the share
of developing countries in world manufacturing production and laying
the basis for achieving the target of a 25 per cent share of world
production by the year 2000 as set out in the Lima Declaration and
Plan of Action on Industrial Development and Co-operation." Industrialization should be aimed at meeting in an integrated way the
over-all requirements of the development of the national economies of
developing countries. Manufacturing activities should be geared
towards not only satisfying growing domestic demand and employment requirements but also, as a component of independent national
economies, increasing the share of developing countries in world exports of manufactured goods. A fundamental objective of the world
community is to achieve a system of trade based on a dynamic pattern
of comparative advantage reflecting a more effective international division of labour. Far-reaching changes should, therefore, be brought
about in the structure of world production, in the spirit of mutual
benefit, so as to increase and diversify the production of the developing countries and create new sources of employment there. In this context, improved access to markets for products of export interest to
developing countries and continued attention to the formulation and
implementation of positive adjustment policies in the industrialized
countries are important objectives of international co-operation.
30. The physical and institutional infrastructure in developing
countries should be expanded at rates that fully support the rate of expansion of the economy as a whole, and adequate financial and
technical resources should be provided for that purpose. Special attention should be given to overcoming the bottle-necks and constraints of
transport and communication facing the developing countries, particularly with a view to strengthening intraregional and interregional
links.
31. Due account should be taken of the positive role of the public
sector in mobilizing internal resources, formulating and implementing
over-all national development plans and establishing national
priorities.
32. In a growing world economy and without prejudice to the
principle of full and permanent sovereignty of each State over its
natural resources, the rational development, management and utilization of natural resources should be encouraged in order, inter a/ia, to
prevent early exhaustion of finite resources and overburdening of
renewable resources. It will be necessary, particularly for the industrialized countries, which bear the heaviest responsibility for the
use of natural resources, to encourage new patterns of consumption
and production.
33. In the field of raw materials, the agreed objectives of the Integrated Programme for Commodities" should be actively pursued. In
this context, international commodity agreements should be concluded
and a more equitable distribution of activities related to the processing
of raw materials should be achieved with the aim of increasing the
location of those activities in developing countries. Developing countries should also acquire improved capacity to explore and develop
their natural resources and to ensure closer integration of the sector in
the over-all development of their economies.
34. In order to create conditions more favourable to the development of the developing countries and the growth of the world
economy in general, efforts for the development and expansion of all
energy resources of the world should be intensified in search of a longterm solution to the energy problem. The international community
will have to make substantial and rapid progress in the transition from

109

the present international economy based primarily on hydrocarbons.
It will have to rely increasingly on new and renewable sources of
energy, seeking to reserve hydrocarbons for non-energy and nonsubstitutable uses. In view of the finite supply of fossil fuels in the
world economy and the often wasteful and inefficient utilization of
those resources, effective measures for their conservation will have to
be urgently adopted and/or improved, in particular by developed
countries which consume the major share of the world's hydrocarbon
production.
35. In view of the increasing energy requirements of the developing countries during the Decade and beyond, which will limit their
ability to reduce energy use significantly without hindering their
development, concerted and adequate measures commensurate with
their development goals and their immediate and longer-term needs
will be adopted by the international community. In this context, the
exploration, development. expansion and processing of all energy
resources of the developing countries will be promoted at a rate commensurate with their development objectives and adequate financial
and technical resources will be provided for the purpose. The international community will devote serious attention to the effective implementation of the results of the United Nations Conference on New
and Renewable Sources of Energy. Adequate financial and technical
resources will be devoted to the development of new and renewable
sources, to conventional forms of energy and to the adaptation of
technology to the 11eeds of developing countries. Developed countries
should give or facilitate, as appropriate, the freest and fullest possible
access to all energy technologies, particularly those related to the
development of new and renewable forms. The problem of energy will
be considered within the global negotiations relating to international
economic co-operation for development, as agreed to by the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session."
36. The strengthening of the scientific and technological capacities
of developing countries is essential for their sustained and accelerated
development. The international community will implement the Vienna
Programme of Action on Science and Technology for Development"
principally in order to strengthen the scientific and technological
capacities of developing countries, to restructure the existing pattern
of international scientific and technological relations and to
strengthen the role of the United Nations system in science and
technology and the provision of increased financial resources. Efforts
will be made at national and international levels to enable developing
countries to have easier access to the technology-including advanced
technology-they require and to facilitate the transfer of such
technology on a substantially increased scale.
37. The most pressing problems and the deteriorating situation of
the least developed countries must receive special attention. In order
to remove the basic constraints to their development and thereby
transform their economies, efforts by the least developed countries
themselves and by the international community must be immediately
and substarttially expanded. Measures should be focused on
promoting a self-sustained process of development, on accelerating
agricultural and industrial progress and on ensuring the development
of human resources and broadly-based participation in development.
The international community will devote serious attention to the effective preparation and conclusion of and follow-up to the United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries.
38. The special and pressing problems of the land-locked, island
and most seriously affected developing countries need to be met
through specific measures and actions.
39. There is a close relationship between disarmament and
development. Progress in the former would help greatly in the realization of the latter. Therefore, resources released as a result of the implementation of disarmament measures should be devoted to the
economic and social development of all nations and should contribute
to the bridging of the economic gap between developed and developing countries.
40. Economic and technical co-operation among developing countries based on the principle of collective self-reliance constitutes a
dynamic and vital component of an effective restructuring of international economic relations. While the main elements of economic
and technical co-operation among developing countries will be determined by those countries themselves, the international community

21

See A/ I 0112, chap. lV.
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, Fourth Session, vol. I; Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.ll.D.10 and corrigendum),
part one, sect. A, resolution 93 (]V).
22

11

Resolution 34/ 138, para. 2 (b).
Report of the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development, Vienna. 20-31 August 1979 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.79.1.21 and corrigenda), chap. Vil.
24

110

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

should accord high priority and urgency to supporting the efforts of
developing countries to strengthen and implement their programmes
of mutual economic and technical co-operation. Such programmes
will contribute to reducing their external dependence and
vuln.:rability, acnieving equitable and balanced international
economic relations and strengthening their role in the world economy,
their self-reliance and autonomous growth and development.
41. Accelerated development in the developing countries could
enhance their capacity to improve their environment. The environmental implications of poverty and under-development and the interrelationships between development, environment, population and
resources must be taken into account in the process of development. It
is essential to avoid environmental degradation and g:ve future
generations the benefit of a sound environment. There is need to ensure an economic development process which is environmentally
sustainable over the long run and which protects the ecological
balance. Determined efforts must be made to prevent deforestation,
erosion, soil degradation and desertification. International cooperation in environmental protection should be increased.
42. Development is an integral process, embodying both economic
and social objectives. National development plans and targets of the
developing countries should be formulated on the basis of a unified
approach to economic and social development, which is essential for
balanced development of all sectors of the economy, should provide
for both accelerated growth and increased effectiveness of production
and should fully take into account not only immediate but also longterm social and economic objectives of development of the developing
countries. It is for each country to establish adequate national objectives for the promotion of human and social development within the
framework of its development plans, priorities and resources and in
accordance with its socio-economic structure and existing circumstances. The final aim of development must be the continuing increase in the well-being of the entire population on the basis of its full
participation in the process of development and a fair distribution of
the benefits therefrom. As part of the efforts to implement the International Developm~nt Strategy, the international community will
provide technical and financial support to achieve those goals, in the
context of an over-all substantial increase in resources for development, paying due respect to the cultural identities of nations and peoples.
43. The reduction and elimination of poverty and a fair distribution of the benefits of development are primary objectives for the international community during the Decade. Great numbers of workers
remain underemployed or unemployed. Many millions are illiterate.
High infant mortality rates, poor housing and environmental degradation in urban slums and depressed rural areas continue to afflict the
people of the developing countries. More resources for production,
higher productivity and accelerated development are essential for
progress towards higher and more equitable standards of living. These
are continuing challenges to the international community, and
Governments accordingly reaffirm their commitment to the broad aim
of development.
44. The achievement of full employment by the year 2000 remains
a primary objective. Intensive efforts will have to be made to increase
the opportunities for productive employment, especially for the new
entrants to the labour force, as this is expected to increase by
2.5 per cent per annum, and to reduce and eliminate the present
massive unemployment and underemployment.
45. The international community recognizes the need for countries
to continue to strengthen their implementation of the recommendations of the World Population Plan of Action." Consistent with the
World Population Plan of Action, all countries should respect and ensure the right of parents to determine the number and spacing of their
children and should, as a matter of urgency, make universally
available advice on and means of achieving the desired family size.
46. The development of human resources provides a broad basis
for development; it enhances the capacity of people to participate constructively in the development process. In this context, education is an
important element, and the provision of universal education on the
broadest possible scale, the eradication or considerable reduction of
illiteracy, and the closest possible realization of universal primary
enrolment by the year 2000 remain major goals of all countries during
the Decade. A parallel and harmonious expansion of all levels and
21

Report of the United Nations World Population Conference,
Bucharest, /9-30 August 1974 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.75.Xlll.3), chap. I.

types of education is equally necessary, keeping in view the decisive
role of education and training for national development and individual fulfilment.
47. The absence or shortage of trained and qualified national personnel often limits the capacity of developing countries to take full advantage of existing or potential development opportunities. The provision of the required trained and qualified personnel on a scale assuring
national self-sufficiency in this respect would constitute an important
contribution to the achievement of the development goals of the
developing countric3. The international community should provide
adequate financial and technical resources to support the training of
national personnel in all sectors of social and economic activities in the
developing count,ics
48. The attainment by the year 2000 of a level of health that will
permit all peoples of the world to lead a socially and economically
productive life is an important objective of the international community. Primary health care is a key measure for the attainment of this
objective. All countries will broaden the access of the poorest groups
in their populations to health facilities and. with the assistance of the
international community, will ensure immunization against major infectious diseases for all children as early as possible during the Decade.
Safe water and adequate sanitary facilities should also be made
available to all in rural and urban areas by 1990. The reduction of
mortality rates will be a major objective. In the poorest countries, infant mortality should be reduced to less than 120 per 1,000 live births.
Life expectancy in all countries should reach 60 years as a minimum.
and infant mortality rates should reach 50 per 1,000 live births. as a
maximum, by the year 2000. Particular efforts should be made to integrate the disabled in the development process. Effective measures of
prevention and rehabilitation are therefore essential.
49. The provision of basic shelter and infrastructure for all people.
in rural as well as urban areas. is a long-term goal. A balanced
network of cities, towns and villages is needed for harmonious
development, for the emergence of mutually supportive linkages between industrial and agricultural activities, and for the adequate provision of infrastructure and services. Well-balanced programmes for the
development of human settlements are necessary so as to provide
greater benefits to low-income groups.
50. In pursuit of the objectives highlighted during the International Year of the Child," the welfare of children will be fostered.
The essential role of the family in the balanced development of the
child should be stressed. Efforts should be made to improve the living
conditions of children and to eliminate child labour in conformity with
the relevant international labour conventions; special attention should
be paid to the large number of children under 15 years of age living in
poor rural and urban areas.
5 I. Full and effective participation hy the entire population at all
stages of the development process should be ensured. In line with the
Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference of the United
Nations Decade for Women, 27 women should play an active role in
that process. Appropriate measures should be taken for profound
social and economic changes and for the elimination of the structural
imbalances which compound and perpetuate women's disadvantages.
To this end, all countries will pursue the objective of securing women's
equal participation both as agents and as beneficiaries in all sectors and
at all levels of the development process. This should include women's
greater access to nutrition, health services, education and training. employment, and financial resources and their greater participation in the
analysis, planning, decision-making, implementation and evaluation
of development. Changes that will lead to the sharing of responsibilities by men and women in the family and in the management of
the household should be encouraged. Institutional and administrative
mechanisms to accomplish these objectives should be strengthened.
All countries should give high priority to the objectives of mobilizing
and integrating youth in development.
111.

POi.iCY MEASliR!cS

A.

International trade

52. All countries commit themselves to an open and expanding
trade system to further progress in the liberalization of trade and to
"· See resolution 31 / 169, para. 2.
-'' See Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality. Development and Peace. Copenhagen. 14-30 July
/980 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.IY.J and corrigendum). chap. I, sect. A.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

the promotion of structural adjustment which will facilitate the
realization of the dynamic pattern of comparative advantage. The
rules and principles governing the functioning of international trade
will be kept under review so as to ensure the steady growth of trade under equitable and secure conditions. To this end, there should be more
effective implementation, as far as possible, of the principle of differential and more favourable treatment, on a non-reciprocal basis, of
developing countries in order to enhance their market access and to increase their share of world trade, taking into account their trade,
development and financial needs.
53. As an immediate measure, the agreements reached in the multilateral trade negotiations will be promptly and fully implemented by
the parties to those agreements. Steps will be taken early in the Third
United Nations Development Decade to reduce or to eliminate existing restrictions on imports from developing countries. Developed
countries will implement fully and adhere strictly to the standstill
provisions that they have accepted. Concerted efforts will be made.
particularly by developed countries, to reduce non-tariff barriers
progressively and even abolish them, especially in the case of products
or sectors of export interest to the developing countries.
54. Efforts will be pursued to reach an agreement on a multilateral
safeguard system based on and subject to objective internationally
agreed criteria relating to, inter a/ia, adequate testing of serious injury
in order to provide greater uniformity and certainty in implementation
and to ensure that the safeguard clause, if used, is not applied for
protectionist reasons or to hinder structural change.
55. The Common Fund, as a new entity serving as a key instrument for the attainment of the agreed objectives of the Integrated
Programme for Commodities, will urgently be brought into full and
effective operation.
56. International commodity agreements, with initial emphasis on
the core commodities included in the indicative list of the Integrated
Programme for Commodities, should be concluded.
57. A framework of international co-operation will be established
within the over-all context of the Integrated Programme for Commodities for expanding in developing countries the processing of
primary commodities and exports of processed goods, as well as for
the increased participation of developing countries in the marketing.
distribution and transportation of their primary commodities.
58. Additional measures for the improvement and stabilization of
commodity export earnings of developing countries should be considered as soon as possible.
59. International organizations and developed countries and
others in a position to do so should assist developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, through the provision of capital
and technology and of training skills for developing, processing and
manufacturing capacities and for setting up and strengthening finance,
commerce, transport, various services and other infrastructures in
developing countries to facilitate and promote their production and
exports of manufactured and semi-manufactured goods.
60. Developed countries should exert their best efforts to improve
access to their markets for exports of agricultural products on a stable
and predictable basis. They should accord developing countries the
opportunity to expand their agricultural exports through a continued
and accelerated liberalization of agricultural and trade policies.
Urgent action will be taken in relevant negotiating forums to move
towards the approval and implementation of proposals to bring about
the reduction and elimination of barriers to trade in agricultural
products, in particular in relation to those of export interest to
developing countries, and thus to facilitate, inter alia, more efficient
patterns of production. Developed countries will make their best efforts to adjust those sectors of their agricultural and manufacturing
economies which require protection against exports from developing
countries, thus facilitating access to the markets of food and
agricultural products. The developed countries should exert their best
efforts to avoid adverse effects on the economies of the developing
countries while formulating and implementing their domestic
agricultural policies.
61. In the context of the framework for international cooperation, measures should be taken, including internationally agreed
programmes for research and development, in order to improve the
competitiveness of natural products produced in developing countries
with the synthetics and substitutes of developed countries. Furthermore, measures should be consiMred lo harmonize. where ap-

111

propriate, the production of such synthetics and substitutes with the
supply of natural products produced in devdoping countries.
62. Sectoral agreements which result in hampering the growth in
the trade of developing countries should be avoided to the maximum
extent. Efforts should be made to avoid extending such existing agreements with a view to their eventual elimination.
63. The generalized system of preferences should be continued as
an important long-term instrument for promoting trade and development co-operation and, in particular, for bringing about an increased
share of developing countries in world trade. The international community reaffirms the importance of the generalized, non-reciprocal
and non-discriminatory system of preferences for expansion and diversification of the export trade of developing countries and for acceleration of the rates of their economic growth. To this end, the preferencegiving countries will implement fully the agreement reached by the
Special Committee on Preferences of the Trade and Development
Board at its ninth session." A comprehensive review of the generalized
system of preferences should be held in 1990.
64. Efforts should be pursued and intensified by developed countries to take special unilateral measures further to reduce trade barriers
facing developing countries in respect of tropical products, including
those products in their processed forms, on a non-reciprocal basis.
Those reductions should be urgently considered and carried out.
65. The International frade Centre should be further supported
by technical and financial assistance from donor countries in order to
increase and strengthen its technical co-operation programme with
developing countries in trade promotion and export development activities.
66. Socialist countries of Eastern Europe, in the context of their
long-term economic plans. will continue to adopt and implement appropriate measures, in order to increase their trade with developing
countries. commensurate with the trade needs of the developing countries, including in particular their production and export potential.
67. Developing countries will promote and expand trade among
themselves in accordance with the relevant decisions taken by those
countries in the Arusha Programme for Collective Self-Reliance and
Framework for Negotiations. 04 adopted by the Fourth Ministerial
Meeting of the Group of 77, held at Arusha, United Republic of
Tanzania, from 12 to 16 February 1979, and in other international
forums. The international wmmunity will provide appropriate support and assistance to the efforts of developing countries.
Invisibles
68. Measures will be devised during the Decade lo encourage a
more balanced international distribution of service industries and to
assist developing countries in minimizing as far as possible their net
outflow of foreign exchange from invisible transactions, including
transport. Developing countries will expand their tourist industry.
Developed countries will assist in this endeavour as far as possible.
69. The international rnmmunity will take appropriate measures
to help the establishment and growth of local insurance markets in
developing countries where such potential exists. As regards those insurance operations that cannot be carried out without using external
insurance services, it is essential that the terms and conditions of international insurance and reinsurance transactions are equitable for. and
meet the needs of. all parties concerned. in particular those of the
developing countries.
Transnational corporations
70. Negotiations on a United Nations code of conduct on
transnational corporations will be concluded in 1981 and the code will
be adopted expeditiously by all members of the international community soon afterwards. aimed at preventing-with a view to
eliminating-the negative effects of activities of transnational corporations and promoting the positive contribution of transnational corporations to the development efforts of the developing countries, consistent with the national development plans and priorities of those
countries. National policies which enable Governments to deal with
and regulate effectively the operations of the transnational corporations will also be developed and pursued.
'' See Official Records of the Trade and Development Board, Twentyfirst Session. Supplement No. 3 (TD/8/802), annex I, resolution 6 (IX).
''' Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Developmenl. Fijih Session. vol I, Report and Annexes (United Nations
publication. Sales 'Jo. I- 7 9.IID 14). annex VI.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

112

Restrictive business practices
71. The principles and rules for the control of restrictive business
practices which adversely affect international trade, particularly that
of the developing countries, and their economic development, approved by the United Nations Conference on Restrictive Business
Practices,'" will be actively implemented.

B.

Industrialization

72. The rapid industrialization of developing countries constitutes
an indispensable element and a dynamic instrument of the sustained
self-reliant growth of their economies and of their social transformation. It is for each developing country to determine its own industrial
development goals and priorities. The attainment of the targets for the
industrialization of the developing countries contained in the present
Strategy, aimed at, inter alia, raising the share of the developing countries in world industrial production in accordance with the Lima
Declaration and Plan of Action, calls for far-reaching changes in the
structure of world production. To this end, developing and developed
countries will consider and adopt appropriate policies and programmes at the national, regional and international levels for the
strengthening and expansion of the developing countries' industrial
capacities as an essential element of their development process.
73. These policies and programmes include, as a crucial element.
the redeployment of industrial capacities. This redeployment will
primarily consist of the creation of new industrial capacities in
developing countries, as well as the redeployment of industrial
capacities from industrialized to developing countries on the principle
of dynamic comparative advantage, in conjunction with structural adjustment, and taking fully into account the over-all national objectives
and priorities in particular of developing countries. This involves the
transfer of financial, technological, managerial, personnel and other
resources to develo.,ing countries, including the provision of the
necessary training and expert services. While economic, institutional.
social and other pertinent factors have an important bearing on this
process, Governments, in particular those of the developed countries,
should encourage and intensify the process by actively pursuing
policies with a view to encouraging the continued reallocation of
resources and encouraging domestic factors of production to move
from internationally less competitive to more viable lines of production or into other sectors of the economy. These policies should be accompanied, to the maximum extent possible, by increased access to
their markets of the manufactured products of developing countries.
74.

Attention will be given to strengthening the developing coun-

tries' industries as a means of independent and autonomous industrial
development, working out long-term industrialization plans and
programmes, including plans and programmes for the discovery, exploitation and more complete processing of natural resources; a balanced industrial development with heavy and light industries, basic
industries, large-scale, intermediate-scale and small-scale production:
and the establishment of agro-industrial complexes. Assistance should
be given to the developing countries in forms which suit the interests of
their self-sustained development.
75. The system of consultations established in the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization as permanent activity will be
strengthened, developed and made more effective so that it may
make a substantial contribution to the industrialization of developing
countries and contribute effectively to the achievement of the objectives and targets set out in the present Strategy as well as in the Lima
Declaration and Plan of Action.
76. Both multilateral and bilateral sources of finance should respond, while taking into account the priorities of developing countries,
to the need for a substantial increase in the transfer of financial and
other resources, including official development assistance transfers. as
appropriate, to developing countries to support and reinforce their industrialization programmes. The arrangements for industrial financing should be reviewed early in the Decade, keeping in mind recent
proposals with a view to strengthening existing international financing
facilities, including appropriate ways to extend or modify those
facilities and other measures required towards this end. The United
Nations Industrial Development Fund should be strengthened and
enlarged to provide a significant increase in the technical assistance
necessary for accelerating the industrialization of developing coun-

tries.
'

0

See A/C.2/35/6, annex.

77. As part of an integrated industrial structure, it is necessary to
encourage, inter alia, labour-intensive, medium-scale and small-scale
industries which are efficient and generate more employment opportunities. The use of appropri:;te technology and effective policies to increase investments for the development of human resources should be
further strengthened and broadened. Industrialization policies should
have as one of their aims productive employment generation and the
integration and equa 1 participation of women in industrial development programmes.
78. Industrialization policies in developing countries will require
vigorous domestic policies supported by international assistance and
investment. Those policies could provide for, inter a/ia, increased
domestic investment. taking into account the role of the public sector
in this process, measures to encourage domestic savings and mutually
beneficial foreign direct investment and other sources of private
capital. It is for the developing countries to set their own investment
priorities and take appropriate decisions regarding admission of
foreign investment and private capital in the light of those priorities.
79. Consideration should be given by all countries to environmental aspects of industrialization in the formulation and implementation
of their industrial policies and plans. Donor countries, suppliers of
technology and the relevant international organizations should assist
developing countries. at their request, with a view to enhancing their
capacities in this respect.
80. The international community will accord highest priority to
measures, including adequate financial provisions, as required, for the
effective implementation of the Industrial Development Decade for
Africa," to be observed in the 1980s.
C.

Food and agriculture

81. Agricultural and rural development and the eradication of
hunger and malnutrition are among the essential aims of the Third
United Nations Development Decade. Developing countries, in the
context of their national development plans and priorities, firmly supported by the international community, will take all necessary
measures to accelerate food and agricultural production in order to
improve national and collective self-sufficiency in food as early as
possible. To this end, effective policies should continue to be pursued
and invigorated in relation to the provision of appropriate price incentives, distribution of credit, the improvement of storage and transport
and reduction of food losses, in particular post-harvest losses. In the
efforts to achieve the 4 per cent average annual growth in agricultural
production, particular attention should be paid to low-income, fooddeficit countries so as to allow them to attain this level of growth as
early as possible. The implementation of national policies should take
into account the need to mobilize fully the domestic resources of
developing countries. Adequate consideration should be given to the
implementation of agrarian reforms as one of the important factors
for promoting increased agricultural production and rural development in conformity with the national plans and priorities of each
developing country. In accordance with their national plans, they will
give priority lo programmes for adaptation of institutional frameworks so as to allow wider and more equitable access lo land and
water resources, as well as effective management of forests, pastures.
water and other natural resources in their national interests, with
wider dissemination and use of new and improved technology, including greater use of fertilizers, improved seeds and pesticides.
utilization of irrigation potential and the development of forests and
fisheries. They will make the necessary efforts to develop and promote
social and economic services and adequate public utilities in rural
areas. They will expand non-agricultural employment opportunities in
rural areas, particularly in industries related to agriculture. All countries will take appropriate measures, on a priority basis, to restore and
improve water resources and the capacity of the land to produce
necessary agricultural products. Extensive reforestation programmes
will be carried oul to prevent soil erosion, as well as to satisfy local
needs for wood as a raw material and source of energy.
82. All countries will take appropriate measures, on a priority
basis, to implement the conclusions and recommendations set forth in
the Declaration of Principles and the Programme of Action adopted
by the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development," as well as taking fully into account the conclusions and recom" Proclaimed by the General Assembly in its resolution 35/66 B.
"See Food and Agriculture Organirntion of the United Nations,
Report of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development. Rome. l:?-:?O July /979 (WCARRD/REP). part ,me

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

113

mendations made by the relevant United Nations bodies and
organizations concerned.

vegetable oil, which also provide useful indicators of annual requirements, should be taken into account.

83. In support of measures in developing countries to increase substantially investment in agriculture, donor countries and international
financial institutions will take all possible steps to increase the flow
of financial resources to the developing countries. The resources of
the International Fund for Agricultural Development should be
replenished on a continuing basis at a level sufficient to attain its objectives as and when recommended by its Governing Council, taking
into consideration the increasing needs of developing countries for external resources, with consultations relating to the first replenishment
to be concluded, on a priority basis, before the end of 1980. Furthermore, donors should commit adequate funds for local costs and
should meet requests wherever possible for financial participation in
recurrent costs of the implementation of development projects in the
agricultural sector.

90. Resources of the World Food Programme will be augmented
and every effort will be made to reach the current minimum agreed
target of$ I billion for 1981 82 and the target agreed upon for each
subsequent biennium during the Decade for this programme.

84. Additional resources should be provided for the adaptation
and dissemination of agricultural technologies and for the intensification of research into techniques that rely less on costly inputs and to an
increasing extent on renewable inputs. High priority will be accorded
to strengthening the network of international and regional research,
including research training institutions, agricultural extension services
and the exchange of information and experience, and to improving
their relationship with national research systems. Special attention will
be given to the implementation of the results of research at the level of
the people concerned.
85. The international community will support measures to provide
agricultural inputs, especially fertilizers, improved seeds and pesticides, and efforts directed towards the prevention of food losses, control of the desert locust and control of African trypanosomiasis.
86. Urgent me1sures will be taken early in the Decade to establish
effective world food security. To this end, world cereal stocks should
be maintained at an adequate level, which has been estimated at from
17 to 18 per cent of annual world consumption." It is essential that
concerted efforts be made to conclude a new international grain agreement aimed at evolving an internationally co-ordinated system of
nationally held food reserves. As an interim measure, early steps will
be taken by countries to implement, on a voluntary basis, the FivePoint Plan of Action on World Food Security of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and the resources of
the Food Security Assistance Scheme of that Organization will be expanded. Bilateral assistance will be co-ordinated with the Scheme
where appropriate.
87. Long-term measures are needed to step up food production in
the developing countries, which is the only lasting way to obtain food
security. At the national level and, in appropriate cases, at the regional
level, developing countries should set up, as a complement to production policies, the facilities necessary for stocking, conservation,
transport and distribution of food, to enable them to meet emergency
situations, to reinforce the stability of their markets and to reduce
avoidable post-harvest losses. In doing so, th,y should be supported
by the international community by financial and technical assistance,
as well as by food aid.
88. Since the Food Aid Convention agreed upon recently for 7.6
million tons falls considerably short of the target of 10 million tons,
every effort should be made both to enlist new contributors and to increase the commitments of existing ones so that the new Convention
can be renewed by mid-1981 with a firm assurance that the target will
be the absolute minimum flow of assistance, even in times of high
prices and food shortage. Urgent consideration will be given to a revision of the target, taking into account the estimated requirements of 17
to 18.5 million tons of cereals which provide a useful indicator of the
over-all requirement of food aid by 1985. This estimate will be
reviewed periodically. In order to ensure continuity, the Food Aid
Convention should be extended to three years, if possible, and should
provide for a revision of the minimum target to meet growing food aid
requirements. Efforts should be made by donor countries and international organizations to meet food aid requirements, especially in the
low-income, food-deficit countries.
89. While considering annual requirements of food aid by 1985,
estimates of 300,000 tons of dairy products and 350,000 tons of

"See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Commillee on Commodity Problems, . Intergovernmental Group on
Grains, Nineteenth Session, "World food security" (CCP:GR 75/9).
August 1975; and Committee on World Food Security. "Report on the
fifth session" (CL 78/10), April 1980

91. The International Monetary Fund should consider urgently,
within the context of its financing facilities, the feasibility of providing
additional balance-of-payments support for meeting the rise in food
imports bills of low-income. food-deficit countries.
92. The target of 500,000 tons of cereals for the International
Emergency Food Reserve should be realized immediately. All countries, particularly those which are not yet contributing to it. should
make or increase their contributions to the Reserve. The Reserve
should be maintained at 500.000 tons. Early consideration should be
given to proposals for strengthening the Reserve. including the
possibility of making a legally binding convention. Any proposals
agreed upon should. inter alia. make provision for increasing the size
of the Reserve so as to meet future emergency needs.
93. The eradication of hunger and malnutrition calls for concerted
efforts, national food policies. plans and commitments by Governments, as well as appropriate programmes on the part of the United
Nations system during the Decade and beyond. A positive commitment to nutrition policies will req.uire efforts at the production and
distribution levels to ensure that requisite food supplies are available
for those whose consumption of food is inadequate. A special national
commitment to the nutritional needs of children should be undertaken. Donor countries are strongly called upon to do their utmost to
ensure a high nutritional value of their food aid.
94. Special attention will continue to be given to the impact of
food trade on the levels of food production in the world, in particular
with reference to the economies of the developing countries.
95. In the context of integrated rural development. Governments
will encourage rural industrialization. the establishment and
strengthening of agro-industrial complexes, the modernization of
agriculture, better integration of women in all stages of the production
process and the ensuring thereby of increased production of food and
other agricultural products, and employment for the rural population.
Governments should encourage and support the establishment of
agricultural co-operatives

D.

Financial resources ji>r development

96. Developing countries will continue to bear the main responsibility for financing their development and will adopt vigorous
measures for a fuller mobilization of their domestic financial
resources. External financial resources. particularly official development assistance, constitute an indispensable element of support for the
developing countries' own efforts. International financial flows. par
ticularly public flows, should be improved and adapted consistent with
the needs of developing countries as regards volume, composition,
quality, forms and distrihution of flows.
97. Bilateral and multilateral flows will be made on an increasingly
assured. continuous and predictable basis.
98. A rapid and substantial increase will be made in official
development assistance by all developed countries, with a view to
reaching and, where possihle, surpassing the agreed international
target of 0. 7 per cent of the gross national product of developed countries. To this end, developed countries which have not yet reached the
target should exert their best efforts to reach it by 1985, and in any case
not later than in the second half of the Decade. The target of I per cent
should be reached as soon as possible thereafter. The efforts of
developed countries will be greater. the lower their relative performance. Developing countries in a position to do so should also continue to provide assistance to other developing countries. In the context of this general increase and in order to meet the most pressing
problems and the deteriorating situation of the least developed countries and developing countries in the other special categories where the
development needs and problems are greatest. the flows of official
development assistance will increasingly he directed towards those
countries.
99. All developed donor countries should announce annually their
plans or intentions, in the light of measures outlined in resolution
129 (V) of J June 1979 ,if the United Nations Conference on Trade

114

General Assembly--Thirty-fifth Session

and Development," as regards an increase in official development
assistance for the longest period ahead <>nd, where possit-le, for a
minimum period of three years. They should provide full information
on their official development assistance flows.
100. The international comml!nity will give priority consideration
to the immediate and urgent needs of poorer developing countries, in
particular the least developed countries, and in this context urgent
consideration should be given to establishing emergency programmes
of assistance to those countries. The measures of assistance and
volume of the programmes will be determined. taking into account
their present economic difficulties and longer-term development
needs.

IOI.

In the context of the general increase of official development
assistance, equitable efforts will be made by donor countries with a
view to doubling as soon as possible the flow of official development
assistance to the least developed countries, taking into account the
relative performance of the donor countries. All donor countries will
give all due consideration, not later than al the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, to be held in I 981, lo the
proposals for further measures to provide an adequate minimum flow
of official development assistance. including those proposals for
tripling the net disbursement of concessional assistance by 1984 and
quadrupling it by I 990 at I 977 prices.
I 02. Within the context of this general increase to developing
countries as a whole, specific efforts should be undertaken to meet the
needs of other special categories of developing countries. To this end,
official development assistance to these categories of countries will be
increased substantially during the Decade, as appropriate.
103. The terms and conditions of official development assistance
should be significantly improved. In particular:
(a) The current over-all average rate of concessionality of official
development assistance should be further increased. Official development assistance to least developed countries should, as a general rule.
be in the form of grants and at high concessionality to other developing countries, particularly those in the special categories, which depend primarily on concessional flows;

(b) The official development assistance should, as a general rule,
be untied. The share of programme assistance and local and recurrent
cost financing in official development assistance should he increased
substantially when necessary.

I 04. Furthermore, sudden and important deterioration in the external conditions of developing countries, beyond their control, will he
appropriately taken into account in determining the concessionality
and grant element of official development assistance.
105. All developed donor countries will continue to improve their
aid-giving procedures, in consultation with the beneficiary countries.
so as to reduce obstacles to rapid aid disbursements and effective aid
uses, without any discrimination.
106. In the field of export credits, the needs of the developing
countries should be recognized by developed countries. To this end,
the export credit guarantee agencies of the developed countries should,
as appropriate, improve the guarantee conditions, including in particular increasing the guarantee periods granted, within the relevant
international arrangements.
I 07. Flows from international and regional development finance
institutions should be increased significantly in response to the growing needs of developing countries, in particular of those eligible for
concessional lending from those institutions. The policies as well as the
resource base of the multilateral institutions should be reviewed in a
regular, timely and co-ordinated fashion and modified, where
necessary, so as to avoid any interruption in their activities and to ensure the expansion of their resources in real terms to adequate levels.
In particular, the agreements reached with regard to the increase in the
capital of the World Bank and the sixth replenishment of the International Development Association will be speedily implemented.
Ways and means should also be considered to achieve long-term linancing, including multiyear pledges of programmes of United Nations
development assistance organizations. Special attention will be paid
by all donors to timely and substantial increases in soft resources
through multilateral institutions. The policies of those institutions
should further evolve so as to be more responsive lo the changing
needs and socio-economic ohjectivcs of recipient countries, in par-

ticular as far as programme assistance, including sectoral assistance.
and local cost and recurrent cost financing are concerned.
108. Consideration should b~ given by the World l:lank and
regional development hanks lo ways and means of strengthening their
lending capacities, taking into account, inter a/ia. the proposals to
raise the lending-capital ratio of those institutions.
I 09. The World Bank should consider steps in establishment of
a long-term financing facility to finance the purchase of capital goods
by developing countries. taking into account the related proposal for a
subsidy account for the poorer developing countries.

110. Non-concessional flows will continue to be an important
source of development finance for mani· developing coL•ntries. Substantially increased transfer of resources largely raised on the linancial
markets and. without prejudice lo official development assistance,
through new and innovative means will be further explored in depth to
allow action-oriented decisions. In this context. several approaches,
including co-financing with private resources and other existing and
possible new mechanisms. will be taken into account. Attention
should be given, inter a/ia, to multilateral guarantees for horrowing on
international financial markets and borrowing in significant measure
under the guarantee of members of the international community, taking into account the possibilities of interest-subsidy mechanisms. The
appropriate international financial institutions, in their consideration
of new forms of lending as a means of channelling external resources to
developing countries. should also consider greater reliance on
programme or non-project loans. Direct private investments that are
compatible with the national priorities and legislation of developing
countries will be encouraged. Developing countries interested in
foreign direct investments should make efforts to create and maintain
a favourable investment climate in the framework of their national
plans and policies. The access of developing countries to private
capital markets should be improved, further facilitated and encouraged. New ways and forms of lending should be compatible with
the development priorities of developing countries and should take
due account of their debt-servicing capacity over the longer term. New
approaches should he considered to ensure the growth and stability of
new types of llows, including availabk funds in financial and capital
markets. New ways and forms of lending should reflect the principles
of universality and equity in decision making. The proposal for a
world development fund should be examined by the Secretary-General
so that a report can be made available as soon as possible and submitted lo the General Assembly at the latest at its thirty-sixth session for
its consideration and appropriate action.
111. Negotiations regarding internationally agreed features for
future operations related to debt problems of interested developing
countries should be hrought to an early conclusion in the light of the
general principles adopted by the Trade and Development Board in
section B of its resolution 165 (S-IX) of 11 March 1978. ''
112. Governments should seek to adopt the following debt-relief
actions or equivalent measures:
(a) Commitments undertaken in pursuance of section A of Trade
and Development Board resolution 165 (S-IX) should be fully implemented as quickly as possible;

(b) Retroactive adjustment of terms sr.ould be continued in accord
ance with Trade and Development Board resolution 165 (S-lX), so
that the improvement in current terms can be applied to outstanding
official development assistance debt, and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development should review the progress made
in that regard.

113. In order to alleviate the financial burden of developing countries resulting from price rises in their vital imports, urgent consideration should be given by the international community, through the International Monetary Fund and other relevant international financial
institutions, to special and favourable criteria relating to the level of
dependence of, and financial burden on, developing countries when
they receive balance-of-payments supports from those institutions.
114. There is a close relationship between disarmament and
development. Progress in the former wotild help greatly in the realization of the latter. Taking into consideration the recommendations of
the tenth special sesson of the General Assembly. devoted to disarmament, relating to the relationship between disarmament and develop-

" See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development. Fifth Session, vol. I. Repon and Annexes (United

" See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirt_v-third Session, Supplement lVo. 15 (A,-'.,.•/15 and Corr. I). vol. I, part two,

Nations publication, Sales No. E79.II.D.l4). part one. sect. A.

annex I

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

ment,'" effective measures should be taken. following disarmament
measures, to use resources thus released for economic and social
development, particularly for the benefit of the developing countries.
E.

International monetary and financial issues

115. The international community should work for stable international monetary conditions supportive of a balanced and equitable
development of the world economy and the accelerated development
of developing countries. In order to create conditions more favourable
to the development of the developing countries and the growth of the
world economy in general, efforts to increase the responsiveness of the
international monetary system to the needs and interests of the developing countries should be intensified through further reform of the
system to be pursued and carried out expeditiously early in and
throughout the Decade to the benefit of the entire international community. The principal features of a stable, effective and equitable international monetary and financial system should include:
(a) An effective, symmetrical and equitable adjustment process
consistent with high sustainable employment and growth. price stability and the dynamic expansion of world trade. An effective adjustment process, both cyclical and structural, must be accompanied by
access to official credit facilities on terms and conditions adapted to
the nature of the balance-of-payments problems of the countries concerned, taking into account their social and political domestic objectives, and their economic priorities and circumstances. including the
causes of their balance-of-payments problems:
(b) The terms and conditions of existing International Monetary
Fund facilities, including the compensatory financing facility, to be
reviewed periodically to ensure that these facilities are adequate and
adapted to the needs of member countries. taking fully into account
the interests of the developing countries. in coping adequately with
changing world economic conditions. In this connexion. the Fund
should give due consideration to such characteristics as the setting of
conditionality associated with the use of its resources, taking into account the causes of deficits, the lengthening of repayment periods,
where appropriate, adequate level of assistance and its increase when
appropriate and the need to maintain an adequate level of Fund
liquidity. The Fund should conclude at an early date its consideration
of mechanisms to reduce the cost of using the supplementary financing
facility;

(c) Assistance to countries, particularly developing countries, with
structural imbalance in their external accounts and consequent
balance-of-payments difficulties, including immediate action to be
taken to improve and expand collaboration between the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank, particularly as regards mediumterm balance-of-payments financing. Such action should improve the
effectiveness and enhance the level of their support over the medium
term for countries facing external cyclical as well as structural disequilibria and consequent international difficulties and lay the foundations for the achievement of high levels of sustainable growth and
price stability. In this context, consideration should be given to the
need for additional resources, the conditicnality attached to those
resources and the maturity periods involved. Consideration should
also be given to measures to reduce the cost of borrowing for the lowincome developing countries to improve their access to the baiance-ofpayments financing programmes of the International Monetary Fund:
(d) Over the Decade, a more stahle, equitable and effective international monetary system, which should he sustained by and promote:

(i)

The restoration of high sustainable growth with price stability:

(ii)

The reduction of inflation. which imposes a substantial, real
and financial cost on all countries, and a particular burden on
developing countries, which have vulnerable economies: effective action at both the national and international levels
should. therefore. be taken to bring inflation under control:

(iii)

A stable, yet sufficiently flexible, exchange-rate regime:

(iv)

Equitable and symmetrical treatment by the International
Monetary Fund of surplus and deficit countries in exercising
its surveillance over exchange rates and balance-of-payments
policies:

(v)

Arrangements for the creation of international liquidity
through collective international action in line with the liquidity requirements of an expanding worlu economy:

"See resolution S-10/2.

(vi)

115

The development of the special drawing rights as the principal
reserve asset of the system: to this end, consideration will be
given periodically hy the International Monetary Fund to the
allocation of new special drawing rights:

\e) The establishment of a link between the special drawing rights
and development assistance which should form part of the consideration by the International '1onetary Fund of the creation of new
special drawing rights as and when they are created according to the
needs of international liquidity:
(/) Provision by the international monetary system for equitable
and effective participation of ueveloping countries in decision making,
taking into account. inter alia. their growing role in the world
econom}

F.

Fechnical co-operation

116. In the implementation of the International Development
Strategy. intensified emphasis must be accorded to the important role
of technical co-operation in the development process. Technical cooperation makes an essential contribution to the efforts of developing
countries to achieve self-reliance through its broad role of facilitating
and supporting. inter a/ia, investment, research, training and development. Realization of the goals and objectives of the new International
Development Strategy will therefore require a renewed emphasis upon
technical co-operation anu a significant increase in the resources
provided for this purpose.
G.

Science and rechnology .fi1r development

117. Access to and mastery of modern scientific and technological
knowledge are essential for the economic and social progress of
developing countries. Accordingly. high priority must be given to increasing the developing countries· scientific and technological capacities. The transfer of technology. which is of the utmost importance in
this respect, must be encouraged and improved. International cooperation in those fields must he broadened and intensified. Special attention must be given to the development of technologies adapted to
the specific conditions of developing countries.
118. Action will be taken by the international community to restructure the existing patterns of international scientific and technological relations affecting the transfer and development of technology.
Developed countries should take adequate specific measures to give or
facilitate as appropriate to the developing countries the freest and
fullest possible access to technologies. To this end, all countries should
take steps for the early finalization. adoption and effective implementation of the international code of conduct on the transfer of
technology. Efforts should also be made to bring the negotiations on
the revision of the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial
Property to a successful conclusion as early as possible. The international community should continue to review the ways in which the industrial property system can become a more effective instrument for
the economic and technological development of all countries. particularly developing countries.
I 19. In technology planning and policies. special attention should
be given to sectors of critical importance to developing countries. They
should also take into account the need to arrive at a reasonable
balance between labour-intensive and capital-intensive technologies
with a view to achieving the fundamental aim of maximizing growth
and employment and satisfying special needs of developing countries.
120. To assist developing countries and to contribute to reducing
the imbalances between ueveloped and developing countries in
research and development. developed countries and international
financial institutions should support these efforts. Developed countries should increase substantially and progressively during the course
of the Decade the proporti,rn of their research and development expenditure and efforts to be devoted to the solution of jointly identified
specific problems of prime importance to developing countries with
the active participation of researchers and institutions of developing
countries. Technologically more advanced countries should facilitate
the acquisition by developing countries of skills, especially high-level
skills, through international exchanges. Developed countries should
intensify their support of developing countries' efforts towards greater
self-reliance in the field of technological development by taking other
specific measures recommended, particularly those in resolution
I 12 (\I of 3 J unc I 979 of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development" on strengthening the technological capacity of
developing countries including accelerating their technological transformation.

116

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

121. In accordance with the Vienna Programme of Action on
Science and Technology for Development, 11 developing countries,
with the necessary support of developed countries and international
financial institutions, will intensify their efforts to strengthen their
scientific and technological infrastructure and develop their endogenous technological and inventive capacities, in order to enhance their
capacity to design and generate new technologies as well as to select,
acquire, apply and adapt existing technology, inter alia, through:
(a) Substantially increasing the resources devoted to education
and training in technical, managerial and inventive skills, as well as to
research and development, and directing those effor!s towards the
solution of problems in the areas and sectors of critical concern to
those countries;

(b) Taking measures aimed at the efficient acquisition and optimum utilization of technology by establishing close and effective
linkages between the generators of technology, productive sectors and
technology users;
(c) Supplementing their efforts at the national level by initiating or
strengthening such co-operative measures among themselves as exchanges of skilled personnel, information and experience through the
establishment of regional. subregional and national centres for the
transfer and development of technology.

122. All countries should seek to ensure that scientific and
technological development will involve and benefit men and women
equally and measures should be taken to facilitate equal access for
men and women to scientific and technological training and to the
respective professional careers.
123. Concerted efforts will be made by the international community early in the Decade to take comprehensive and effective action.
as recommended by the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development at its fifth session, at the national, regional and international levels, aimed at minimizing the negative impact of the migration
of skilled personnel so that such migration from developing countries
will constitute an exchange in which the interests of all parties concerned are adequately protected. The international community should
consider examining, early in the Decade, in the light of relevant United
Nations decisions, arrangements whereby developing countries experiencing large-scale outnows of their skilled nationals. which cause
economic disruption, could secure assistance in dealing with the adjustment problems arising therefrom.
124. Substantial resources should be mobilized for the United
Nations Financing System for Science and Technology for Development, established by the General Assembly in section VI of its resolution 34/218 of 19 December 1979, to support actions needed for the
development of science and technology in developing countries. In determining the nature and level of the resources of the Financing
System, the following considerations should. inter alia. be taken into
account:
(a)

The need for a predictable and continuous now of resources:

The need for substantial resources in addition to those that exist within the United Nations system:
(b)

(c) The need for untied external resources for the scientific and
technological development of the developing countries.
The long-term arrangements of the Financing System will be brought
into operation in January I982, as agreed by the General Assembly at
its thirty-fourth session. To this end, the study of the long-term
arrangements of the Financing System should proceed expeditiously.
125. As provided for in the Vienna Programme of Action on
Science and Technology for Development. the development of the
global and international information network should be expedited
and, in this context, the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and
Technology for Development should consider urgently the establishment of such a system. The existing information systems within the
United Nations and other international bodies set up for the exchange
of scientific and technological information. which are also serving as
industrial technology data banks, should form an integral part of the
proposed global network. The network should be designed to meet the
urgent needs of the developing countries. Priority should be given to
covering alternative sources of technology and scientific, technical.
socio-economic, legal and other aspects needed for decision making in
the selection and transfer of technology.

" Report of the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development, Vienna. 20-J/ August /979 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.79.1.21 and corrigenda), chap. Vil.

H.

Energy

J26. Effective and urgent measures will be taken by the international community for the attainment of the goals and objectives in
the field of energy, as spelt out in paragraph 34 of the present Strategy.
These measures will include. inter a/ia, the following:
(a) All countries, in particular the developed countries, will undertake immediate measures to rationalize their energy consumption
through, inter alia, conservation, improved efficiency of their energy
systems, especially of hydrocarbons, improved energy management
and increased technical manpower training;

(b) In conformity with the principle of the full and permanent sovereignty of each country over its natural resources, the exploration and
rational exploitation of energy resources, both conventional and nonconventional, should be promoted in accordance with the national
plans and priorities of each country. The international community
should support and facilitate the effective participation of developing
countries in the production, processing, marketing and distribution of
those resources;
(c) To advance towards the. development of indigenous energy
resources of developing countries and the satisfaction of their energy
needs, developed countries should facilitate the fullest possible access
by developing countries to scientific and technological processes to
enable them to develop energy sources. including nuclear technology
for the production of energy in accordance with the principles set forth
in General Assembly resolution 32/50 of 8 December 1977. In this
context, developed countries and others with a capacity to do so. as
well as international institutions, should assist developing countries in
preparing comprehensive assessments of energy needs. uses and
resources and facilitating their planning and review of the energy
needs implicit in their development goals;
(d) The establishment and strengthening of medium-term and
long-term national action programmes on new and renewable sources
of energy. For this purpose, programmes of development. testing and
training co-operation between developed and developing countries
with testing centres in similar geophysical and climatic conditions will
be established and supported;

(e) Much greater participation by the international, national and
regional financial institutions in the financing of energy projects, in
particular those sited in the least developed countries, so as to bring
about an increase in the now of different types of resources;

(j) The improvement of the investment climate in interested developing countries so as to stimulate nows of foreign investment in the
framework of their national plans and policies in the field of energy:
(g) Meeting the needs of energy-deficient developing countries
through co-operation, assistance and investment in relation to conventional as well as new and renewable sources of energy. The United
Nations system should strengthen its information services in the field
of natural resources.

127. The question of co-operation in the field of energy will be
dealt with within the over-all framework of international economic cooperation for development so as to encourage and accelerate energy
conservation and the development of world energy resources by. inter
a/ia, facilitating and improving access to energy-related technologies.
expanded energy research and development and increased investment
nows into energy exploration and development.
I.

Transport

128. In the transport sector, national and international action ,-jJJ
promote the development of world sea-borne trade and other transportation systems and the increase in the participation by developing
countries in world transport of international trade and, to this end. appropriate structural changes will be carried out where necessary. The
international community will continue to take the necessary steps to
enable developing countries to compete more effectively and to expand their national and multinational merchant neets so as to increase
their share substantially with a view to reaching as close as possible to
20 per cent of the dead-weight tonnage of the world merchant neet by
I 990. The Convention on a Code of Conduct for Liner Conferences
will be implemented by its signatories. Early in the Decade, the Convention on International Multimodal Transport will come into force.
which will facilitate the development nf multimodal transport operations by developing countries.
129. The international community will assist the developing countries in their efforts to expand their capabilities in ports and related in-

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

land transport facilities and infrastructure in the training of maritime
personnel. It should also, where appropriate, assist in the development
of their shipbuilding and ship-repairing capacities.
130. Developing countries will be enabled to make major advancements in air transport, particularly in air cargo transport, inter alia,
through the increase of the air transport fleets and the development of
suitable airports and related infrastructures. Particular attention will
be given at the international level to the elimination of discriminatory
and unfair practices, where they exist, in civil aviation which are
detrimental to the growth of the air sector in developing countries.
131. The road and railway transport sectors, which are recognized
as important parts of the physical infrastructure in developing countries, will receive considerable support from the international community in order substantially to increase and improve the road and
railway networks of the developing countries.
132. The international community will give adequate support, to
the extent possible, to regional co-operation in the transport and communication sector, especially to the implementatton of the Transport
and Communications Decade in Africa, 1978-1988.
133. The international community will explore ways and means of
increasing the availability of financing for the development of the
transport sector.
J.

Economic and technical co-operation among
developing countries

134. Developing countries will pursue actively the promotion of
economic and technical co-operation among themselves as a basic
component of the efforts towards the establishment of the new international economic order which, as such, is based on co-operation
among all States. In this context, they are committed to the effective
implementation of the Arusha Programme for Collective SelfReliance as well as to the programmes in those fields agreed at Mexico
City, Havana and Buenos Aires and regional programmes, including
the Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia
Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa, which was adopted
at the second extraordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity, held at Lagos,
on 28 and 29 April 1980." The implementation of these programmes
in the 1980s would first of all help the developing countries, through
their own efforts, to strengthen their economic potential, accelerate
their economic growth and improve their position in the system of international economic relations.
135. On the basis of the proposals of developing countries in competent bodies, the international community will take measures to
provide, as appropri;;te, support and assistance to developing countries in strengthening and enlarging their mutual co-operation, at the
subregional, regional and interregional levels, including additional
technical support, as well as conference and secretariat services for the
holding of meetings in accordance with the established procedures and
practices of the United Nations.

K.

Least developed countries, most seriously affected countries,
developing island countries and land-locked developing countries

l.

Least developed countries

136. As an essential priority within the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, the
least developed countries-the economically weakest and poorest
countries with the most formidable structural problems-require a
special programme of sufficient size and intensity consistent with their
national plans and priorities to make a decisive break from their past
and present situation and their bleak prospects. Efforts must therefore
be immediately and substantially expanded in order to transform their
economies, to promote a self-sustained process of development, to accelerate agricultural and industrial progress and to ensure development of human resources and broadly based participation in the
development process concurrent and consistent with equitable distribution of the gains of socio-economic development. Therefore, the international community will take urgently the necessary steps to
finalize and implement the Substantial New Programme of Action for
the I 980s for the least developed countries, which was launched by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its fifth session in its resolution 122 (V) of 3 June 1979." The Programme is to be
finalized, adopted and supported by the United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries. to be convened in 198 J.
"See A/S-11 / 14, annex I.

117

137. To meet the objectives of the Substantial New Programme of
Action for the J 980s, national plans will identify and cost major priority projects and programmes. The details for each country in terms
of structural change in agriculture and industry, improved physical.
social and institutional infrastructure, and improved performance in
connexion with, inter a/ia, nutrition. literacy, health, employment and
the development of human resources will be clearly specified. The
goals to be achieved will require greater efforts by the least developed
countries themselves, together with a substantial expansion of support
from the international community.
138. Every possible effort will be made to develop programmes
that will enable each least developed country to increase its national
income substantially-even doubling it in appropriate cases-by 1990.
139. To help the least developed land-locked countries to alleviate
their geographical handicap, specific assistance will be provided for
the development and improvement of a transit transport infrastructure, both administrative and physical. Similar specific assistance will
be provided to least developed island countries for the development of
their transport infrastructure.
140. The expanded planning efforts at the national, subregional
and regional levels will be strongly backed by firm international commitments to expand resource flows to the least developed countries by
substantial amounts. Commitments already unoertaken" will be implemented effectively, within the framework of an equitable sharing of
effort, taking into account the relative performance of donor countries. The United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries will take note of those measures which have already been
taken, and consider necessary further measures to ensure an adequate
minimum flow of external assistance to each least developed country.
141. To meet the pressing problems of the least developed countries, the modalities by which concessional aid is provided to them will
become much more flexible and responsive to their special needs.
142. In national development efforts, high priority will be given to
increasing production and export earnings as rapidly as is feasible. The
aim should be to make progress towards self-reliance and selfsustained growth by reducing significantly the degree of dependence on
foreign assistance flows during the 1990s. The international community will strongly support such efforts through financi.tl and technical
assistance and through commercial policy measures.
143. To meet the special needs of the least developed countries, the
international community will support efforts towards strengthening
the technological and productive capacity of those countries, increasing their absorptive capacity by building up their infrastructure, particularly in transportation. <:ommunication and electrification and assistance in the establishment of comprehensive inventories of their
resources and preparation of industrial surveys. supporting their full
industrialization and full participation in the processes of redeployment and in the international consultations on industrial growth, including the system of consultations, strengthening their importsubstitutiOJl processes and their manufactures-export performance,
setting up joint enterprises under regional co-operation and preferential treatment of the least developed countries within international
agreements for industrial products and processed commodities. Financial flows to the least developed countries will be substantially increased on highly concessional terms. inter a/ia, with a view to implementing these measures.
144. To bring about an increase in agricultural production and the
structural transformation of agriculture in the least developed countries, the level of annual investments in land development, including
flood control, soil and water conservation measures and the establishment of permanent crops, in irrigation, machinery and equipment,
livestock development, storage and marketing, transport and firststage processing of primary agricultural production will be substantially increased. Commitments of external resources to agriculture in
the least developed countries will be raised substantially and in real
terms. The agreed recommendations of the United Nations Conference 011 the Least Developed Countries in this regard will be fully
implemented.
145. It will also be especially important, in elaborating the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the lea~t
developed countries, to make maximum use of co-operation arrange" See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, Fifth Session. vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.7911.D.14). part one, sect. A, resolution 122 (V).

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

118

ments among developing countries, particularly at the regional and
subregional levels. In elaborating their programme for greater collective self-reliance and economic and technical co-operation among
themselves, the developing countries will pay particular attention to
the special difficulties of the least developed countries and to expanding substantially support for the least developed countries as a
further important contribution to the above-mentioned programmes.
146, Serious consideration will be given by developed countries to
increasing substantially and in real terms official development assistance to the least developed countries during the Decade. The
proposals made by the Group of High-Level Experts on the least
developed countries for the allocation by developed countries to the
least developed countries of a minimum of 0. 15 per c0nt of their gross
national product as official development assistance by the first half of
the 1980s, rising to 0.20 per cent during the second half of the 1980s,
will be appropriately considered by the United Nations Conference on
the Least Developed Countries in 1981 within the context of an overall increase in official development assistance with a view to achieving
the internationally accepted targets.

2.

Developing island countries

148. During the Decade, further specific action will be taken to
assist developing island countries in offsetting major handicaps due to
geographical and other constraints. In order to lower their vulnerability to economic instability, every effort will he made by the international community to assist them in diversifying their economies,
taking into account over-all prospects for, as well as existing levels of.
development.
149. Efforts of developing island countries in actively seeking
foreign investment will be supported by the international community.
including investment in their infrastructural projects, especially in the
sectors of water, electricity, industrial estates and transport. The es•
tablishment of joint ventures and assistance in strengthening the
capacity of developing island countries to negotiate with foreign investors should also be explored during the Decade. Their access to
foreign markets will be facilitated hy assistance, both technical and
financial, in their trade promotion efforts and by the simplification or
preference procedures, where appropriate, so that small administrations and enterprises can take full advantage of preferential access to
markets where it is in principle available. Assistance will be given in
the establishment of appropriate technical education and training
programmes, including the areas of marketing and management.
150. Financial and other assistance to developing island countries
by multilateral and bilateral institutions will be augmented as appropriate. Assistance procedures should be simplified to the extent possible.
151. The developed countries and international organizations
should be ready to take action to ensure that the full benefit of general
measures in favour of developing countries is shared by developing
island countries.

4.

154. In addition. multilateral and bilateral financial institutions
will further intensif} their efforts to raise the flow of resources to the
land-locked developing countries to alleviate their geographical handicaps through diversification of their economies, givin8 particular
priority to the establishment of industries and the development of
natural resources.
155. In order to implement the above-mentioned measures, the international community. in particular the developed countries, is invited to contribute significantly and generously to the United Nations
Special Fund for land-locked Developing Countries. Those donor
countries which have not yet contributed to the Fund should urgently
consider reviewing their positions with a view to extending their full
support to the Fund.
L.

Most seriously affected countries

147. The current world economic situation has given rise to deep
concern at the deterioration of the economic and financial situation of
those developing countries whose relatively weak economies make
them particularly vulnerable to economic crises caused by sharp increases in the prices of their essential imports. The international community will consider extending relief and assistance to those countries
which may be most seriously affected by the current economic crisis,
bearing in mind immediate balance-of-payments and development
needs: To this end, urgent consideration should he given to immediate
relief measures in favour of those countries. Concrete measures will
need to be urgently considered hy the international community with a
view to the implementation of recommendations agreed by the
General Assembly on the basis of the Secretary-General's report. In
the meantime, urgent consideration should be given to the implementation of the measures set out in General Assembly resolution 34 /217
of 19 December 1979.
3.

153. The international community will give, in accordance with
the priorities of the land-locked countries and accepted development
criteria, strong financial and technical assistance support, through
specific actions, in accordance with resolution 123 (V) of 3 June 1979
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development."

Land-locked developing countries

152. An integrated planning approach for the improvement and
development of transit transport facilities and services will be encouraged, particularly through more effective co-operation between landlocked countries and the transit countries. Such co-operation will involve the harmonization of transport planning and the promotion of
joint ventures in the field of transport at regional, subregional and hilateral levels.

Environment

156. Because health, nutrition and general well-being depend upon
the integrity and productivity of the environment and resources.
measures should continue to be developed and carried out to promote
the environmental and ecological soundness of developmental activities. Methods will he devised to assist interested developing countries in environmental management and in the evaluation of the costs
and benefits, quantitative and qualitative, of environment protection
measures with a view to dealing more adequately with the environmental aspects of development activities. This method will be
developed taking fully into account the existing knowledge of interrelationships between development, environment, population and
resources. To that end, research on these interrelationships will be intensified. The capacity of the developing countries will be strengthened
to facilitate their making appropriate scientific and technical choices
relating to environment in their development process.
157. Bilateral and multilateral donors will consider, within the
over-all financing of projects in developing countries, at their request,
meeting the costs of taking environmental aspects into account in the
design and completion of such projects. They will furthermore provide
assistance, including in the field of training, to develop the endogenous capacity of developing countries to follow the methods enumerated in paragraph 156 above. thereby also facilitating technical cooperation among developing countries.
158. The international community, in particular the developed
countries, will substantially increase its financial and technical support
to drought-stricken countries suffering from desertification. In this
context, support to the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification"' will
he augmented.

Human seltlements

'\1.

159. The quality of life and the environment should be improved
through, inter a/ia, the formulation and implementation of appropriate planning and development policies designed to ensure a better interregional balance between rural and urban development, as well as
through the strengthening, in the context of human settlements
planning, of measures to improve housing conditions for the most
disadvantaged regions and communities-access to services, land and
employment-and. in particular, through housing rehabilitation
programmes.
160. Developing countries will formulate policies for the provision
of basic shelter and infrastructure. To this end, and so as to benefit
from the multiplying effect of investment in the field of human settlements. countries will develop their construction industry, particularly
for low-cost housing, support relevant financing institutions. stimulate
research and disseminate findings on efficient methods of construction, low-cost design and technology for infrastructure, indigenous
huilding materials and environmental protection.

N.

Disaster relief

161. Recognizing the detrimental effects of disasters on the
development of developing countries, the international community
will take measures to improve and strengthen arrangements to provide
developing countries with adequate and timely assistance in matters of
disaster relief, prevention and preparedness.
'" A/CON F.74; •6. chap. 1

V.
0.

Social developmenl

162. Each country will freely determine and implement appropriate policies for social development within the framework of its
development plans and priorities and in accordance with its cultural
identity, socio-economic structure and stage of development. The
necessary financial and technical assistance will be provided by the international community through, inter alia, specific international
programmes to support the national endeavours of the developing
countries in key areas of social policy. To this end, an important role
should be played by the United Nations system. Each country shall intensify measures for the full utilization of human resources, especially
for the training of national personnel. within the framework of its
national plans and its present and long-term requirements for
qualified national personnel at all levels and in all important sectors of
socio-economic activity.
163. Countries will pursue the objectives of the reduction of
poverty, promotion of employment opportunities and the provision of
the right to work through enhanced economic growth and measures to
ensure a fair distribution of the benefits of development and institutional reforms. As development requires productive and adequately
remunerative employment, development planning will pay due attention to this aspect. Countries will seek policies to reconcile gains in
productivity with increase of employment in the industrial, agricultural, service and other sectors of their economies as well as policies to
promote improved working and living conditions in these sectors.
Measures to that effect include access to land, credit and know-how,
as well as an increase in training facilities adapted to the needs of
the various sectors. The creation of producer co-operatives. including
credit, marketing and processing. as well as consumer co-operatives
will be encouraged. Countries will adopt effective measures to enhance
the involvement of women in the development process. Likewise.
measures for the benefit of youth will be formulated and adopted.
Prompt measures will be taken to eliminate child labour in conformity with relevant international labour conventions and to promote the
general welfare of children. In this regard, national development efforts, including policies, programmes and services that affect children,
should be reviewed regularly with a view to extending and strengthening the basic services benefiting children, including water and sanitation, health, nutrition and education. International co-operation in
support of these measures should he enhanced and strengthened.
164. Countries will formulate and implement education policies
appropriate to their economic and social requirements. Each country
will determine the balance between the necessary efforts and resources
required to promote universal education, including the goal of free
education at ail levels, non-formal education of adults. cultural
development and scientific and technological ability. l ncreased and
equitable access to educational and training facilities will help to
reduce income inequalities and to enhance the capability of the society
for economic and social progress. Particular attention will be devoted
to the transmission by the educational system of the cultural heritage
and of universal values of mankind.
165.

119

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

To attain an acceptable level of health for all by the year

2000, countries will establish an adequate and comprehensive system
of primary health care as an integral part of a more general health
system and as part of a general imp.ovemenl in nutrition and living
standards and basic infrastructure for supplying such needs as safe
water and basic sanitation. The development of appropriate health
technologies, the provision of essential drugs, the prevention of the introduction of dangerous and hazardous drugs. the promotion of
health-related research and the training of qualified health personnel
at all levels, including highly qualified physicians, will complement the
results expected from a multiplication of primary health care centres.
Measures to reduce infant and general levels of mortality will include
proper nutrition, education of parents, immunization of children and
better environmental health. Countries will establish the requisite infrastructure and also introduce, expand and improve access to health
care services and will strive to achieve the goal of providing health protection to the entire population, if possible free of charge.
166. Population policies will be considered as an integral part of
over-all development polici~s. All countries will continue to integrate
their population measures and programmes into their social and
economic goals and strategies. Within the framework of national demographic policies, countries will take the measures they deem necessary concerning fertility levels in full respect of the right of parents lo
determine in a free, informed and responsihle manner the number and
spacing of their children. The international community will increase
the level of population assistance in support of those measures. In addi-

tion, due consideration should he given to the need for increased
biomedical and social science research into safer, more efficient and
more widely acceptable techniques of fertility regulation.
167. It is for each developing country to decide, within the
framework of a unified approach to development, the possible content
of a national programme for the development of its human resources.
Such a programme would include the improvement of primary and
secondary education for the entire population, which provide a broad
manpower basis for future development, acceleration of community
activities and the development of skilled personnel. On the other hand,
the developed countries should place increased emphasis on cooperation for the development of human resources in the developing
countries. They should explore the most effective means of extending
assistance in response to the development needs in specific areas as requested. In this context, the use of the mass media, which will reach a
broader section of society, can be an effective measure for the development of human resources. Assistance in the areas of extension services
and teacher training will also eventually affect a large part of the population.
168. The important set of measures to improve the status of
women contained in the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women"s Year." adopted at
Mexico City in 1975, and the important agreed measures relating to
the sectors of the International Development Strategy in the
Programme of Action for the Second Half of the United Nations
Decade for Women,'' adopted at Copenhagen in I 980. should he implemented
IV.

RL\IIW AND Al'l'RAIS,\l

01

IHI

IMl'I FMI NTAIION 01· 1111

NIW

IN r I RNA 110NA1 DFv1-1 <lPMl·NT STR,\11 (;\
169. The process of review and appraisal forms an integral part of
the International Development Strategy. Its aim will be to ensure the
effective implementation of the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade and to strengthen
it as an instrument of policy. The process will be undertaken within the
United Nations system at the global. sectoral and regional levels. and
at the national level hy the respective Governments, making full use of
existing mechanisms and facilities and avoiding as far as possible duplication or proliferation of review activities.
170. The process will consist of systematic scrutiny, within the
context of an over-all review of the international economic situation,
of the progress made towards achieving the goals and objectives of the
Strategy and the identification and appraisal of !he factors which acwunt for shortfalls that may be encountered.
171. This process should provide an occasion, in the light of this
over-all review, to see how the implementation of the Strategy can be
strengthened a'nd the necessary political impulses given and to carry
out. if necessary, the adjustment, intensification or reformulation of
the policy measures in the light of evolving needs and developments.
172. At the national level, Governments will, in accordance with
their national priorities and plans, appropriately renect the goals and
ohjectives and the policy measures of the International Development
Strategy in their policy formulation. Where necessary, the evaluation
capacity, comprising also the statistical capability, of the countries
concerned should be strengthened. including through assistance, upon
their request, from appropriate multilateral and bilateral sources.
173. At the regional level, the review and appraisal will be conducted by the respective regional commissions. Development banks,
regional and subregional groups and organizations could collahorate
with the regional commissions for this purpose. Furthermore. the
regional commissions should carry out, as part of their regular activit_v
of preparing economic surveys of the region. periodic reviews of major
aspects of development in the evolving development experiences in
their regions.
174. The regional commissions should consider the feasibility of
preparing action programmes to support the efforts of developing
countries in the implementation of the International Development
Strate_gy in their respective areas. Furthermore. the regional commis11 See Report ofche World Conference of the lrzternarional Women's
Year, Mexico City, /9 Jwtt'-21 July /975 (Lnitcd Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.1), chap. II, sect. A.
"See Report of the World Conference of the Uni red Narions Decade
for Women: Equality. Developmenc and Peace. Copenhagen. 14-30 July
191W (United Nations publication. Sales No. F..80.IV., and corrigendum), chap. I, sect I\

120

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

sions, in conjunction with relevant United Nations specialized agencies and multilateral development institutions, might suggest ways of
improving United Nations assistance efforts and enhancing their coordination in the context of the particular economic and social
development needs of each region.
175. At the sectoral level, the relevant specialized agencies, organs
and organizations of the United Nations will contribute from the experience of their respective sectors to the process of review and appraisal at both the global and regional levels.
176. At the global level, review and appraisal will be carried out by
the General Assembly, with the assistance, as appropriate, of a body
of universal membership, which would report through the Economic
and Social Council. The process will take into account the results
achieved at the sectoral. regional and national levels. The Committee
for Development Planning will be invited to submit its observations
and recommendations. The Secretary-General will prepare and submit
a comprehensive report and other appropriate documentation in order
to assist the process of review and appraisal.
177. Developed countries, individually or through their relevant
organizations, are invited to transmit reports of their development assistance efforts in the light of the commitments undertaken by them in
the International Development Strategy and in relevant international
forums.
178. The process of review and appraisal should, based on an assessment as provided for in General Assembly resoldion 33/201 of
29 January 1979, ensure that the operational activities of the United
Nations system contribute effectively to the implementation of the International Development Strategy.
179. The review and appraisal will. at all levels, take into account
the results of the global negotiations relating to international
economic co-operation for development, the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, the International
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, and of such United Nations conferences as effectively contribute to the implementation of the Strategy,
as well as the results of relevant regional and interregional meetings.
The agreed results will be incorporated in the Strategy by the General
Assembly when and as appropriate. with a view to contributing to its
effective implementation.
180. The first review and appraisal will be carried out by the
General Assembly in 1984, on which occasion a decision as to the timing of a subsequent review or reviews will be taken.

35/57.

Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order, contained in its resolutions 320 I ( S- VI)
and 3202 (S-VI) of I May I 974, and the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States, contained in its
resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December I 974, which
laid down the foundations of the new international
economic order,
Bearing in mind article 34 of the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and General Assembly resolution 3486 (XXX) of 12 December 1975, relating to
the review of the implementation of the Charter,
Concerned by the limited and partial progress in the
attainment of the aims and objectives established in the
resolutions on the new international economic order
and in the implementation of the provisions contained
in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States
which are directed towards more just and equitable
economic relations and towards the structural changes
needed to promote the development of developing countries,
Reaffirming solemnly the determination to establish a
new international economic order,

Mindful of the great importance that the international
community attaches to the launching and successful
conclusion of the round of global negotiations on international economic co-operation for development and to
the implementation of the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade, 41
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the assessment of the progress made in the establishment of the new international economic order and appropriate action for the promotion of the development
of developing countries and international economic cooperation,''
I. Reaffirms the role of the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order and of the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States as principal
sources for international economic co-operation for
development;
2. Urges Member States, in this context, to take all
appropriate measures for the launching and successful
conclusion of the round of global negotiations and the
implementation of the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade;
3. Decides, in the light of the results of the negotiations on international economic co-operation for
development, to hold at its thirty-sixth session a comprehensive, in-depth review of the implementation of the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, as
provided for in article 34 thereof.
83rd plenary meeting
5 December I 980
35 / 58.

Specific action related to the particular needs and
problems of land-locked developing countries

The General Assembly,
Reiterating the specific actions related to the particular needs of the land-locked developing countries
stated in resolutions 63 (Ill) of 19 May 1972," 98 (IV) of
31 May 1976"' and 123 (V) of 3 June 1979' 7 of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
Recalling the provisions of its resolutions 31 / 157 of
21 December 1976, 32/191 of 19 December 1977, 33/150of
20 December 1978 and 34/ 198 of I 9 December 1979 and
other resolutions of the United Nations relating to the
particular needs and problems of land-locked developing countries,
Bearing in mind various other resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly, its related organs and the
specialized agencies, emphasizing special and urgent
measures in favour of land-locked developing countries,
Recognizing that the lack of territorial access to the
sea, aggravated by remoteness and isolation from world
markets. and the great transit, transport and transshipment costs impose serious constraints on their
socio-economic development,
'' See resolution .15/56 above. annex.
"A/S-11/5 and Corr. I and Add. I-3.
'' See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development. Third Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.7.1.11.D.4), annex I.A.
"Ibid.. Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D. IO and corrigendum). part one.
sect. A.
"Ibid., Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14). part one. sect. A.
