General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

108

2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the necessary facilities and
services;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-fifth session an item entitled "Report of the
Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression".
1831st plenary meeting,
12 December 1969.
2550 (XXIV). United Nations Programme of
Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law

The General Assembly,
N oting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of Intemational
Law,17
Considering that, in the conduct of the Programme,
it is desirable to use as far as possible the resources
and facilities made available by the intemational organizations concemed, by Member States and by others,
l. Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out in
1970 the activities specified in bis report, and in particular to provide:
(a) Fifteen fellowships at the request of Govemments of developing countries;
(b) Current United Nations legal publications to
institutions in developing countries which have previously received United Nations legal publications under
the present Programme, and to other institutions in
developing countries for which requests for such publications are made by the Member States concerned;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for its
participation in the Programme, particularly in respect
of the assistance provided in the development of the
teaching of international law;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
lnstitute for Training and Research for its partici_Pation in the Programme, particularly in the orgamzation of regional seminars and training courses, in the
preparation of studies in international law and in the
conduct of the fellowship progr,uume in intemational
law sponsored jointly by the United Nations and the
Institute;
4. Reiterates its request to Member States and interested bodies and individuals to make voluntary contributions towards the financing of the Programme and
expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have made voluntary contributions for this
purpose;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To pursue bis consultations with the bodies
concerned in order that regional seminars and training
courses under the Programme should continue to inelude topics relating to international trade law, so as
to meet the need for developing local expertise in
intem~tional trade law, particularly in the developing
countrtes;
lT lbid.,

(b) To consult with the Advisory Committee on the
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
Inte~n~tional Law and with United Nations organs,
spec1ahzed agencies and other organizations and institutions active in the field of international trade law
concer~ing the feasibility of establishing, within their
respective programmes at selected universities or other
institutions in developing countries, regional institutes
or chairs for training in the field of international trade
law;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session on the implementation of the Programme during 1970 and,
following consultations with the Advisory Committee
?n the Progra~me, to submit recommendations regardmg the execution of the Programme in 1971;
. 7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
1ts twenty-fifth session an item entitled "United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of Intemational
Law''.
1831 st plenary meeting,
12 December 1969.

2551 (XXIV). Forcihle diversion of civil
aircraft in flight

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned over acts of unlawful interference
with international civil aviation,
Considering it necessary to recommend effective
measures against hijacking in all its forms, or any
other unlawful seizure or exercise of control of aircraft,
M indf ul that such acts may endanger the life and
health of passsengers and crew in disregard of commonly accepted humanitarian considerations,
. A ware that international civil aviation can only func!•on properly in conditions guaranteeing the safety of
1ts operations and the due exercise of the freedom of
air travel,
l. Calls upon States to take every appropriate
m~asure to ~nsure that their respective national legislat10ns prov1de an adequate framework for effective
legal measures against ali kinds of acts of unlawful interference with, seizure of, or other wrongful exercise
of control by force or threat thereof over civil aircraft
in flight;
'
2. Urges States in particular to ensure that persons
on board who perpetrate such acts are prosecuted;
3. Urges full support for the efforts of the lnternational Civil Aviation Organization directed towards
the speedy preparation and implementation of a conv~ntion providing for appropriate measures, inter alía,
w1th respect to making the unlawful seizure of civil
aircraft a punishable offence and to the prosecution of
persons who commit that offence;
4._ Invites States to ratify or accede to the Convention on Offences and Certain Other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft, signed at Tokyo on 14 September 1963, 18 in conformity with the Convention.
1831st plenary meeting,
12 December 1969.

Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 91,

document A/7740.

18 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 704 (1969), No. 10106.
