United Nations

A/RES/64/269

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 August 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 146

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 24 June 2010
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/64/820)]

64/269. Cross-cutting issues
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/233 A of 23 December 1994, 49/233 B of 31 March
1995, 51/218 E of 17 June 1997, 57/290 B of 18 June 2003, 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 and 61/279 of 29 June
2007,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the overview of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations, 1 on national professional
officers, 2 on the welfare and recreation needs of all categories of personnel and
detailed implications, 3 on the progress of training in peacekeeping, 4 on the
comprehensive review of the compensation of death and disability benefits to
military contingents, formed police units, military observers and civilian police
officers, 5 on the status of cases for death and disability for formed police units,
military contingents, civilian police officers and military observers processed and
currently in process, and comprehensive review of the administrative and payment
arrangement for such cases, 6 on special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse, 7 on the comprehensive report of conduct and
discipline including full justification of all posts 8 and on peacekeeping best
practices, 9 the report on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2007, 10 as well as the note by the
Secretary-General thereon, 11 the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
0F

1F

2F

3F

4F

5F

6F

7F

8F

9F

10F

_______________
1

A/62/727 and A/63/696.
A/62/762.
3
A/63/675 and Corr.1.
4
A/63/680.
5
A/63/550.
6
A/62/805 and Corr.1.
7
A/63/720.
8
A/62/758.
9
A/62/593 and Corr.1.
10
A/62/281 (Part II).
11
A/62/281 (Part II)/Add.1.
2

09-47797

*0947797*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/269

on peacekeeping operations 12 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 13
1F

12F

Having also considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the overview
of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations, 14 on the global field
support strategy 15 and on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation
and sexual abuse, 16 the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
peacekeeping operations, 17 as well as the related report of the Advisory
Committee, 18
13F

14F

15F

16F

17F

General
1.
Reaffirms its resolutions 57/290 B, 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276, and
requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of their relevant
provisions;
Appreciates the efforts of all peacekeeping personnel in the field and at
2.
Headquarters;
3.
Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the overview of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations,14 the global field support
strategy15 and special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual
abuse,16 as well as the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions;18
4.
Also takes note of the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
on peacekeeping operations;17
5.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report
of the Advisory Committee, subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and
requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
I
Budget presentation and financial management
1.
Reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of
the General Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and
budgetary matters;
Takes note of paragraph 3 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
2.
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,18 and stresses that the General Assembly
has the sole authority to approve the implementation of recommendations of the
Advisory Committee pertaining to peacekeeping;
3.

Reaffirms paragraphs 21 to 25 of its resolution 64/259 of 29 March 2010;

4.
Reiterates that the delegation of authority on the part of the SecretaryGeneral should be in order to facilitate the better management of the Organization,
_______________
12

A/63/302 (Part II).
A/62/781, and A/63/746, sects. II and IV.
14
A/64/643.
15
A/64/633.
16
A/64/669.
17
A/64/326 (Part II).
18
A/64/660.
13

2

A/RES/64/269

but stresses that the overall responsibility for management of the Organization rests
with the Secretary-General as the Chief Administrative Officer;
5.
Affirms the need for the Secretary-General to ensure that the delegation
of authority to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Field Support and field missions is in strict compliance with relevant resolutions
and decisions, as well as relevant rules and procedures of the General Assembly on
this matter;
Stresses that heads of departments report to and are accountable to the
6.
Secretary-General;
7.
Reiterates the importance of strengthened accountability in the
Organization and of ensuring greater accountability of the Secretary-General to
Member States, inter alia, for the effective and efficient implementation of
legislative mandates and the use of human and financial resources;
Takes note of paragraphs 12 and 14 of the report of the Advisory
8.
Committee, and emphasizes that all field missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates and
that the transition of peacekeeping operations to peacebuilding may entail a change
in resource requirements;
Welcomes the improvements that have been made in the timeliness and
9.
quality of budget proposals for peacekeeping operations, and encourages the
Secretary-General to further intensify his efforts to that end through enhanced
coordination and cooperation among missions, the Department of Field Support, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Management and the
Department for General Assembly and Conference Management of the Secretariat;
10. Reaffirms that budget submissions should reflect management
improvements and efficiency gains to be achieved and should present future
strategies in that regard;
11. Stresses the importance of further steps by the Secretary-General towards
improving budget presentations and making more accurate forecasts;
12. Appreciates the improved presentation by the Secretary-General of
efficiency gains in peacekeeping budgets;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts to achieve
economies of scale within and between field missions without undermining their
operational requirements and the implementation of their respective mandates and to
report thereon in the context of the overview report;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
the main part of its sixty-fifth session on measures to address the impact of
exchange rate fluctuations in the presentation of peacekeeping budgets and the
management of peacekeeping accounts;
15. Notes with concern the significant amount of prior-period obligations
cancelled by several missions, and reiterates its request that the Secretary-General
improve control over obligations;

3

A/RES/64/269

II
Human resources
1.
Reaffirms section VII of its resolution 61/276, and its resolution 63/250
of 24 December 2008;
2.
Decides to revert to the establishment of minimum welfare and recreation
standards, as described in paragraphs 62 to 82 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral,3 at the second part of its resumed sixty-fifth session;
3.
Also decides to increase the level of compensation for death for all
categories of uniformed personnel to 70,000 United States dollars;
4.
Expresses deep concern about delays in the settlement of claims in
respect of death and disability, and requests the Secretary-General to take urgent
measures to eliminate the existing backlog of death and disability claims pending
for more than three months and to report on the progress made to the General
Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixty-fifth session;
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to settle death and
5.
disability claims as soon as possible, but not later than three months from the date
of submission of a claim;
Reaffirms its resolution 52/177 of 18 December 1997, and requests the
6.
Secretary-General to ensure that, accordingly, all uniformed personnel deployed in
peacekeeping operations shall continue to be eligible for death and disability
compensation during the entire period of their deployment;
III
Operational requirements
1.
Notes that fuel is a major item of expenditure and that its management is
vulnerable to serious risk of fraud and abuse;
2.
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest
possible use of facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy, in order to minimize the costs of procurement for field missions;
Notes the increase in aircraft rental costs, particularly for rotary wing
3.
aircraft, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to achieve
economies of scale and efficiencies in air operations through better planning and
optimal use of available resources without undermining safety and operational
requirements and rotation and troop deployment cycles;
Underlines the need for the United Nations to improve management of
4.
its ground transportation in order to achieve maximum operational efficiency, and
urges the Secretary-General to accelerate his efforts in this regard;
Recalls paragraph 72 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
5.
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,18 and requests the Secretary-General to
provide detailed information on the measures undertaken to mitigate the
environmental impact of peacekeeping missions in the context of his next overview
report;
6.

4

Reaffirms the provisions of section XVIII of its resolution 61/276;

A/RES/64/269

7.
Stresses the need for expedited and flexible procedures for the
implementation of quick-impact projects with a view to ensuring the fulfilment of
the mandate established in section XVIII of resolution 61/276;
IV
Conduct and discipline
1.
Recognizes the shared responsibility, within their respective
competencies, of United Nations organizations and agencies and troop-contributing
countries to ensure that all personnel are held accountable for sexual exploitation
and related offences committed while serving in humanitarian and peacekeeping
operations;
Underlines the great importance it attaches to the elimination of
2.
misconduct, including sexual exploitation and sexual abuse, calls for full
implementation of the United Nations zero-tolerance policy, stresses the importance
of the measures put in place in this regard, and requests the Secretary-General to
strengthen efforts for the prevention, prompt investigation, enforcement of
disciplinary action and assistance to victims of sexual exploitation and abuse;
Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures to prevent
3.
unsubstantiated allegations of misconduct from damaging the credibility of any
United Nations peacekeeping operation and to ensure that appropriate steps are
taken to maintain and restore the image and credibility of any peacekeeping
mission, troop-contributing country or United Nations peacekeeping personnel in
cases where allegations of misconduct are ultimately legally unproven;
Strongly urges Member States to take all appropriate measures to ensure
4.
that crimes by United Nations officials and experts on mission do not go unpunished
and that the perpetrators of such crimes are brought to justice;
V
Other
Notes with concern the status of liabilities and reimbursements to troopcontributing and police-contributing countries for their troops, formed police units,
contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment, emphasizes the importance of
the full settlement of those liabilities, and in this regard urges all Member States to
pay their assessed contributions on time, in full and without conditions;
VI
Global field support strategy
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of
27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December
2000,
Recognizes the challenges faced by the Organization in providing
1.
logistical, administrative and information and communications technology support
for peacekeeping operations, and expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by
the Secretary-General to present an integrated approach to enable more timely
mission start-up and deployment and to improve quality, efficiency and economy of
scale in the delivery of services to field missions;

5

A/RES/64/269

2.
Also recognizes the need for timely mission start-up and deployment and
to improve the quality and effectiveness of service delivery to field missions;
3.
Notes with interest the overall concept of the global field support
strategy, which outlines a broad and useful framework for improving the efficiency
and effectiveness of service delivery to field missions and the better use of
resources, including through the provision of common services;
Underlines the central role of Headquarters in strategic policymaking and
4.
oversight of relevant rules, regulations and procedures while seeking efficiency and
effectiveness in the delivery of support to field missions;
Emphasizes the importance of preserving unity of command in missions
5.
at all levels as well as coherence in policy and strategy and clear command
structures in the field, up to and including at Headquarters;
Also emphasizes the need for the Secretary-General to closely consult
6.
with Member States, in particular troop-contributing countries, in the
implementation of the global field support strategy in the light of the decisions
taken in the present resolution;
Further emphasizes that the implementation of the global field support
7.
strategy will improve the operational effectiveness of field missions;
8.
Decides that, if a decision of the Security Council relating to the start-up
phase or expansion phase of peacekeeping operations results in the need for
expenditure, the Secretary-General is authorized, with the prior concurrence of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, to enter into
commitments up to 100 million dollars from the available balance of the
Peacekeeping Reserve Fund and that the cumulative total of outstanding
commitment authority in respect of the start-up or expansion phase of peacekeeping
operations should not exceed the total level of the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund at
any one time, and accordingly decides to amend the Financial Regulations and
Rules of the United Nations 19 by substituting the words “the balance of the
Peacekeeping Reserve Fund, and not to exceed 100 million United States dollars”
for the words “50 million United States dollars” in financial regulation 4.6 and by
substituting the words “100 million dollars” for the words “50 million dollars” in
financial regulation 4.8;
18F

Also decides that, if a decision of the Security Council relating to the
9.
start-up phase or expansion phase of peacekeeping operations results in the need for
expenditure, the Secretary-General is authorized, with the prior concurrence of the
Advisory Committee, to enter into commitments up to 50 million dollars of the
available balance of the stores available from the Organization’s strategic
deployment stocks and draw upon these, with the drawings from the stocks to be
replenished when the initial appropriation is received;
10. Affirms the authority of the Fifth Committee to fully review the
administrative structures, the staffing levels, including the number and level of posts
established through the exercise of commitment authority, at the time of the
presentation of the budget, with a view to making adjustments as necessary;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to submit proposals for a standardized
funding model for the first year of peacekeeping operations for consideration by the
_______________
19

6

ST/SGB/2003/7.

A/RES/64/269

General Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixty-fifth session, on the
understanding that the model should not in any way derogate from the legislative
role of the Assembly in the consideration and approval of budgets;
12. Notes the intention of the Secretary-General that global service packages
will be configured and managed from the Global Service Centre at Brindisi and that
regional service centres could in turn develop region-specific service packages;
13. Recalls its resolution 64/266 of 21 May 2010 and paragraph 101 of the
report of the Advisory Committee,18 and requests the Secretary-General, in close
consultation with troop-contributing countries, to further develop predefined
modules and service packages to improve the quality and expedite the delivery of
services to field missions, including civilian response capabilities;
14. Recognizes that delivering modularized service packages at the United
Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi is aimed at enhancing the operational
effectiveness of field missions, and stresses the importance of proceeding in this
regard;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to further develop specific proposals in
consultation with Member States, in particular troop-contributing countries, on
functions and resources to be transferred to the Global Service Centre, in the context
of the budget of the United Nations Logistics Base, for the consideration of the
General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session, addressing the issues raised in
paragraphs 108 to 110 of the report of the Advisory Committee, without prejudice to
a decision of the Assembly at its sixty-fifth session;
16. Stresses that functions primarily involving interactions with Member
States, particularly troop-contributing countries, will continue to be located at
Headquarters;
17. Reaffirms its resolutions 60/121 A of 8 December 2005, 61/281 of
29 June 2007, 62/256 of 20 June 2008 and 63/291 of 30 June 2009, and decides to
establish a regional service centre at the logistics hub at Entebbe, Uganda, with the
functions proposed by the Secretary-General in his report;15
18. Recalls paragraphs 119 and 120 of the report of the Advisory Committee
and paragraph 79 of the report of the Secretary-General, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure the attainment of these projected benefits and to further identify
subsequent annual benefits of the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe;
19. Notes that the concentration of missions in Central and Eastern Africa
provides an opportunity to optimize the use of air assets through, inter alia, the
establishment of a transportation and movements integrated control centre
responsible for the planning and movement of personnel and cargo, and requests the
Secretary-General to further develop and operationalize the concept in close
consultation with Member States, in particular troop-contributing countries;
20. Recalls paragraphs 55 and 142 of the report of the Advisory Committee,
and stresses that efforts to explore possibilities for economies and efficiencies in air
operations should not undermine safety and operational requirements and rotation
and troop deployment cycles;
21. Stresses the accountability and ultimate responsibility of Headquarters
for the acquisition of air services and the provision of safety standards, bearing in
mind current delegations of authority for procurement, without prejudice to any
future decision that the General Assembly may take on this issue;

7

A/RES/64/269

22. Also stresses that the establishment of a regional service centre must
respect the principle of separate financial arrangements for missions and that its
resources and the volume of its activities are scalable, reflecting the start-up,
expansion, drawdown or closure of the field missions that it serves;
23. Requests the Secretary-General, when developing budget proposals for
the missions to be served by a regional service centre, to reflect the posts, positions
and related costs of a regional service centre in the respective budget proposals,
including the results-based budgeting framework;
24. Stresses that the staffing of the global and regional service centres will be
achieved mainly through redeployments from the Department of Field Support at
Headquarters and from field missions;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to present more than one option for any
future proposed regional service centre for the consideration and approval of the
General Assembly;
26. Decides that the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe will be a family
duty station, effective 1 July 2011, contingent on and without prejudice to any
future decision taken by the General Assembly on the designation of duty stations as
well as the consideration of criteria, including financial and administrative, for
designating duty stations as family or non-family;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to provide an update on the
implementation of the integrated human resources management framework to the
General Assembly during its consideration of human resources management issues
at its sixty-fifth session;
28. Also requests the Secretary-General, in consistency with the objectives of
the global field support strategy, to take into account the risks involved in using
single source or multifunctional contracts in developing further proposals related to
logistics modules;
29. Recalls paragraph 159 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and in
this regard requests the Secretary-General to submit an annual progress report on
the implementation of the global field support strategy;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight
Services with conducting an audit of the implementation of the global field support
strategy and to submit a report thereon to the General Assembly at the second part
of its resumed sixty-sixth session.
101st plenary meeting
24 June 2010

8
