S/2008/300

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 May 2008
Original: English

Letter dated 6 May 2008 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), I have the honour to
convey the attached letter, dated 30 April 2008, which I received from the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina (see annex), transmitting the thirty-third
report on the implementation of the Peace Agreement, covering the period from
1 October 2007 to 31 March 2008.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

08-32571 (E) 090508

*0832571*

S/2008/300

Annex
Letter dated 30 April 2008 from the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and European Union Special
Representative to the Secretary-General
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), in which the Council
requested the Secretary-General to submit to it reports from the High Representative
in accordance with annex 10 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the conclusions of the London Peace Implementation
Conference of 8 and 9 December 1995, I herewith present to you the thirty-third
report (see enclosure). I would ask for this report to be distributed to the members of
the Security Council for their consideration.
This is my second report to the Secretary-General since assuming the office of
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina (and European Union Special
Representative) on 2 July 2007. The present report covers the period from 1 October
2007 to 31 March 2008.
Should you or any Council member require any information beyond what is
offered in the attached report or have any questions regarding its contents, I should
be pleased to provide further information.
(Signed) Miroslav Lajčák
High Representative and European Union Special Representative
in Bosnia and Herzegovina

2

08-32571

S/2008/300

Enclosure
Thirty-third report of the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina
1 October 2007-31 March 2008

Summary
This report covers the period from October 2007 to March 2008. During these
six months Bosnia and Herzegovina made important progress on the reforms
required for it to integrate into Euro-Atlantic institutions. Although a political
agreement among the ruling parties on police reforms proved sufficient to permit the
European Union to initial a Stabilization and Association Agreement with Bosnia and
Herzegovina in December — and so to defuse a looming crisis of government at
State level — the same parties proved unable to translate their agreement into the
legislation required for the country actually to sign a Stabilization and Association
Agreement until 16 April, when they finally adopted the two police reform laws.
These delays disappointed the vast majority of the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, who wish to see real movement towards European Union accession. It
also illustrated the extent to which the country’s politics remain divisive,
confrontational and self-defeating. Elsewhere, an agreement late in March among the
State and entity governments on moveable defence property resulted in Bosnia and
Herzegovina securing “intensified dialogue” towards a membership action plan at the
NATO summit in Bucharest early in April.
The conjunction of continuing domestic political stalemate with mounting
regional uncertainty in the run-up to and immediate aftermath of Kosovo’s
declaration of independence made it impossible for the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council to confirm the closure of my office in June 2008. The Peace
Implementation Council thus decided late in February that the Office of the High
Representative should continue until such time as the domestic authorities deliver on
five long-standing objectives and two conditions are met. The preconditions are that
Bosnia and Herzegovina should have signed a Stabilization and Association
Agreement and that the political and security situation in the country and
neighbourhood should be stable.
The Steering Board’s declaration of 27 February is attached as an annex to this
report. It makes the point once more that I must continue to exercise my mandate and
powers as High Representative in order to ensure full respect for the Dayton Peace
Agreement. I will also continue to do my utmost to help to overcome the challenges
still facing Bosnia and Herzegovina and to facilitate steps that can contribute to the
country’s peace, progress and stability.

08-32571

3

S/2008/300

I.

Introduction
1.
This is my second report to the Secretary-General since assuming the office of
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and European Union Special
Representative on 2 July 2007. It is the first to deal solely with my own time in
office. As has been the norm, the report assesses progress made towards attaining
the goals outlined in previous reports, reviews developments during the reporting
period, and provides my assessment of mandate implementation in the more
important areas. However, the decision of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council in February to set five objectives and two conditions that
must be achieved or met before the Office of the High Representative can transition
into an Office of a European Union Special Representative implies a focused
approach. While the workplan of my predecessor will continue to inform the work
of my office, our priority will now be to attain the objectives and to ensure the
conditions identified by the Peace Implementation Council are met. As a
consequence, I have not included the section of this report normally devoted to
assessing progress on the workplan.

II.

Political update
General political environment
2.
October and November 2007 saw a period of political turbulence, when
politicians from Republika Srpska sought to defy and overturn decisions I had made
on 19 October that aimed to streamline decision-making procedures in the Statelevel Council of Ministers and Parliamentary Assembly. The situation was resolved
only after intense negotiations between myself and party leaders, which led to
agreed amendments to voting procedures in the Parliament and Council of Ministers
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
3.
Despite the negative political atmosphere, the leaders of the six governing
parties were nonetheless able to strike agreements on police reforms to be conducted
in two stages. Those agreements opened the way for the initialling of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the European Union on 4 December.
4.
In the meantime, however, the resignation on 1 November of the Chairman of
the Council of Ministers, which turned his government into a caretaker
administration until it was reconfirmed by parliament late in February, meant that
there was little progress on other elements of the reform agenda. In fact, stagnation
prevailed through March 2008.
5.
On 26 January 2008 the leadership of the Republika Srpska ruling party, the
Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD), adopted conclusions that called
for the transformation of Bosnia and Herzegovina into an asymmetric federation (or
confederation) and claimed the right, supposedly based on the Charter of the United
Nations, to self-determination up to and including secession for the entity. This was
clearly a warning shot fired in anticipation of Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of
independence on 17 February. The Republika Srpska National Assembly duly
confirmed this link when it passed a resolution on 21 February condemning the
illegality of Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of independence, demanding that
Bosnia and Herzegovina not recognize it, and excoriating those countries that had

4

08-32571

S/2008/300

done so. It went on to state that the Republika Srpska “… would consider that it too
possessed the right to establish its future legal status by means of a referendum”.
6.
I immediately reacted to this in a public statement, noting that I was deeply
concerned by the adoption of this resolution by the Republika Srpska National
Assembly, and stressing that Bosnia and Herzegovina is an internationally
recognized State whose sovereignty and territorial integrity is guaranteed by the
Dayton Peace Agreement. Entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have no right to
secede. In its declaration of 27 February, the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council made clear its position when it expressed deep concern
with regard to official calls for secession. It strongly emphasized that under the
Dayton Peace Agreement “one entity has no right to secede from Bosnia and
Herzegovina”.
7.
In a separate development, the largest Bosniak party, the Party of Democratic
Action (SDA), repudiated its previous acceptance of the inter-party agreements
envisaging a two-stage reform of the country’s police. The SDA representative on
the working group established by the Council of Ministers to draft the requisite
legislation sought throughout to change its terms of reference. When this failed, the
party president, Sulejman Tihic, announced early in February that SDA would not
support the legislation emerging from the working group. It became clear in
subsequent discussions with SDA that Mr. Tihic had reneged on his commitments
under the Mostar Declaration because he feared that agreement implied an implicit
recognition of the Republika Srpska, something he and his party seem unwilling to
do ahead of any negotiations on constitutional reform. The police-reform laws were
thus destined to have a difficult passage through parliament; and so it proved, with a
number of failures before the breakthrough on 16 April.
8.
With the police reform laws adopted and the Stabilization and Association
Agreement due to be signed in fairly short order, a key factor will be the degree to
which the Stabilization and Association Agreement will improve the political
atmosphere and restart reforms. But inter-party and inter-communal tensions remain
fraught, especially as 2008 is an election year. The run-up to the municipal elections
in October will spotlight the extent to which the effects of wartime “ethnic
cleansing” endure. The likelihood that ever fewer voters will choose to cast their
ballots in the towns and villages in which they lived before the war also means that
fewer members of “minority” communities will win seats on municipal councils.
Given its moral and symbolic significance for Bosniaks, Srebrenica will be a
particular flashpoint. Demands are already being heard that the town should have a
special electoral regime that would guarantee seats and a share in power for Bosniak
councillors.
9.
The Office of the High Representative continued to work towards its earliest
possible closure. The Steering Board discussed the future policy of the international
community towards Bosnia and Herzegovina and the deteriorating political situation
in the country at its meeting held on 26 and 27 February. It was a major achievement
that all members were able to agree on a transition strategy. This preserved the unity
of the international community around a transition strategy based on five objectives
and two conditions that have to be achieved by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities before there can be a transition from the Office of the High
Representative to a European Union Special Representative.

08-32571

5

S/2008/300

The five objectives are:
• Resolution of State property
• Resolution of defence property
• Completion of the Brcko Final Award
• Fiscal sustainability of the State
• Entrenchment of the rule of law
In addition, the two conditions are that:
• The Stabilization and Association Agreement must be signed
• There must be a positive assessment of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina by the Peace Implementation Council
Constitutional reform
10. Many of the country’s political parties have been busy developing their
constitutional reform platforms and proposals. The initialling of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement with the European Union on 4 December, based on the
assumption that both police reform legislation and a full Stabilization and
Association Agreement would quickly follow, stimulated Croat and Serb party
leaders, in particular, also to assume that the political focus would now shift to
tackling the issue of constitutional reform. Not only did neither happen during the
reporting period, but the constitutional models that were published or sketched out
were at such wide variance with one another that the entire issue became a renewed
battleground among the ruling coalition. The party leaders therefore decided at a
meeting in Siroki Brijeg on 2 February to concentrate on police reform and to
postpone any discussions on the process or scope of constitutional reform until after
the signing of the Stabilization and Association Agreement.
11. Despite continuing efforts to coordinate and articulate a single position on the
basis of the principles outlined in their Kresevo Declaration of September 2007, the
Croat-dominated parties have not achieved a unified stance on constitutional reform.
The two incarnations of the Croat Democratic Union (HDZ BiH and HDZ 1990)
have been most proactive in developing and presenting their proposals. The HDZ
1990 came forward on 10 November, advocating a federal model for Bosnia and
Herzegovina that would have “at least three units” with legislative, executive and
judicial powers. Each would be multinational in population, but each would also
provide one constituent people with a majority. The platform of 11 December of
HDZ BiH endorsed the same model, but with four federal units, one being the
greater Sarajevo metropolitan area. The smaller Croat parties, including HSS-NHI
and HSP, opted instead for more mid-level units, which should not be formed
according to exclusively national criteria. What remains unclear within the Croat
camp is whether the internal reorganization of Bosnia and Herzegovina should be
limited to adjusting the territorial set-up within the Federation or should also
include — and change — the current boundaries of the Republika Srpska. The
leaders of Republika Srpska have, of course, rejected the second option out of hand.
12. This stumbling block, combined with statements by the leader of HDZ BiH
that were seen as accepting the territorial inviolability of the Republika Srpska,
produced a change of tack by some of the Croat parties with regard to both

6

08-32571

S/2008/300

substance and process. Meeting on 14 March at the initiative of HDZ 1990, most
leaders present agreed to and signed a statement calling for immediate changes to
the entity constitutions and laws in order to ensure the equality of all three
constituent peoples in each. HDZ BiH and the People’s Party “Radom za Boljitak”
did not sign the statement. Although the former assessed the statement as positive, it
regretted the timing, which had caused the predominantly Bosniak and Serb parties
immediately to reject any plan to start reforms with the entities rather than the State
as a whole.
13. The Republika Srpska-based parties have made clear throughout that they are
prepared to consider only constitutional changes that do not diminish the territorial
integrity and competencies of the Republika Srpska as established at Dayton. Their
preference is for an explicitly federal or confederal order in which the Republika
Srpska, in its existing confines, would become one of the units. The Party of
Democratic Progress argued in its proposal of 19 January that no reforms beyond
those envisaged by the so-called April package of 2006 would be acceptable to
them; and that any territorial reorganization of Bosnia and Herzegovina should
apply only to the Federation. For its part, the Main Board of Alliance of SNSD
concluded on 26 January that future federal or, in fact, confederal units should have
the explicit right to self-determination, up to and including secession, as well as
more State-like powers than the current entities.
14. Bosniak political leaders proved reluctant to discuss constitutional reform
models in any detail. The President of SBiH, Haris Silajdzic, argued that this would
be pointless until such time as Kosovo’s final status was settled. Arguments over the
scope of police reform have, in fact, become surrogates for the discussion of
constitutional matters as far as they are concerned. Thus the common SDA-SBiH
platform on constitutional reform that had been expected in 2007 did not
materialize. The two parties do, however, share a preference for a “civic” Bosnia
and Herzegovina composed of at least five multinational regions based on
functional, economic, geographical, transport, historical and national (or ethnic)
criteria.
15. Although constitutional reform remains essential if Bosnia and Herzegovina is
to be a functional and sustainable State with real hope of joining the European
Union any time soon, reaching any domestic consensus on the matter will prove
extremely difficult so long as the domestic parties’ conceptions remain both
antithetical and non-negotiable. When a readiness to compromise emerges, it will
still be necessary for the international community to help facilitate any potentially
successful process.

III.

European partnership requirements
16. Hopes rose during the reporting period when new political agreements on
police reform — the long-running and single most important precondition to signing
a Stabilization and Association Agreement with the European Union — were
deemed sufficient by Brussels early in December to permit at least the initialling of
the agreement. However, it was not until 16 April that the requisite legislation was
finally adopted.

08-32571

7

S/2008/300

Police restructuring
17. The leaders of the six parties comprising the ruling coalition at State level met
in Mostar on 28 October 2007 and signed a Declaration on honouring the
commitments for implementation of the police reform with the aim of initialling and
signing the Stabilization and Association Agreement (Mostar Declaration). A month
later they agreed to a two-phase Action Plan for its implementation. On 4 December,
following the adoption of these documents by the Council of Ministers, the
European Commission initialled a Stabilization and Association Agreement with
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Actual signature, however, would depend upon the passage
of the requisite legislation.
18. According to the Action Plan, the first phase of the reform requires that the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly enact laws establishing seven
police-related bodies at State level by June 2008. The second phase, which will
regulate subordinate policing levels as part of a single structure in line with the
three European Union principles, is to be deferred until after constitutional reforms
are in place. The Action Plan envisages that implementation of the second phase —
the enactment of the relevant policing legislation — should be carried out within
one year of the adoption of constitutional amendments defining the relative powers
of the various units of government.
19. In December the Council of Ministers established a working group charged
with drafting the laws required by the Mostar Declaration and Action Plan for the
first phase of police reform. The working group met six times, from 18 December
2007 to 7 February 2008. The members could not achieve a consensus on a number
of issues, principally because of the insistence by the SDA representative that the
laws should give the State a degree of authority over the entity, cantonal and Brcko
police forces. The majority of working group members contended that the
relationship between the State and local levels of policing should be determined in
the second phase, after constitutional reform.
20. The working group submitted two draft laws to the Council of Ministers in
February 2008, the first providing for the establishment of a Directorate for Police
Coordination and various police support agencies, and the second creating
independent and oversight bodies. Because of the disagreements within the working
group on the texts of the laws, written alternatives for — and tallies of the members’
votes on — the disputed provisions were included. On 14 February, the Council of
Ministers adopted, by majority vote, versions of the laws that did not contain the
provisions backed by SDA and forwarded them to the Parliamentary Assembly.
21. Because of the opposition of SDA, SDP and SDS, the Parliamentary
Assembly’s Joint Committee on Defence and Security twice failed in March to
produce positive reports on the laws. On the second occasion, on 20 March, the
Collegium of the House of Representatives tried and failed to bypass the committee
stage by putting the laws into urgent procedure because SNSD and SBiH could not
agree on single texts embodying amendments demanded by the latter. The laws were
not dead, but no harmonization of the texts that met the requirements of the five
parties still favouring the laws was possible during the remainder of the month.
However, on 11 April a compromise between SNSD and SBiH was reached that
allowed the laws to be adopted on 16 April.

8

08-32571

S/2008/300

IV.

Entrenching the rule of law
22. The principal development during the reporting period was the decision in
February of the Steering Board’s Political Directors to single out “entrenchment of
the rule of law” as one of the objectives to be delivered by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities before the transition from the Office of the High
Representative could be effected. In particular, the Peace Implementation Council
cited the need to demonstrate this entrenchment through the adoption of a national
war crimes strategy, the adoption of the law on aliens and asylum, and the adoption
of a national justice sector reform strategy.
War crimes prosecution strategy
23. The working group led by the country’s chief prosecutor held four meetings
during the reporting period that aimed to determine the scope and contents of a
national strategy on the prosecution of war crimes. A draft is expected by the end of
April. The strategy should confirm current practice on case selection and
prioritization. It could also put an end to the endless public discussions in Bosnia
and Herzegovina of the number of war crime cases that remain to be tried. The
agreement on a robust strategy should also serve to address public concerns over the
efficacy of domestic judicial processes dealing with war crimes. The chief
prosecutor’s absence on sick leave has lately delayed the emergence of the draft
strategy, but the recent appointment of a replacement to chair the working group
indicates that the process is back on track towards producing a document on which
concrete discussions and recommendations can be based. Given the decision of the
Peace Implementation Council that the adoption of a war crimes strategy is one of
the benchmarks for the closure of the Office of the High Representative, my office
will be closely involved in helping ensure that Bosnia and Herzegovina has a
relevant and effective plan.
Adoption of the law on aliens and asylum
24. The Office of the High Representative has closely monitored the progress of
the draft law on the residence and movement of aliens in the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly. It adopted the law on 16 April. The Office of
the High Representative has also participated in the drafting of amendments to the
Law on the Service for Foreigners’ Affairs, worked on the establishment of an
information system to control legal migration, monitored preparations for the
opening of a detention centre for illegal migrants, and worked on the development
of rules regulating the deportation of illegal migrants from Bosnia and Herzegovina.
National justice sector reform strategy
25. By January 2008, the national justice sector reform strategy was ready for
submission to and adoption by the Council of Ministers. At that point, however, the
Republika Srpska Ministry of Justice sent in comments of a largely technical nature,
but which served, collectively, to undermine the previously achieved agreement and,
in effect, to degrade the strategy’s State-wide scope. The Republika Srpska
comments pointed to the maintenance of exclusive entity competency over judicial
reform, denying the State’s interest and depriving it of any harmonizing or
coordinating role among the entities and Brcko District. Both the long and relatively
successful engagement of the international community in justice sector reform, as

08-32571

9

S/2008/300

well as the more recent commitment of the Peace Implementation Council to push
this issue forward, mean that the Office of the High Representative will need to
work with other interested parties, particularly the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry
of Justice, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United
Kingdom Department for International Development, to forge a compromise that
will ensure an acceptable and substantive strategy is adopted.
Other rule of law issues
26. As I noted in my previous report, the Office of the High Representative
remains involved in supporting other aspects of justice sector reform. My office
worked with international partners to draft amendments to the laws on the Border
Police and the State Investigation and Protection Agency, as well as new laws on
police officials at the State, entity, cantonal and Brcko District levels. The Office of
the High Representative assisted the Bosnia and Herzegovina Security Ministry to
review its internal organizational rulebook. Two national working groups,
established following the brainstorming sessions the Office chaired in 2007, have
now produced their recommendations. These propose the establishment of an
Appellate Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but not the formation of satellite
branches of the State Court to try war crimes cases. Rather, they argue for the
reinforcement of the human capacity of the State Court’s War Crimes Chamber. The
project to build a State prison has also progressed. Sufficient funding was secured to
allow construction to commence; and the Council of Europe Development Bank has
committed itself to providing a loan to cover the shortfall. Finally, the Office of the
High Representative continues to monitor other ongoing processes, including the
transition by the State Court Registry to full domestic ownership. This is still
anticipated to be complete by the end of 2009.

V.

Cooperation with the Tribunal
27. I continue to place a high priority on cooperation with the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Since my last report, international forces and
domestic law enforcement agencies have applied continuous pressure on and
scrutiny over persons and networks suspected of supporting fugitives from the
Tribunal. My office cooperates with and supports the activities conducted by the
Tribunal, NATO, EUFOR, the Republika Srpska police, the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Intelligence and Security Agency, and others involved in efforts to bring the four
remaining fugitives to justice. This has resulted in greatly improved coordination
and unity of effort, as well as more efficient use of our limited resources.
28. For its part, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Prosecutor’s Office remains vigilant
in its investigation of the financial assets of the support networks; and the Office of
the High Representative will continue to back efforts to freeze the assets and to
coordinate travel bans on individuals known to be part of those networks.
29. The arrest of the remaining fugitives — and of Mladic and Karadzic above
all — would greatly improve the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Not only
would their arrests help bring closure for the families of victims, but it would also
do much to remove the stigma attached to Republika Srpska and to improve interethnic relations in the country. It would therefore be helpful if the relevant organs of
the United Nations could find a way to ensure that Serbia meets its legal obligations

10

08-32571

S/2008/300

under both international and domestic law to arrest the fugitives and to close this
sorry chapter of Balkan history.
30. Although the Office of the High Representative continues to press for progress
on the case before the Human Rights Chamber relating to the disappearance of
Colonel Avdo Palic in 1995, the Republika Srpska authorities have made no
progress in locating his remains or in bringing his murderers to justice, as required
by the Chamber’s rulings. There has been a lack of cooperation on the part of
Serbia, where the putative perpetrators and/or witnesses reside. The Office of the
High Representative will continue to press for action on the Palic case, which,
despite its longevity, remains under active investigation.
31. Our efforts to secure funding for hiring experienced staff to assist the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Prosecutor’s Office in the investigation of Srebrenica-related war
crimes has resulted in an exceptionally generous response from international donors.
Sufficient funds were pledged to permit four investigators and two legal assistants to
be hired. Combined with the establishment of a field office in Srebrenica by the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Prosecutor, I am confident we will begin to see progress in
assuring Srebrenica survivors that their concerns for justice and, in some cases, their
own security are being addressed.
32. I will continue to monitor all aspects of Tribunal-related activity in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to ensure that our joint efforts contribute to the apprehension of key
fugitives.

VI.

Reforming the economy
33. Accelerating inflation represented one of the biggest economic developments
in Bosnia and Herzegovina during the fourth quarter of 2007. Prices rose by 2.1 per
cent in October and by 1.1 per cent in both November and December. This rather
sharp monthly price movement produced an annualized inflation rate of 4.9 per cent
in December. Inflation was mainly caused by higher food prices and transport costs,
the latter reflecting the rising price of imported oil derivatives. There is reason to
believe, however, that the existing monetary regime, along with sound economic
policy mechanisms, will help to limit inflationary trends. Nonetheless, the current
account deficit continues to impede the Bosnia and Herzegovina economy. The trade
deficit amounted to KM 2.1 billion in the third quarter of 2007, which was up by
16.2 per cent compared to the same period in 2006. Exports have increased by 12.6
per cent and imports by 15 per cent compared to 2006.
34. The fiscal position of Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2008 is likely to be positive,
as the general government budget is expected to post a surplus thanks to strong
revenue growth and delays in project implementation, particularly in the Federation
and at State level. While both entities adopted their 2008 budgets in December
2007, the State budget was approved only in March 2008 — and after intense
political disputes among the coalition parties about how much it could be increased
and where any extra spending should go. This wrangling underlined once again the
need for better fiscal coordination through the establishment of the National Fiscal
Council.
35. On 16 October 2007, the Office of the High Representative organized an
economic conference which, apart from reinitiating debate on the economic

08-32571

11

S/2008/300

problems and needs of Bosnia and Herzegovina, resulted in written commitments
from the State and entity Prime Ministers and the Mayor of Brcko District to work
on key reforms that have long been identified as central to the country’s economic
development and promotion as a potentially attractive destination for foreign
investments. By signing a so-called platform for action, the Prime Ministers and
Mayor pledged to pursue a number of reforms aimed at (1) improving fiscal
coordination and stability; (2) creating a better business environment; and
(3) promoting other reforms ensuring sustainable development. This document will
serve as a basis for the Office of the High Representative — as well as for the
international and business communities — to restart negotiations on a series of longstanding economic reform priorities, most of which are also venerable items on the
mission implementation plan and workplan of the Office. The platform will also
provide the basis for the country development strategy for 2008-2013 for Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Of course, it remains to be seen if the action plan will help to
deliver the political breakthroughs required to de-block laws on banking
supervision, obligations and the National Fiscal Council.
36. Some progress has already been recorded. The Council of Ministers adopted
the State-level Law on Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices on 14 February. This
law aims to create a single, regulated pharmaceutical market. It is now in
parliamentary procedure. The Federation, for its part, has enacted both a Law on
Profit Tax, which is in harmony with its Republika Srpska equivalent and will
prevent double taxation, and a new Law on Income Tax, which should apply as from
1 January 2009. Finally, the Council of Ministers has lately endorsed and forwarded
to parliament a draft Law on the National Fiscal Council. Once established, this
body should ensure proper fiscal coordination and macroeconomic stability. Its
formation is also one of the objectives set in February by the Steering Board as
necessary before the transition from the Office of the High Representative. There
had been no progress by the end of March on the other fiscal sustainability
benchmark identified by the Peace Implementation Council: agreement on a
permanent methodology for establishing the coefficients by which the Indirect
Taxation Authority would distribute revenues.

VII.

Public administration reform
37. I reported in the last quarter of 2007 on positive developments regarding
public administration reform, including the appointment of a new State-level
coordinator and the signature of a memorandum of understanding on the public
administration reform fund. Progress since then has been limited and uneven, and
dogged by persistent political disagreements. Lack of progress on fundamental
issues such as constitutional reform continues to slow down related reforms such as
public administration reform, as do ongoing debates between local partners and
international donors about the role of political appointees in senior civil service
positions and the relationship between the State- and entity-level public
administration reform processes.
38. My office is cooperating closely with the European Commission delegation
and will continue to advise and assist the relevant authorities whenever possible to
ensure that the public administration reform process can continue and that what has
been achieved so far will not be undermined.

12

08-32571

S/2008/300

VIII.

Defence reform
39. After lengthy debates, senior State and entity ministers signed an agreement on
the final disposal of all rights and obligations over movable defence property that
will continue to serve defence purposes in Doboj on 27 March. The Minister of
Defence also signed a list enumerating such moveable military property, breaking it
down into categories (such as ammunition, weapons and explosives) for disposal.
UNDP is to determine the total time that will be required and estimate the costs for
disposing of the property that will not be sold or donated.
40. Resolution of the issue of immovable defence property (real estate) seems
unlikely before there is a settlement of the overall dispute over the ownership of
State property. Both issues figure among the core objectives that need to be
achieved before the Office of the High Representative can transition into an Office
of a European Union Special Representative.
41. The agreement on moveable defence property was sufficient, however, to win
Bosnia and Herzegovina the status of “intensified dialogue” at the NATO summit in
Bucharest early in April. Intensified dialogue means that contacts between Bosnia
and Herzegovina, NATO and NATO member States will be stepped up to prepare the
country for a membership action plan leading to eventual accession.

IX.

Intelligence reform
42. The State Intelligence and Security Agency retained its multi-ethnic cohesion
despite the political turbulence in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region during the
reporting period. Operational work continued without interruption in the fields of
organized crime, counter-terrorism and war crimes. The Agency’s cooperation with
global and regional partners also continued to grow in scope and depth. The
committee responsible for parliamentary oversight of the Agency made significant
progress, commencing both announced and unannounced inspections. A
parliamentary working group established to review the law on the State Intelligence
and Security Agency was due to complete its report shortly.

X.

European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
43. EUFOR continued to provide a credible military force of some 2,500
personnel and retained the capability to bring in over-the-horizon reserves. EUFOR
is headquartered in Sarajevo but has liaison and observation teams throughout the
country. It should be noted that the presence of EUFOR on the ground provides the
crucial reassurance that many in the country still feel is necessary. Given the current
political environment, I welcome the fact that EUFOR retains the capacity to deploy
troops throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina at short notice.

XI.

Return of refugees and displaced persons
44. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry for Refugees and Human Rights has
completed its consultations on a revision of the current strategy for the

08-32571

13

S/2008/300

implementation of annex VII of the Dayton Peace Agreement, the annex that
guarantees to refugees and displaced persons the right to return home.
45. According to the latest figures from the Ministry, there are still 130,000
displaced persons in Bosnia and Herzegovina who aim to return to their pre-war
homes. This does not mean that all of these people will indeed be able to return, as
there are likely to be several objective reasons that rule this option out for many
people, including the absence of employment opportunities, inadequate funds for
rebuilding, and difficulties in accessing health and social services in their former
places of residence.
46. Although the current draft strategy, to be finalized and adopted later in the
year by the Council of Ministers, still focuses on facilitating people’s return to their
original homes, it will also emphasize the need to sustain those people who have
already returned and to pay more attention than in the past to vulnerable groups who
have not been able to take advantage of any return assistance projects. Unable to
return, such persons are often still living in deplorable circumstances in collective
centres. The strategy will make it a priority to offer them dignified and long-term
living conditions. UNHCR, my office, and other international and domestic
stakeholders have been actively involved in the drafting of the new strategy.

XII.

Mostar
47. The Mostar City Council adopted its 2008 budget in December 2007: the first
time since unification in 2004 that a budget has been adopted on time. Previous
years saw budgets enacted as late as June, with various political disputes blocking
the process. The intervention of the Office of the High Representative was required
in 2005 and 2006. The timely adoption of the 2008 budget reflects not only the
maturity of the political parties in Mostar, but also the success of the unification
process in overcoming many long-standing quarrels. The city has also made
progress in establishing a unified public utility company, finally qualifying for a
World Bank waste-management programme.
48. Despite this progress, all signs point to a divisive electoral campaign in
advance of the October municipal elections, which will be only the second local
elections since unification. All regular city business, including outstanding items on
the unification agenda, will be on hold from June. This is likely to preclude the
adoption of the Mostar Statute this year, a key goal in the unification process.
49. As part of the already-incipient electoral campaign, repeated calls by the main
Croat parties for the constitutional reorganization of Bosnia and Herzegovina along
federal (and explicitly ethnic) lines, which started with the HDZ 1990 party
congress in November, have raised concerns among Bosniaks in Mostar that the
Croats aim either to repartition the city or to claim it as their own.
50. At the level of the Herzegovina-Neretva Canton, seated in Mostar, no budget
for the current year had been enacted by the end of March. Nor, after the passage of
18 months, had a replacement police commissioner been appointed. Bosniak and
Croat politicians both aim to secure this key position for one of their own.

14

08-32571

S/2008/300

XIII.

Brcko District
51. Politics in Brcko District remained relatively stable over the reporting period.
The District, however, cannot but be affected by the troubled political situation
prevailing in the country as a whole. The District Statute, as amended in February
2007, smoothed the functioning of government institutions and has led to improved
performance by and greater responsibility on the part of the government. However,
coordination between the government and the majority coalition in the District
Assembly remains unsatisfactory, and has not been improved by the prospect of
elections in October. The economy is healthy and it keeps on attracting private
businesses, including investments from outside the District and the country.
52. Efforts continued apace to ensure that the District will be able to “function
effectively and apparently permanently” after the end of supervision. In order to
provide for high quality, efficient, and safe utility services to Brcko District
residences and businesses, the government completed the transfer of electricity,
water, and waste water supply services from government departments to a new
public utility company. The company commenced work on 1 January 2008. The
Supervisor’s office closely monitored and guided the transformation process. The
public utility company has operated efficiently and transparently during its first
three months.
53. A new Customs terminal was opened in Brcko Port on 7 March. The terminal
conforms to European Union standards and represents an investment of
approximately KM 3 million. It provides modern facilities within the port area that
are of great significance for Customs operations for businesses within both the
District and the entire region.
54. On 7 December 2007, the Brcko District Assembly adopted, for the first time
in four years, a budget for the next year within the timeline stipulated by the Statute.
The 2008 budget is once again balanced and financed from revenues collected
within the District and allocations from the Indirect Taxation Authority. Another
first, however, is that it includes a three-year capital development line.
55. The Supervisor issued an order on 31 January completing the process of
harmonizing District legislation with the amended Statute. This entailed the
enactment of a final set of 31 amendments on top of the nearly 70 laws and
amendments he passed in June 2007.
56. One of the most important achievements of the District during the period was
the Assembly’s adoption on 27 March of the Law on Primary and Secondary
Education. Brcko District has had the only truly multi-ethnic education system in
Bosnia and Herzegovina since the Supervisor enacted the first education law in
2001, so fulfilling a requirement of the Final Award. After seven years in force, the
law required modernization and harmonization in line with the European Partnership
Programme, which will necessitate the rationalization of the school network by
2009 and higher standards of education for teachers by 2015. The development and
adoption of the new law was difficult and time-consuming, but the fact that a wide
array of governing and opposition parties voted for it testifies to the acceptance of
an integrated educational system in the District that is often and rightly held up as a
model for the rest of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

08-32571

15

S/2008/300

57. Brcko registered several other legislative achievements in the period, including
the introduction of the first modern real-estate tax law in Bosnia and Herzegovina. A
new concept for land ownership has been developed for consideration, while a new
Law on Police Officials that supports systematic police reform throughout Bosnia
and Herzegovina was adopted without difficulty. Filling a potentially dangerous
legal gap, the Supervisor also provided for regulation of the insurance industry in
the District and resolved a simmering problem of land conveyance for displaced
persons in the Ilicka settlement.
58. On 15 February the Supervisor dismissed two policemen from positions in the
Brcko District Police. The Supervisor acted after receiving multiple and
substantiated reports of the two officers’ official misconduct, serious breaches of
duty, unprofessional behaviour, inadequate performance, and other actions that
seriously undermined the effectiveness of the service. He was compelled to
intervene when it became clear that the dismissals ordered by the police disciplinary
boards could not be implemented soon enough to spare the District Police further
harm.
59. In line with the objective set for Brcko by the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board, the Supervisor commenced exploratory discussions with political
leaders about additions to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution and a State law
that would regulate relations among the District, State and entities in accordance
with the Awards of the Arbitral Tribunal. At the time of writing, the discussions are
ongoing, but remain subject to the broader political situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

XIV.

Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region
60. Bosnia and Herzegovina is uniquely vulnerable to political instability in the
region. Not only do the domestic politics of Croatia, Montenegro and Serbia
occasionally impact upon it, but Serbs, Croats and Bosniaks in Bosnia and
Herzegovina all frequently identify with the aims and achievements, struggles and
defeats, of their co-nationals across its borders.
61. The issue of Kosovo’s future status continued to feature prominently in the
country’s political discourse during the period. The failure of the Troika process in
December and the countdown to a unilateral declaration of independence in
February led to a ratcheting up of rhetoric and concern on the part of Bosnia and
Herzegovina Serbs, who share the general Serb identification of Kosovo with their
faith, culture and nationhood, albeit to a lesser degree than in Serbia proper. The
Prime Minister of Republika Srpska, Milorad Dodik, took part in many
manifestations of Serb solidarity over Kosovo, but also usually argued that
Kosovo’s fate should not and need not have implications for — or produce
disturbances in — Bosnia and Herzegovina. Although, as reported above, both his
party and parliament ultimately sought to play the card of the alleged Kosovo
“precedent”, he maintained public order and did not support the more extreme
manifestations of Serb anger over Kosovo’s eventual declaration of independence
and its recognition by many countries. Public demonstrations against Kosovo’s
independence in the Republika Srpska were relatively small in scale and the entity’s
police contained the violent impulses of young hooligans relatively easily, although
minor damage was inflicted on some diplomatic offices in Banja Luka.

16

08-32571

S/2008/300

62. What did afflict non-Serbs in Bosnia and Herzegovina were the efforts of the
European Union to placate Serbia for its impending “loss” of Kosovo by offers of a
Stabilization and Association Agreement and/or a political treaty in the run-up to
both the Serbian presidential elections in January and Kosovo’s declaration of
independence in February. Accusations of double standards on the part of Brussels
were frequent, especially in view of the difficulties Bosnia and Herzegovina was
experiencing in its own efforts to fulfil the European Union terms in regard to police
reform.
63. The niggling border-definition issues with Croatia and Serbia remain
unresolved, as does the problem of Croatia’s plan to build a bridge, bypassing the
small slice of Adriatic coastline of Bosnia and Herzegovina, between the mainland
and the Peljesac peninsula. The risk in this case is that the access of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the open sea might be impaired. Inadequacies in judicial cooperation
among Serbia, Croatia, Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly over
war crimes prosecutions, also remain. As noted above, however, the main complaint
of Bosnia and Herzegovina is that Serbia has done nothing to implement the verdict
of February 2007 of the International Court of Justice in regard to indicted war
criminals.

XV.

European Union police mission
64. On the invitation of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the European
Council decided on 19 November 2007 to extend the mandate of the European
Union police mission for another two years. It will now run until 31 December
2009. The mandate stays roughly unchanged, as does the mission’s size. Having
worked closely with the mission, I strongly supported its extension. Although the
chain of command in the mission had been previously amended to reflect the
establishment of a new civilian planning and conduct capability at the Brussels level
(Council Secretariat General), I continue to provide political guidance to the
mission.
65. As foreseen in its reconfirmed mandate, the strategic priorities of the mission
remain the fight against organized crime and corruption, the attainment of police
reform, and the improvement of police accountability. As for the first of these, the
mission took the lead in coordinating the policing aspects of international efforts
and ensured, in particular, closely targeted European Union attention to major crime
cases across Bosnia and Herzegovina through the European Union Coordination
Board. Through its Criminal Justice Unit and in close coordination with my office,
the mission promoted better relations between police and prosecutors and hosted the
third National Police and Prosecutors Conference.
66. The mission also monitored police accountability and supported the
development of best practices. For example, protest demonstrations in Republika
Srpska in February against Kosovo’s declaration of independence provided the
mission with an opportunity to evaluate police handling of highly sensitive public
events (in this case, positively). The mission likewise supported the strengthening of
State-level law enforcement agencies (the Border Police and the State Investigation
and Protection Agency, particularly through co-location. The mission continued to
support efforts to broker a political agreement on police reform and later
participated, together with colleagues in the Office of the High Representative, as an

08-32571

17

S/2008/300

observer on the working group tasked with drafting the new policing laws. On the
basis of the common operational guidelines, it continued its close cooperation with
EUFOR.

XVI.

Non-certification of police officers
67. Following the letter of April 2007 from the President of the Security Council
to the Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United Nations
on former police officers denied certification by the International Police Task Force,
the Office of the High Representative/European Union Special Representative and
the European Union police mission drafted model amendments to assist all
jurisdictions in bringing their legislation into compliance with the terms of the
President’s letter.
68. As of March 2008, 8 of the 10 Federation cantons and Brcko District had
amended their legislation to comply with the conditions set by the President of the
Security Council. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers and the
Federation Government had both adopted the necessary amendments and forwarded
them to their respective parliaments. Neither Cantons 1 and 10, nor Republika
Srpska, had yet begun to adopt legislation.

XVII.

Media development
69. Although Bosnia and Herzegovina ranks fairly high on league tables of media
freedom, there was much discussion during the reporting period about alleged
“blacklists” of persons critical of the Republika Srpska Government who should not
be allowed to air their views on radio and television or to write for the press. In the
Federation, meanwhile, concern centred on the extreme partisanship and intermittent
irresponsibility of some newspapers and television news programmes. Both
complaints reflect the fact that the media landscape is as fragmented as are the
national and political scenes. Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs tend to watch, listen to and
read their “own” media to the exclusion of the others. The State-level public
broadcaster, BHRT, has had difficulties acquiring an audience, particularly in the
Republika Srpska. Croats feel particularly disadvantaged by what they regard as
Bosniak domination of the Federation’s public broadcaster and Serb control of its
Republika Srpska equivalent. They argue that they, too, must have a State-wide
public television service that would broadcast exclusively in the Croatian language.
70. This explains the failure to complete public broadcasting reform, the
enactment of the requisite legislation in the Federation being the missing element.
Croat parliamentarians have twice invoked “vital national interest” to stop
enactment of the law as adopted by the Federation Parliament. Their most recent
objections have now been sent to the Federation Constitutional Court for
adjudication.
71. Ensuring the independence of the Communications Regulatory Agency is
another European partnership requirement. Unfortunately, the appointment of a new
director has become enmeshed in the larger ethno-political game. Although the
Council of the Communications Regulatory Agency has repeatedly sought to
reappoint the current (Bosniak) director to another term, the Council of Ministers
has refused to do so, demanding a rerun of the appointment process. This refusal

18

08-32571

S/2008/300

stems from an agreement, struck by the leaders of the six coalition parties in
December, that the directorship of the Communications Regulatory Agency should
go to a Croat.

XVIII.

European Union Special Representative
72. In line with my mandate as European Union Special Representative in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (Council Joint Action 2007/427/CFSP), I continued to promote the
priorities listed in the European partnership document of 2006, as well as the
implementation of the Dayton Accords. In my capacity as European Union Special
Representative, I have also continued to coordinate and ensure the coherence of the
European Union presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular with regard to
the European Union police mission and EUFOR.
73. In line with the European Union enlargement strategy 2007-2008, calling for
better communication by the European Union, I have recently launched a European
Union integration campaign in coordination with the delegation of the European
Commission and missions on the ground under the European Security and Defence
Policy. The objective is to create a critical mass of citizens in the country that would
be empowered to speak out in favour of European Union integration and gradually
exert ever-greater pressure on the domestic political establishments to deliver on
their commitments to integration. I have opened a dialogue with the public by
attending the debates that continue to take place across the country. In addition, I
have recently set up an interactive web page (www.reci.ba) through which I reply to
citizens’ questions and facilitate public debate on European Union integration. The
site received some 18,000 visits and 1,300 comments from citizens in its first
month.

XIX.

Future of the Office of the High Representative
74. As has been reported above, the meeting held on 26 and 27 February of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council determined that the Office of
the High Representative should remain in place and continue to carry out its
mandate under the Dayton Peace Agreement until such time as the domestic
authorities fulfil five specific objectives and two general conditions prevail (see
annex). This shift to an objective-driven road map towards the closure of the Office
should accelerate the reform process, inculcate domestic ownership, and diminish
uncertainly about the future. The Office of the High Representative can and will
close as soon as these benchmarks and conditions are met.

XX.

Reporting schedule
75. In keeping with my predecessors’ proposals to submit regular reports for
onward transmission to the Security Council, as required by resolution 1031 (1995),
I herewith present my first regular report. Should the Secretary-General or any
Security Council member require information at any other time, I should be pleased
to provide an additional written update.

08-32571

19

S/2008/300

Annex
Declaration of the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council, 27 February 2008
The Political Directors of the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council met in Brussels on 26 and 27 February 2008. The Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers as well as leaders of the
governing coalition were present during parts of the meeting.
The Steering Board noted that, since October, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
made progress with regard to the Stabilization and Association Agreement. The
Steering Board welcomes the initialling of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement that took place on 4 December 2007. The signing of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement is finally in reach as soon as the necessary conditions
are met.
However, important underlying problems, which gave rise to recent crises,
remain in Bosnia and Herzegovina. There have been attempts to weaken
progressively the institutions and legitimacy of the State. There have been renewed
tensions between political actors over the future constitutional make-up of the
country as well as the role and competencies of the State. The limited degree of
cooperation among Bosnia and Herzegovina actors shown late in 2007 has
deteriorated. There have also been unacceptable challenges to the Dayton Peace
Agreement.
The Steering Board expresses deep concern with regard to official calls for
secession. It strongly emphasizes that under the Dayton Peace Agreement an entity
has no right to secede from Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As previously stated, the Steering Board is also concerned by statements
calling the existence of entities into question.
The Steering Board underlines once again that Bosnia and Herzegovina is a
recognized sovereign State whose territorial integrity is guaranteed by the Dayton
Peace Agreement. The Steering Board recalls that the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina recognizes that Bosnia and Herzegovina consists of two entities and
that Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs are constituent peoples. The Steering Board remains
fully committed to the Dayton Peace Agreement.
The Steering Board reiterates that Bosnia and Herzegovina politicians must
end the practice of threatening unilateral changes to the constitutional structure of
the country. All parties must comply fully with the Dayton Peace Agreement. The
Steering Board underlines that the international community retains the necessary
instruments to counter destructive tendencies and that it will not allow attempts to
undermine the Dayton Peace Agreement, whether from inside or outside the country.
All signatories and parties are obliged under annex 10 of the Dayton Peace
Agreement to cooperate fully with the High Representative and his staff. Decisions
of the High Representative must be fully respected and promptly implemented.
With regard to police reform, the Steering Board encouraged Bosnia and
Herzegovina actors to take forward the debate in the Parliamentary Assembly and to
adopt police reform legislation in line with the Mostar Declaration and the

20

08-32571

S/2008/300

subsequent Action Plan and consistent with European Union requirements as a
matter of urgency.
The Steering Board encourages the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of
Ministers to continue to move forward on the reform agenda with determination,
and to adopt an action plan as a response to the European partnership.
The Steering Board welcomes the adoption of the platform for action and the
progress made towards realizing some of its objectives, including fiscal
coordination. However, much more needs to be done.
The Steering Board notes that political party leaders have had initial
discussions on constitutional reform and that this issue is also reflected in the
Mostar Declaration and the action plan. The Steering Board reaffirmed its view that
constitutional reform will be necessary in order to equip Bosnia and Herzegovina to
meet the requirements of a modern European State.
The Steering Board underlines the importance of freedom of expression,
including free and independent media, and notes that the Dayton Peace Agreement
obliges Bosnia and Herzegovina, including both entities, to ensure the highest level
of internationally recognized human rights and fundamental freedoms. In this regard
the Steering Board welcomes the visit of the OSCE representative for freedom of
the media to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In line with the decision taken at its meeting of October 2007, the Steering
Board reviewed the situation. It endorsed the following recommendations of the
High Representative regarding the future of the Office of the High Representative.
Having assessed developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the past
months, the Steering Board reiterated that transition and ownership remain the
goals. It is for Bosnia and Herzegovina actors, in the first place, to create the
conditions for transition to occur, which should happen in the shortest possible time.
The Steering Board and the broader international community stand ready to support
Bosnia and Herzegovina actors in creating the necessary conditions.
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a “peaceful, viable State irreversibly on course for
European integration” has been the long-standing objective of the Steering Board
and achieving this objective has been the focus of the work of the Office of the High
Representative.
The workplan of the Office of the High Representative approved by the
Steering Board in April 2007 contains a number of long-standing objectives that the
Steering Board considers to be essential for the creation of such a peaceful, viable
State. For this reason, the Steering Board has decided that the most critical issues
contained in the workplan should be considered objectives that need to be achieved
by the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities prior to transition. These objectives are
well established, have been approved by the Steering Board, and have all been
previously recognized by Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities as obligations.
The objectives that will need to be delivered by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities prior to transition are:
• Acceptable and sustainable resolution of the issue of apportionment of
property between State and other levels of government
• Acceptable and sustainable resolution of defence property

08-32571

21

S/2008/300

• Completion of the Brcko Final Award
• Fiscal sustainability promoted through an agreement on a permanent
coefficient methodology for the Indirect Taxation Authority and establishment
of a National Fiscal Council
• Entrenchment of the rule of law (demonstrated through the adoption of a
national war crimes strategy, adoption of the law on aliens and asylum, and
adoption of a national justice sector reform strategy).
In addition to the objectives listed above, the Steering Board agrees that two
conditions need to be fulfilled prior to transition: signing of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement and a positive assessment of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina by the Steering Board based on full compliance with the Dayton Peace
Agreement.
The signing of the Stabilization and Association Agreement is not part of the
Office’s workplan. However, it is an important requirement for transition and
necessary to demonstrate Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress towards membership
of the European Union.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has previously been defined by the
Steering Board as a criterion for decision-making on the closure and transition of
the Office of the High Representative. It remains crucial that Bosnia and
Herzegovina political leaders fully comply with the Dayton Peace Agreement
avoiding any rhetoric or action that would threaten or violate the Peace Agreement.
The achievement of the above-mentioned objectives and fulfilment of the
conditions will facilitate transition. The Steering Board urges the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to achieve these objectives and contribute to fulfilling
these conditions as soon as possible. The High Representative stands ready to advise
and work with Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions in this regard.
The Steering Board underscores its full support for the High Representative to
facilitate accomplishment of these objectives in a manner consistent with the overall
goal of entrenching reform and ensuring that Bosnia and Herzegovina meets its
commitments for Euro-Atlantic integration. The Steering Board requests the High
Representative to take all appropriate measures to ensure that the objectives are met.
The Office of the High Representative will remain in place and continue to
carry out its mandate under the Dayton Peace Agreement, ensuring full respect of
the Peace Agreement.
The Steering Board reiterated the view that a reinforced office of a European
Union Special Representative would constitute an important part of the European
Union comprehensive engagement after the Office of the High Representative. The
Steering Board looked forward to a renewed exchange of information on the
respective planning processes.
The Steering Board calls upon Serbia, a Dayton signatory, as well as the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially those in Republika Srpska, to
abide by their obligations under international law to cooperate fully with the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, playing a proactive role in
apprehending all remaining indictees, including Radovan Karadzic and Ratko

22

08-32571

S/2008/300

Mladic, without further delay, dismantling the networks offering support to such
fugitives, and ensuring they are transferred to the Tribunal.
The Steering Board reminded all authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina of the
fundamental principle of the inviolability of diplomatic missions and their
obligations in that regard. The Steering Board deplores the damage inflicted upon
diplomatic offices in Banja Luka. It expects the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in particular the Republika Srpska, to live up fully to their obligations
and to maintain public order.
The Office of the High Representative will monitor progress against objectives
and conditions and the Steering Board will keep the situation under constant review.
The next meeting of Political Directors will be held in Sarajevo on 24 and 25 June
2008.

08-32571

23
