UNITED NATIONS

AL RECQ
THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

23 FEBRUARY 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/241 8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...*...

..,...*..a

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 19 February 1983 from the Permanent Representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
. . . . . . . . .,,.,*....,.,...*.........
Council (S/15615) ..*..,.**........

1

WPV.2418

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Recordsof the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutionsand Decisionsof the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2418th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 23 February 1983, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Oleg Aleksandrovich TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): 1
would like to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Algeria,
Rulgaria, Cuba and Ethiopia in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice and with
the consent of the Council, I propose to invite those
repreSentatives
to take part in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with Article 3 1 of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

Provisional agenda(S/Agenda/2418)
1. Adoption

At the invitation of the President,Mr. Abada (Algeria),
Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), and Mr.
lbrahim (Ethiopia) took the placesreservedfor themat the
side of the Council chamber.

of the agenda

2. Letter dated 19 February 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15615)

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): I
would like to inform members of the Council that I have
received a letter dated 23 February from the representative of Togo [S/15621], which reads as follows:

The nteeting was called to order at 4.30 p.m.

“I have the honour to request the Security Council
to extend an invitation, under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure, to Mr. Ike F. Mafole, the representative of the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania, to
participate in the consideration of the item entitled:
‘Letter dated 19 February 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council’ (S/15615).”

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted

Letter dated 19 February 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15615)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): In
accordance with the decision taken by the Council at
previous meetings [2415th and 2417th meetings], I invite
the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to take
a place at the Council table; I invite the representatives of
Benin, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Egypt, the
German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Hungary, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Madagascar, the Sudan, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Viet Nam to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to this request.
It was so decided.
4. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom Russian):The

first speaker is the representative of Hungary. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
5. Mr, RACZ (Hungary): Comrade President, first Of
all I should like to express my sincere thanks to YOU and,
through you, to the members of the Council for inviting
my delegation to participate in the Council’s deliberations and for giving me the oppOrtUnitY
to express Our
view with regard to the important issue on the agenda.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Burwin (Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya) took a place at the Council table; Mr.
Soglo (Benin), Mr. Suja (Czechoslovakia), Mr. AI-Ashtal
(Democratic Yemen), Mr. KhaliI (Egypt), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Gbeho (Ghana), Mr. Rdcz
(Hungary), Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani (Islamic Republic of
Iran), Mr. Rabetaflka (Madagascar) Mr. AbdaDa &Qdan),
Mr0 E.U’attal (Syrian Arab Republic) and Mr. Le Kim
Chung (Viet Nam) took the places reservedfor them at the
side of the Council chamber.

6. At the Same time, it gives me great pleasure to con-

you, Comrade President, on your assumption
of the presidency for the month of February. It is mY

gratulate

1

firm conviction that the guidance of a highly qualified
and respected diplomat from a country to which my
country is connected by bonds of friendship and close
co-operation will greatly help the Council contribute to
the maintenance of international peace and security.

12. MrSHAH
NAWAZ (Pakistan): I wish first of all to
avail myself of this opportunity to extend a warm welcome to our newest colleague on the Council, Mr. Abdullah Salah, the representative of Jordan, a country with
which Pakistan enjoys close, brotherly relations. Mr,
Salah brings with him a wealth of experience in the diplomatic field. We are confident that his wisdom and skills
will be a great asset to the Council in its deliberations on
the important issues that will come before it. We look
forward to his contributions to the work of the Council
and are ready to co-operate with him in our collective
endeavours to strengthen the role of the Security Council
in the promotion of international peace and security.

7. Since this is the first time I have spoken in the
Council this year, 1 should like to avail myself of the
opportunity to greet the new members; I wish the delegations of Malta, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan and
Zimbabwe much success in their highly responsible
assignment.
8. This series of urgent meetings of the Council has
been called to consider yet another act that could further
aggravate the generally tense international situation. The
recent attempts to intimidate the people and the Government of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya give us cause for
concern. The dispatch of AWACS aircraft to one of the
neighbouring
countries and the deployment of the
aircraft-carrier Nimitz in close proximity to the Libyan
coast, the latest manifestations of a series of anti-Libyan
manoeuvres, constitute acts of provocation and amount
to a military threat. This unprovoked step of the United
States Administration and the hysteria that accompanied
it clearly demonstrate that some of the influential factors
of international politics still keep on stubbornly ignoring
the genuine interests of mankind and the corresponding
wish of world public opinion to alleviate international
tension and promote the spirit of mutual understanding
among nations, and that, instead, they repeatedly resort
to provocations. By doing so, these circles deliberately
poison the international atmosphere.

13. We have given careful consideration to the fetter,
dated 19 February, which the representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya addressed to the President of
the Council asking the Council to consider “the deteriorating situation near the Libyan shores”. This letter and
the earlier related communication from the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, dated 18 February
[S/15614], draw attention to “the grave situation” resulting from the movement of the United States aircraftcarrier Nimitz, with some other naval vessels, close to the
Libyan coast, and the dispatch of AVACS aircraft to a
neighbouring country. It has been further stated that
flights by United States reconnaissance aircraft and the
use of jamming devices have created a dangerous situation and disrupted civil communications
inside the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. At the same time, an assurance
has been given that the Jamahiriya does not have any
intention of interfering in any country, whether a neighbour or a non-neighbour.

9, The contradictions in the various statements that
have been made to try to justify the unjustifiablecontradictions which are all too well known to all of us
here-shed even more light on the real nature and purposes of these manoeuvres. These prevarications have
obviously failed to make anyone believe in the alleged
danger and in the necessity of the so-called deterrent
measures.

14. We have also studied carefully the letter, dated 22
February, addressed to the President of the Council by
the representative of the United States [S/1.5617], rejecting Libyan charges and in turn making the allegation
that Libya is interfering in the affairs of its neighbours,
thus threatening the security of the region.
15. Yesterday [2416th meeting], the representative of
the Sudan complained of interference by Libya in his
country’s internal affairs, interference aimed at OVWthrowing the legitimate Government of the country. He
also considered the recent United States air and nava1
deployment as having been necessary.

10. Thanks to the patience and self-restraint exercised
by the Libyan Government, the provocation has not
resulted in an open conflict in this particular case, But
the danger has always been there. And no one can lose
sight of the possibility that such provocations might lead
to unpredictable consequences, might jeopardize the
stability of the region in question and threaten international peace and security as a whole. It must be clear to
everyone that once this happens, he who has provoked
the act should bear all the responsibility
for its
consequences.

16. The variety of the positions taken and the vehemence with which these have been advanced by the parties
concerned are bewildering and render the task of the
Council difficult. Nevertheless, all these statements
deserve the Council’s full attention.
17. Pakistan has consistently upheld the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and, both as a member
and a non-member of the Council, has extended full support to it in the discharge of its heavy responsibilities, We
earnestly believe that the maintenance of international
peace and security imposes an inescapable obligation on
all countries to adhere strictly to the principles of the
Charter and, in particular, to refrain from interference in
the affairs of other States and from the threat or use of

11. The international community should deplore all
kinds of provocation and must resolutely stand up
against them. This kind of muscle-flexing should not be
allowed to be repeated. The provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations should be respected and the fundamental principles of international law and other norms of
the international code of conduct should prevail in international relations.
2

force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State. Any deviation from these principles,
whether by a major Power or by a small country, cannot
but have serious consequences for international peace
and stability.

recurrence of situations like the one now being considered by the Council.
24. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Bulgaria, whom
I invite to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

IS. Our approach to the issue before the Council is
guided by these considerations. It is also clear from the
statements of the speakers who have participated in the
debate that there is an overwhelming sentiment against
all acts of interference in the internal affairs of sovereign
States and against resort to the threat or use of force
aimed at intimidating smaller countries.

25.

Mr.

TSVETKOV
(Bulgaria) (interpret&on
from
President, at the very outset I should
like to thank you, as well as all the members of the
Council, for giving me the opportunity to state the position of my Government concerning the item on the
agenda.

French): Comrade

26. I should like to say at once, Comrade President,
how pleased we are to see you presiding over the work of
the Council during the month of February. I am particularly pleased since you represent a great country with
which the People’s Republic of Bulgaria enjoys the closest, most fraternal, relations. The fact that your country
pursues, in a most consistent manner, a policy of peace
and progress, and the fact that you have such political
wisdom and diplomatic skill, which are recognized by all,
will help see to it that the Council can fulfil its
responsibilities.

19. The air and naval activities in the eastern Mediterranean have served to create fears concerning their
impact on the security of States of the region. It is clear
from the statements made by a number of countries from
the region that such fears are shared by them. Pakistan is
bound to take note of the expression of these fears.
20. We are deeply disturbed at the sequence of events
which has culminated in the need for the Council to meet
to consider the resulting situation, in which the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya feels a threat to its security. We earnestly hope that the consideration which the issues
involved have received in the Council’s debate will help
defuse the situation and bring about a lessening of the
tension that has been generated.

27. I should like to pay a tribute also to the representative of Togo for the outstanding way in which he presided over the work of the Council during January.
28. The events which recently took place in the region
of the Mediterranean
Sea have again shown that the
explosive situation prevailing there is by no means the
result of some sort of historical or geopolitical predetermination. It is the result of a well-thought-out
strategy
which seeks to paralyse progressive change in the Middle
East, perpetuate the exploitation of the natural riches of
that region by capitalist monopolies and impose the military and strategic supremacy of imperialism in that geographical area, situated at the crossroads of the three
continents of the Old World.

21. It is our hope that States Members of the United
Nations will feel encouraged to have recourse to the
Council whenever they perceive a threat to their security,
instead of resorting to the threat or use of force to
achieve their objectives. Only in this way will the Council
be enabled to function as an effective instrument for the
maintenance of international peace and security, as it is
intended to be in accordance with the role assigned to it
by the Charter: an aspect to which the report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the Organization submitted to the General Assembly at its most recent session’ draws particular attention. This role will be denied
to the United Nations if countries decide to arrogate to
themselves the role which properly belongs to the Security Council.

29. The provocative manoeuvres against the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya are evidence of the extremes to which
the United States Government has gone in its ambition
to point the unfolding of events in the region in a direction which would favour its imperialist interests.

22. We appeal to all the parties concerned to cooperate in taking steps to reduce tension in the region
and to avoid any precipitate action which might
endanger international
peace and security. In this
respect, we welcome the reassuring statements made yesterday by the representatives of Libya and the United
States [2415th meeting]. We find in these statements a
reaffirmation of their commitment to the principles of
the Charter, particularly the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of States.

30. The People’s Republic of Bulgaria resolutely condemns that act of aggression and believes that it constitutes an attempt to impose the Camp David deals by
brute force, to deepen the scission in the Arab world and
to compel it to capitulate to the hegemonistic designs of
imperialism and Zionist reaction. We cannot fail to point
out that the perpetrators of that act of provocation seek
to create a smoke-screen to conceal the continued expansionist manoeuvres of Tel Aviv and to distract world
public opinion from the Sabra and Shatila crimes.

23. In view of these statements and of the latest developments in the area, we are hopeful that the situation in
the region will soon revert to normalcy. We also hope
that the present debate in the Council will contribute to
the achievement of that desirable goal and will inhibit the

31. The latest anti-Libyan venture is significant in that
it shows the existence of a new plan to destabilize the
region and to dismantle the national liberation movement in that part of the world.
3

38. I should also like to take this opportunity to express
my sincere thanks and gratitude for the warm welcome
that you and other members of the Council have
extended to me. I need not emphasize my personal pleasure at representing my country in this august body. I
look forward to good relations of co-operation and fruitful endeavour with all of my colleagues, and I pledge my
personal co-operation and that of my delegation.

32. The ambitions of a large State wilfully to assume
the role of arbiter of the security of a region thousands of
kilometres away from it have caused particularly grave
concern within the international community. The worst
examples in history, both recent and remote, attest to the
fact that that State arrogates to itself the right to survey
and sanction the sovereign acts of States as well as their
domestic and foreign policies. The obstinacy with which
it pursues that policy reveals a total disregard for the
realities of our time and a blind attachment to the instruments of force and destruction. There is no need to dwell
in detail on where such aspirations could lead.

39, I need not emphasize Jordan’s concern at the developments that have taken place during the last few daysin
the Mediterranean area and North Africa and that have
led to the submission by the fraternal country of Libya of
its complaint to the Council. Those developments have
clearly created a situation of tension and danger in that
region, tension and danger that have spread beyond the
regional level to the international level. Our concern and
interest with regard to those developments are based on
the existence of mutual relations between Jordan and the
countries concerned in the present crisis. Jordan is linked
to Libya and the Sudan by Pan Arabist commitments
and common destiny, belonging as we do to the same
regional group, the League of Arab States. We have a
clear sense of our Pan Arabist responsiblities and
national obligations towards the Arab nation and its just
causes, In addition to being part of the Islamic world and
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, we are also
bound to the international community through bilateral
relations and mutual co-operation within the framework
of serving common interests and safeguarding the principles of peace, security and legality throughout the world.

33. The danger is particularly great given the deliberate
intention to raise the level of confrontation in a region
that is particularly sensitive, both politically and militarily. The blackmail carried out against the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya is an open defiance of the attempts being
made to arrive at a peaceful and just solution to the
differences that exist in the region. It also constitutes a
further step towards a universalization of the Middle
East crisis. The action was undertaken within the context
of massive military and psychological pressure brought
to bear against all the progressive forces in the world.
Indeed, it represents a restoration of the grimly familiar
1950s policy of brinkmanship.
34. I should like to stress that the events that have just
occurred in the region around Libya bring out once
again the urgent need to arrive at a comprehensive and
just solution to the Middle East problem. The unhappy
experience of many military conflicts has shown that
such problems cannot be resolved by diktat, armed confrontation and acts of aggression. Nor can such a solution be achieved through separate deals, by pitting the
Arab countries against each other. The solution can be
reached only through the collective efforts of all the parties concerned. The People’s Republic of Bulgaria,
together with the other socialist countries, has always
favoured the convening at the earliest possible date of a
broad, international representative forum to that end,

40. Notwithstanding
the divergent views as to the
causes of the tension that came into being last week
around the borders of Libya and other neighbouring
States, and irrespective of the pros and cons of the present crisis on the regional and international
levels, my
Government believes that it is in the interest of none of
the parties to internationalize Arab affairs; therefore, the
transfer of such issues to the international
arena will
serve only to aggravate them further, making them more
complex and leading to a polarization in the region that
will result in more suffering for the Arab nation. Such a
course can only serve to weaken further the bases of
Arab solidarity and co-operation and lead to a concomitant increase in the tension that exists in international
relations.

35. There is no doubt that all States are duty-bound to
abide, both in their policies in the Mediterranean region
and in their international relations in general, by the principles of non-use of force, non-interference in the internal
affairs of other States, equality of rights and the right of
peoples to decide their own future.

41. Jordan’s foreign policy is based on the principle of
opposition to interference in the internal and external
affairs of nations on the part of any party in any circumstances and for any reason whatsoever, and in any form
or manifestation. On that basis we cannot accept threats
to the security of any State from outside its borders,
Responsibility for safeguarding the sovereignty and security of each State is an absolute right of the concerned
State; the safeguarding of international peace and security is an international responsibility exercised by the
United Nations through the Security Council.

36. Accordingly, while reaffirming our total support
for the just cause of the Libyan people and condemning
imperialist aggression against it, my country expresses its
willingness to co-operate with all those who sincerely
desire the establishment of lasting peace and security in
the region of the Middle East and the Mediterranean.
37. Mr. SALAH (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic):
Since this is the first time I have spoken in the Council as
the representative of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
I should like to begin by personally extending to you, Sir,
my warmest congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency for the current month.

42. Israel has continuously threatened the security of
Arab States, as well as their territorial integrity, launching many attacks and invasions and committing
acts of
4

aggression. Moreover, for over 15 years Israel has been
occupying Jerusalem and the West Bank, as well as Gaza
and the Golan Heights.
43. Despite the numerous resolutions adopted by the
United Nations, foremost among which is Council resolution 242 (1967), Israel has failed to implement a single
one and has refused to heed the international call for its
withdrawal from all the occupied Arab territories, for the
establishment of a just and comprehensive peace in the
area, and recognition of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. Nor has there been any successful attempt
to compel it to do so.
44. Jordan opposes the threat or use of force in international relations and, in conformity with this policy, calls
for respect for international
norms and instruments
which make it incumbent upon States to strive to settle
their disputes amicably and by peaceful means, avoiding
provocative acts and extremist policies and practices.
45. All countries bear special responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the safeguarding of stability and the development of cooperation all over the world. That responsibility requires
all States to abstain from any action that could lead to
tension in international relations; it implies the need to
proceed on the basis of the principle of safeguarding the
atmosphere of detente, international co-operation, nonintervention in the internal affairs of others and respect
for good-neighbourliness.

50. I should also like to take this opportunity to express
my delegation’s sincere appreciation to the representative
of brotherly Togo for the efficient manner in which he
presided over the affairs of the Council last month.
51. Last but not least, I should like to congratulate the
new members of the Council and to wish them successin
the fulfilment of the high hopes we have all reposed in
them.
52. Today the Council is once again meeting to consider a situation in which the might of a super-Power is
being imposed on the will of a small nation to deny it the
right to chart its destiny free from foreign domination.
Some might wittingly or unwittingly view the agenda
item before the Council today as representating a conflict
situation between two neighbouring States, but the facts
belie that point of view. If the issue had been an imminent threat emanating from one African country against
another, neighbouring African country, as some would
like us to believe, surely the countries of the region themselves would have been able to contain that threat. But
the fact that the colossal might of a super-Power has
been deployed so swiftly compels us to look for reasons
other than those advanced by the representative of the
United States in her statement to the Council yesterday
[ibid].
53. As is well known, the present United States Administration has publicly and unequivocally
stated on
numerous occasions the high priority it attaches to what
it characterizes as “the containment of Libyan adventurism”- which actually means the overthrow of the legitimate Government of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
Indeed, for the last two years the United States Administration has pursued this objective with uncharacteristic
consistency and determination. That, we submit, is the
real source of the tension on the northern shores of
Africa, and therefore no amount of sophistry can alter
that incontrovertible
fact.

46. There are certain practices that, on the one hand,
might not serve the dignity and reputation of various
countries and, on the other, might prompt smaller countries to go to extremes or to try to form blocs. There are
also grave risks that the great Powers may conduct their
foreign policies on the assumption that peaceful coexistence and detente cannot be achieved.
47. In conclusion, we realize the importance of respecting the right of every State to exercise its sovereignty
within the framework of choosing and implementing its
own foreign policy; to formulate its international relations in order to safeguard its security and territorial
integrity; and to use every legitimate means to that end.
National and regional stability is synonymous with international stability and progress. Indeed, the national security of every State should be respected by all members of
the international community.

54. When we say that, we are not, of course, oblivious
to or denying the fact that there are differences and difficulties between Libya and some of its neighbours, but we
are convinced that those differences are not the real
source of the present tension in that part of the world.
Those differences can and will be resolved by the countries concerned, bilaterally or through the instrumentality of regional organizations. Unfortunately,
however,
the differences are being deliberately fanned in order to
serve as a pretext for intervention in and ultimate domination of that region.

48. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Ethiopia, whom
I invite to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

55. In this connection, let me refer to a simple and very
recent example of how the United States pursues a policy
in the region that could be characterized as one of
“divide and dominate”. In her statement to the Council,
the representative of the United States stated that: “A
number of Libyans are in Ethiopia advising Somali and
Sudanese guerrillas.” [Ibid., para. 663. We, of course,
view that as malicious. What makes that statement noteworthy, ho i ever, is not its lack of scruples but the sinister motive that lies behind it.

49. Mr. IBRAHIM
(Ethiopia): Allow me at the outset,
Sir, to offer my congratulations to you on your assumption of the presidency for the month of February. Your
personal diplomatic skills and the policy of peace
pursued by your Government augur well for the successful discharge of your responsibilities.
5

56. The whole world knows that Ethiopia and Somalia
have strained relations. But what the world probably
does not know is how the United States exploits these
strained relations in order to maintain military bases and
facilities in our region, The whole world also knows that
Ethiopia and the Sudan enjoy very good relations and
that both countries are striving to strengthen further that
good-neighbourliness at the highest possible level. Unfortunately, the United States is not happy with this state of
affairs and, as has been attempted here by its representative, is sowing seeds of distrust and discord in the bilateral relations of those sister nations.

Government of the United States. When that takes place,
at some future date, it will certainly mark a significant
turn of events in favour of the maintenance of global
peace and stability and the enhancement of international
co-operation in promoting progress and prosperity for
mankind as a whole.
60. There is no denying, however, that such positive
developments uncertain and unspecified as they are, will
not provide a solution to the present situation, which is
so replete with all the possibilities for escalating into a
conflagration. The present dangerous situation and the
tension that mounted dramatically last week in and
around the northern shores of Africa appear to be the
result of a deliberate plan and the culmination of a whole
series of hostile and provocative acts committed by the
United States against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. We
shall not burden the Council by restating those facts, as a
whole inventory of those provocations over the past several years was given only yesterday by the representative
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya [ibid., para. 14.

57. In this connection, I wish to state that not only are
there no Sudanese guerrillas being trained by Libya in
my country but even the Sudanese Government itself has
not made such charges against my country. When viewed
against this background, the motive behind the statement
of the United States representative should become very
apparent. And, we submit again, the purpose is to raise
suspicion, create tension and strain the good-neighbourly
relations that exist beween the people and Government
of my country and the people and Government of the
Sudan. The statements and actions of the United States
should therefore be viewed at all times within the context
of its guiding policy of divide and dominate.

61. The statement of the representative of the United
States not only has failed to assure us that the present
crisis is over but in fact has added to the confusion generated by the contradictory statements of high officials in
Washington, including the President of the United States
himself,

58. Being a permanent member of the Security Council
obviously entails primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. At this point in
time, if one asks the question how the policies of the
present United States Administration
measure up to its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations,
the answer is not a difficult one. The global policy of
peaceful coexistence and detente is today being replaced
by a dangerous policy of confrontation; the cherished
goal of disarmament is countered by extensive rearmament; the ardent desire for the creation of zones of peace
in different regions of the world is being supplanted by a
chain of military bases where intense military activity is
taking place, albeit in the form of manoeuvres. Where
wisdom and caution are imperative, Washington acts
with haste and brinkmanship. Where responsibility and a
sense of justice are expected, the world finds a singular
lack of those qualities, One can go on enumerating the
difficult situations in which the world finds itself as a
result of the policy pursued by the present United States
Administration.

62. The official Government statement from Khartoum, as reported in The Washington Post of 21 February, is that there had been no coup attempt and that only
25 persons had been arrested over the past three months.
The Egyptian Minister for Defence was also reported in
the same newspaper as having asserted that he did not
see any signs of crisis or a possible aggression against the
Sudan at present. Also, no joint military manoeuvres
have been confirmed by the countries concerned; in fact,
they have been denied outright, Yet, those were the justifications offered by the United States for the dangerous
military activities that it undertook.
However, The New York Times, in its issue of 22
February, touched upon what appears to be the more
1ikeIy and, indeed, the most disturbing currents underneath the high drama of last week. It reported that:
63.

“The plan, according to the American officials, was
to lure Libya into striking and then to destroy as much
of its air force as possible, If no strike occurred, the
plan was to assert that prompt help to Egypt had
deterred Libya.”

59. Faced with such predicaments, what should the
Security Council do to discharge its Charter responsibilities? Indeed, what should small countries like Libya
expect from the Council when a super-Power threatens
to exercise its military might against it? Those are some
of the questions that the members of the Council have to
address. As for the Ethiopian delegation and Government, we commend Libya for its courage and perseverance in the face of the boundless might and ceaseless
provocations of a nuclear Power. At the same time, we
continue to hope that the dictates of world peace and
security, rather than narrowly conceived national interests, will one day be given due consideration by the

The same New York Times article continued:
“The cover story was to be that the AWACS planes
had been sent to Egypt as part of a training exercise.“’
It was further stressed that:
“The apparent contradictions in the public posture
and the private explanations, officials said, were due
more to poor execution than to a faulty plan.”
6

In other words,
implementation.

it was a good

plan

with

poor

accusing it of dark plans against its Arab neighbours,
which not only are not threatened by Libya, but whose
peoples are linked by historical and indissoluble ties of
brotherhood and by battles waged in common against
the Zionist rtgime of Israel, colonialism and imperialism.

64, Thus the aircraft-carrier Nimitz, with its sophisticated, deadly weapons, was diverted to the shores of
Libya on a mission of fishing for a pretext that would
provide a semblance of justification for clobbering a
weak and small country. What is even more disturbing is
the fact that this was done by a super-Power, a permanent member of the Security Council, which has responsibility for maintaining international peace and security,
for protecting the weak and the small and for promoting
the rule of law in international relations.

70. The actions today of the United States are nothing
but a repetition of the 1981 occurrences. The propaganda
campaign. unleashed by the United States mass media
against Libya is an attempt purely and simply to disguise
and justify the aggressive policy of Washington against
the Libyan revolution,
against its position of antiindependence
and solidarity
with the
imperialism,
national liberation movements and the struggle of peoples for their national and social emancipation.

65. Indeed, the world is approaching a new international anarchy, as was emphatically expressed by the
Secretary-General in his report on the work of the
Organization, submitted to the thirty-seventh session of
the General Assembly.’ What reason do we have for
optimism when a permanent member of the Council, the
organ in which the Charter of the United Nations reposes
special responsibilities for maintaining world order, is
arrogating to itself the role of international policeman
or, worse, is acting as a lawless gang bullying the weak
and the small?

71. Cubans cannot be surprised at such conduct. For,
at the end of the last century, JosC Marti, the founder of
our independence, conceived his struggle for freedom as
a means of preventing the nascent imperialism
of the
Yankees from being unleashed-with
the force that had
taken possession of Cuba-against
the territories of
Latin America. Therefore, in the Buenos Aires newspaper La Nacidn, following the first Pan American Conference, held in Washington, he warned our peoples
against the hegemonistic designs of their powerful neighbour and said that the time for its second independence
had come for Latin America.

66. For our part, our response to that can only be to
call for prudence and to urge all States concerned to
conduct themselves in accordance with the norms of
international law, as enunciated in the Charter. The alternative to prudence and the rule of law is not only dangerous but also irreversible.

72, Sim6n Bolivar, the great fighter for Latin American
liberty, had exclaimed with singular far-sightedness several decades before this that: “The United States seems to
be destined by providence to beset Latin America with
miseries in the name of liberty.”

67. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

73. It is of course, again, in the name of liberty-which
for the Indians of the United States is the liberty to take
refuge in their tiny concentration camps on reservations;
which for the black people of that country is the liberty
to live in ghettos, be discriminated against, downtrodden
and persecuted; which for millions of Latin Americans,
Africans and Asians is the liberty, purely and simply, to
die of hunger, malnutrition
or disease; liberty to be
enjoyed only by the great monopolists and their most
outstanding representatives-it
is, I repeat, in the name
of liberty that the Government of the United States has
come forward in the role of policeman of the world.

68. Mr. ROA KOURI
(Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): A little more than a year ago, in August 1981,
the Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries
held an extraordinary meeting in New York to consider
the grave situation created by the provocative naval
manoeuvres carried out by the United States Navy near
the coasts of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
Those
manoeuvres, obviously carried out for intimidatory purposes, resulted in the shooting down of Libyan aircraft
by the United States Air Force. The Co-ordinating
Bureau regarded those actions on the part of a permanent member of the Security Council, which has, as we
know, primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as a series of threats to
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the non-aligned countries of the region, which advocate
the creation of a zone of peace and co-operation in the
Mediterranean.

74. I wouid like to know what principle in the Charter
of the United Nations authorizes the Government of the
United States to impose unilaterally an economic blockade, already 23 years old, on my country. What Article
of the Charter authorizes it to organize, train and finance
mercenaries to destabilize Nicaragua and Grenada?
What precept of international law is invoked for sending
its fleet to the coast of Libya, to the Indian Ocean, to
South Korea and to the Caribbean and to maintain military bases throughout the world, even against the will of
the peoples concerned, as is the case of the naval base
which is being illegally maintained on Cuban territory in
GuantBnamo?

69. The Council is today considering the dangerous
situation arising from the new provocative actions of the
United States Navy in the vicinity of Libya and the dispatch of AWACS spy planes to a neighbouring country.
Indeed, the most powerful imperial Power of our time is
striving to intimidate a small, non-aligned country,
7

81. The movements of a powerful unit of the United
States aircraft-carrier fleet in the Gulf of Sidra and the
dangers that this poses to the countries of the area confirm the correctness of the traditional policy of Algeria to
do everything possible to make of the Mediterranean a
sea of peace, co-operation and understanding among the
coastal countries and a zone free from all external
threats, a zone of peace, security and independence for
the countries and the peoples of the region. This policy
has been constantly endorsed and confirmed by the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, to which the great
majority of the island and coastal countries of the Mediterranean belong.

75. The members of the Council may perhaps have a
good answer to my questions. Since I do not want to be
guilty of ingenuousness, I wish to make clear that the
questions are purely rhetorical. We all know that no one
asked the Government of the United States to become
the world’s policeman and that it has no right to assume
that role, either under the Charter or in international
law, More than one President of the United States has
already admitted this. Yet the United States does all this;
it interferes, when it deems it necessary, in the internal
affairs of States Members of the United Nations in the
name of its sacrosanct interests.
76. This is the strange way the imperialists have of con-.
fusing everything and distorting values and principles.
That is one thing. But it is another thing to claim that
independent, sovereign States should share the misguided vision of the world and of international relations
of the United States. None of our countries, regardless of
its size or power-or lack of power-is ready to yield an
inch in defence of its principles, sovereignty, independence and the freedom to chart its own destiny.

82. The argument of joint manoeuvres by a Power outside the region and a country inside the region-whether
this be in the Mediterranean or elsewhere-cannot be
accepted as a valid explanation. Such exercises, precisely
because they occur in sensitive areas, inevitably carry
with them the risk of confrontation and destabilization,
while at the same time placing regional conflicts within a
much broader framework of confrontation.

77. We are no longer in the era of the gunboat. The
Davids of the world today do not fear Goliath, although
he may possess nuclear warheads. Therefore, once again
we wish today to express our unswerving solidarity with
the Libyan people and with its inalienable right to direct
its own destiny without any outside interference or intervention. Therefore, we vigorously condemn the aggressive policy of the United States Government against a
member of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
and we call to the attention of members of the Council
this grave situation, which, together with the repeated
acts of aggression by Israel against the Arab nation, jeopardizes international peace and security.

83. Whatever the reality and complexity of the problems confronting the countries of the region, there can bc
no justification for intervention or the threat of intervcntion by a Power from outside the region. In this part of
the Arab world, which is also part of the African world,
it is deplorable that there should have been such interventions at a time when dangerous actions are undertaken to
weaken and undermine the bases of regional organizations, which are the natural forums for the examination
of the problems of a region and for the search for peaceful solutions.
84. In the face of the paralysis of these regional organizations, which are those that truly regulate international
life, in accordance with the very spirit of the Charter of
the United Nations, the Security Council remains the
ultimate recourse for safeguarding international
peace
and security and for deterring and condemning any
action which might undermine it. In this particular grave
situation before the Council today, Algeria wishes to
express the hope that the Council will live up to its
responsibilities.

78. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
79. Mr, ABADA (Algeria) (interpretation from French):
I thank you, Sir, for permitting me to speak in the Council. Although the Algerian delegation has already paid
you the tribute yen deserve as President, I should like, in
my turn, to express to you the sincere pleasure I have
in addressing the Council under your distinguished
presidency,

85. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): In
accordance with the decision taken at the start of this
meeting, I invite the representative of the Pan Africanist
Congress of Azania, Mr. Mafole, to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

80. Algeria cannot remain indifferent to events which,
for several days now, have been occurring in the Mediterranean region, an Arab and African region, which is
Algeria’s own immediate geographical and political environment and to which it is attached by so many links.
The Algerian delegation therefore believes it to be entirely legitimate, urgent and important for the Council to
meet to examine the deterioration of the situation in the
vicinity of the Libyan coast, We should like to take this
opportunity to recall Algeria’s position of unswerving
principle in the consideration of the events which caused
this matter to be presented to the Council by a neighbour
and fraternal country,

86. Mr. MAFOLE: Mr. President, on behalf of the Pan
Africanist Congress of Azania (PAC), the custodian of
the true aspirations of the oppressed and exploited African majority of Azania, I wish to thank you and the
members of the Council for permitting us to make a
statement in solidarity with the Socialist People’s Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya.
87. We also take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for the month
of February, we are confident that under your able lead8

ership the Council will objectively examine the facts as
presented and take appropriate measures in order to
uphold peace and security in that region.

94. The Council has been urgently convened to take up
the worsening situation in the vicinity of Libya, the acts
of provocation by the United States, which sent out ships
of its Sixth Fleet to the coast of Libya, thus creating, as is
stated in the letter from Libya, a threat to regional and
international peace and security.

88. The PAC, on behalf of the oppressed and exploited
people of Azania, denounces in the strongest terms possible the United States imperialist aggression against the
Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

95. This is certainly not the first time that the United
States Government has had recourse to armed acts of
provocation against Libya, an independent, sovereign
State and a Member of the United Nations, The events of
August 1981, when American fighters shot down two
Libyan aeroplanes over the Gulf of Sidra, are still sufficiently fresh in everyone’s memory. For some years now,
the authorities in Washington have been pursuing a systematic campaign of threats and intimidation
against
Libya and its leaders.

89. United States imperialist warmongers are at it
again. It will be remembered that the same aggressive
activities were carried out in 198 1. The aim of this imperialist provocation and aggression remains the same: to
further the strategic designs of the United States for global domination and continued exploitation of the world’s
peoples. It is becoming more and more explicit that the
United States wants to create a state of permanent instability in the Mediterranean so as to further its exploitative interests in the region. This obviously poses a serious
threat to international peace and stability.

96. The leaders of the United States Government are
always spreading fabrications about Libya’s independent
foreign policy, which is obviously not to the liking of the
architects of American policy. They clearly find unpalatable the fact that Libya is pursuing an anti-imperialist
policy in international affairs and is decisively opposing
attempts by the United States and Israel to force a capitulatory peace on the Arab peoples.

90. It is an historical fact that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has consistently been in the vanguard of the struggle
against the imperialism led by the United States both in
Africa and the Middle East. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya continues to support, materially, politically and
diplomatically,
the struggles of the peoples of Namibia
and Azania against apartheid, colonialism and imperialism, The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is also in the forefront
of the struggle against Zionist Israel and whole-heartedly
supports the progressive struggle of the Palestinian
Arabs in occupied Palestine. All this commitment and
dedication on the part of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
not only poses a threat to the imperialist interests of the
United States in the two regions and hinders United
States designs to penetrate the regions further, but also
exposes the adventurist gunboat diplomacy of the present United States Administration,
led by the most predatory and belligerent representatives of monopoly
capitalism.

97. That is precisely why the American fleet was in the
vicinity of the Libyan coast, whereas Washington once
again dredged up the hackneyed propagandistic canard
about a Libyan threat to neighbouring countries and,
one would almost believe, to the United States itself.
98. This clearly points to the serious consequences of
the imperialist policy of the United States in the Middle
East, That policy seeks to militarize the region, to expand
the direct American military presence there and to interfere in the affairs of States of the region. In places beyond
the reach of the strategic ally of the United States, Israel,
Washington immediately turns up as a self-styled arbiter,
shamelessly trying to dictate its conditions to other
countries.

91. The United States hopes that it can save this situation by continuing its aggressive activities against Libya
and hopes to bully and cow the militant Libyan people.
Far from it. The PAC believes that, on the contrary, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya will continue playing its revolutionary role against United States imperialism in that
region and elsewhere.

99, And here I should like to remind the Council of
what Mr. Gromyko, the Foreign Minister of the Soviet
Union, said at the thirty-seventh session of the General
Assembly:
“Who, we might well ask, has given Washington the
right to tell sovereign States what they should and
what they should not do in their own house? Who has
given it the right to try to punish those who cherish
their sovereignty and would not yield to pressure, to
apply all kinds of sanctions, to impose economic
blockades, and even to brandish arms?

92. Finally, the PAC condemns, in the strongest terms
possible, the United States aggression against the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, which is also an
attack against the African revolution. We therefore
express our unequivocal support for and revolutionary
solidarity with the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in its goal of
maintaining its right of self-determination, national independence and international sovereignty.

“From what some say, it would appear that United
States interests are being endangered almost everywhere in the world. This is an absurd thesis. Yet it is
being used to justify crude interference in the affairs of
others, used on a sweeping geographic scale, as
regards both nearby countries and those situated

93. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): 1
should now like to make a statement as the representative of the UNION
OF SOVIET
SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS.
9

many thousands of kilometres away from the United
Stat&.“2

basis of international relations and at gross interference
in the affairs of others, and it constitutes a serious threat
to world peace, leading to a further exacerbation of tension in that already explosive region of the Middle East,
An end must be put immediately to such acts of provocation against Libya.

100. Those words admirably sum up the present policy
of the [Jnited States in respect of Libya.
101. To judge by the statement made by the Secretary
of State of the United States, it was only thanks to the
“speedy, decisive actions” of the United States Administration that the threat to international peace was averted,
a threat which was allegedly posed to Libya’s neighbours. The question is: What threat are we talking
about? The Egyptian Defence Minister, Mr. AbuGhazala, said, according to reports, that he saw no signs
of’ crisis or possible aggression from Libya. It would seem
that this time, as indeed in the past, the latest mirage
about the Libyan danger was born not in the sun-baked
sands of the Sahara but in the cauldron of the propaganda kitchen of the Administration
in Washington.

105. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT.
106. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America):
As frequently happens in the proceedings of the Council,
the apparent focus of its attention tends, under the harsh
blows of rhetoric and inflamed passion, distortion and
misrepresentation,
to sink, like the proverbial stone,
without a trace.
107. My delegation has been particularly impressed by
some of the presentations made in the course of this
discussion-which
we had thought was a discussion of
the unstable situation in and around the area occupied
by Libya. We were struck by the noble sentiments
expressed in behalf of noninterference in the affairs of
others by the representative of Viet Nam, who is, of’
course, probably experienced in these matters, as the
people of Kampuchea might attest. And even, Mr. President, at the risk of your well-known and richly deserved
reputation for charm wearing somewhat thin, I was
impressed by your statement, in view of the well-known
activities of your Government in helping, I am sure, to
stabilize the situation in Afghanistan with the neighbourly injection of upwards of 110,000 of your troops.
But I thank you, Mr. President, as the representative of
the Soviet Union, for putting a spotlight on what apparently is truly the issue before the Council, namely, in
your words, Libya’s “anti-imperialist
policy in international affairs”.

102. Witness, too, the clumsy attempts by United
States officials to try to smooth over the glaring contradictions in the hastily concocted version of recent events
which seeks to justify the sending of the United States
fleet to the coast of Libya. At a press conference on 17
February, the President of the United States stated that
there were no movements of the fleet towards Libya, At
the same time, other representatjves of the Administration-in
an attempt, as it were, to correct their
President-acknowledged
the presence of the United
States fleet near the Libyan coast but stated that this had
nothing at all to do with Libya. Now, the Administration
would have us believe that it was only this decisive action
it undertook that led to a lessening of the danger. Everything becomes clear if we take a look at the articles in
American newspapers which shed real light on Washington’s intentions. According to an article in The New York
Times, which specifically names United States officials,
the Administration’s
plan was to provoke Libya and
then to destroy its air force. Certain representatives have
already quoted this article, but I considered it my duty to
refer to it again in my statement.

108. Well and good; we wish simply that Libya would
take counsel as to whether it wants to apply its antiimperialist policy against Chad and against the Sudan
and against numerous other of its neighbours and,
through its support and arms and finances to world-wide
terrorist organizations, against other Governments and
other peoples far, far beyond north-east and central
Africa.

103. There is another aspect of these recent events
which should not be forgotten. The question is: Is Libya
the onIy target of United States attempts to wave the big
stick‘? No one can seriously believe that that State, with a
population of about 2.5 million, could be a threat to the
United States. Would it not be closer to the truth to say
that the actions of the Administration
are aimed against
all non-aligned countries, particularly those that do not
want to go along with the hegemonistic policies of the
United States? It would seem that that country wants to
make it clear to them too that if gross slander cannot
prevail upon them to change their independent policies,
the United States always has at the ready warships and
planes to teach them a good lesson and to restore
“order”, cooked up from colonial recipes concocted in
Washington.

109. I said that the subject of our concern has tended to
sink without a trace beneath the onslaughts of our rhetoric. Let me remind the Council of the subject of our
concern, and let me read to the Council-particularly
because its members and those who have asked to speak
have paid a massive lack of attention to the detailed,
concise, straightforward and utterly convincing statement delivered yesterday by the representative of the
Sudan-from
the transcript of the press conference held
yesterday in Khartoum by Presidents Mubarak of Egypt
and Nimeiri of the Sudan:
“President Nimeiri indicated that Qaddafi himself
openly declared that he was intending to attack the
Sudan on 18 February and was preparing for it. . .

104. The Soviet: delegation believes that this type of
behaviour is inadmissible in relations between States.
The IJnited States action was aimed at subverting the

“. . .
10

“President Nimeiri said that Qaddafi told one of his
agents that on the morning [of18 February] he would
send a TU aircraft to bomb Khartoum , . . Afterward,
he tried to preoccupy world public opinion with anticipated moves against himself and submitted a complaint to the Security Council. By so doing [Qaddafil
was applying the proverb we use: ‘He hits me and
hastens to complain’.”

disagreement between the Libyan, Egyptian and Sudanese peoples because they are Arab peoples who share a
common destiny, a common history and a common goal.
There are many Egyptian and Sudanese brothers working in Libya. We are proud of the struggle of the Egyptian people for the cause of the Arab nation, and we are
also proud of the struggle of the Sudanese people.
114. The representative of the United States is still
asserting and maintaining that his country may interfere
in the affairs of any country that might interfere in the
affairs of its friends or agents. Let him call them what he
likes, ‘&Foreign intervention” might be acceptable. But
what if we are dealing with internal affairs? Peoples have
awakened; they do not wish to see their rulers as puppets
of the United States, which is the enemy of the Arabs, the
Palestinians, the Muslims and the oppressed peoples of
South Africa.

What of the prospects for the future? President Nimeiri
replied to another question on the current situation by
saying:
“The threat from Libya against the Sudan is continuing. I believe that it will not stop for a long time
because, for three years now, the Libyans have been
really ready to attack the Sudanese Government and
its President. Qaddafi has clearly said that he waflts ts
change this Government and to do away with Nlmelrl
by all means, even if he has to kill him. He is working
toward this end, What I want to say is that we are
aware of his, . . plan.”

115. I have one question: Is not the presence 9’ the
nuclear-powered aircraft-carrier Nimitz, near the Libyan
coast, as reported in the American press, a violation of
United Nations General Assembly resolutions and those
of the Organization of African Unity that call for implementation of the Declaration on the Denuclearization of
Africa?3 Is not the presence of that nuclear-powered warship near the shores of Lebanon in contravention and
violation of General Assembly resolutions that call for
the establishment of a nuclear-free zone in the region of
the Middle East? What is the fate of General Assembly
resolutions that provide for the need to agree on effective
international
arrangements
to assure non-nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons?

President Mubarak of Egypt then added, at another
point in the press conference:
“I believe that President Nimeiri has explained to
you accurately everything that happened. Following
the Sudan’s discovery of the attempt against it, I do
not believe that this attempt will be repeated.”
110. It is the earnest hope and the profound wish of my
Government,
the motivation behind its recent acts of
deterrence, our profound hope and prayer that President
Mubarak will turn out to be a good prophet.

116. The United States representative mentioned that
Libya finances terrorism or terrorist movements. A short
while ago, the Council heard a statement by the representative of one of those organizations the United States
deems to be terrorist, namely, the representative of the
PAC, who spoke on behalf of the oppressed and the
tortured. We hope that the United States will one day
recognize the rights of those peoples.

111. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
The representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has
asked to speak, and I now call on him.
112. Mr. BURWIN

(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)(interpre-

tation from Arabic): I should like in a few simple words to

draw the attention of the representative of the United
States to the following. If his country is concerned about
spreading peace and righteousness in the world and
about combating interference, we hope that his Government will deter Israel-not
to mention South Africa,
which interferes daily in the affairs of neighbouring African countries and applies the policy of racial discrimination against its own black majority. Is that in conformity
with the principles of human rights that the United States
claims to uphold, or are human rights-as Eliot Abrams,
who is the United States official responsible for human
rights, said-restricted to concern over those who oppose
national Governments’? Abrams also said: “The dissidents of today are the heads of State and the prime ministers of tomorrow,“* This is the real secret of the United
States interest in human rights.

117. There are many motives for the interference by the
United States or for its having raised this issue. There are
certain internal domestic motives that are inspired by the
need to gain approval for the large sums of money to be
devoted to the machinery of war and destruction. There
are external motives as well, namely, the imposition of an
American policy on the Middle East, the imposition of
the Zionist entity upon the peoples of that region, the
interference in Libya and the diversion or international
public opinion from feelings that are inimical to the
United States, especially on the continent of Europe,
with regard to the issue of disarmament and the deployment of nuclear weapons in Europe.
118. Libya, Viet Nam and other States need no lestimony from the United States. Some 26 representatives
have made statements here. No fewer than 24 of them
have taken the side of the Jamahiriya. Those who have
made statements represent Asia, Eurape, Latin America

113. The mission of the United States is to sow dissent
among the Arabs, We assert that there is no genuine
* Quoted in English

by the speaker.

li

ana the struggling peoples in those regions. Because of its
composition and structure, we do not expect anything
from the Council, for we realize that, unfortunately,
there is the United States veto power, a power that has
come to be directed especially against Arab and African
issues.

sentative of Libya stated yesterday [24151h meeting], the
Jamahiriya is prepared for dialogue and is ready to iron
out differences, if any, with the Government of the
United States.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

119. I should like to thank all those who showed concern over this issue, and I should like once again to state
that Libya is a small country that wants to live in peace
and to pursue a policy of non-alignment. It also wishes to
establish normal relations with the peoples of all States,
including the people of the United States. As the repre-

Litho

in Uriited

Nations,

New

York

NOTES
[ Official Records of the General Assembly,
Thirty-sevenih
Supplement No. 2 (A/37/ 1).
2 Ibid., Plenary meetings, 13th meeting, paras. 98 and 99.
’ Ofjiciaf
Records
of the General
Assembly,
Twentieth
Annexes,
agenda
item 105. document A/5975.

00300

6020%November

Session.

Session,

1990~2,050
