V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

the interim arrangements, taking into account that each
country concerned should receive appropriate technical
and financia! assistance.
85th plenary meeting
15 December 1978
33/86.

Report of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on the work of its sixth session28 and the statement of the Executive Director of the Programme introducing the report, 29
Having also considered Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/62 of 3 August 1978 concerning
international co-operation on the environment,
Noting with satisfaction the signing in Kuwait, on
23 April 1978, of the Final Act of the Kuwait Regional
Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Protection and
Development of the Marine Environment and the
Coastal Areas,
Having further considered the note by the SecretaryGeneral on international conventions and protocols in
the field of the environment,30
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme on the work of its sixth session and the
decisions, as adopted, contained in annex I thereto;
2. Welcomes the activities of the United Nations
Environment Programme, in particular the decisions of
the Governing Council relating to the establishment
of a system-wide, medium-term environment programme based on thematic joint programming, the
emphasis to be given to project and programme evaluation and to the preparatory process for the consideration by the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination
of matters concerning the environment and the implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification,31 adopted by the United Nations Conference
on Desertification, held at Nairobi from 29 August to
9 September 1977, and the reporting thereon by the
Administrative Committee on Co-ordination to the
Governing Council;
3. Calls upon all bodies and organizations of the
United Nations system involved in the elaboration of
the new international development strategy to take environmental concerns into full account in view of the
close interrelationship between environment and development;
4. Invites the executive heads, members of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to continue
to consider, after the merger of the Environment Coordination Board with the Administrative Committee
on Co-ordination, environmental matters at their level;
5. Urges all Governments to contribute urgently
and generously to the Fund of the United Nations
Environment Programme, bearing in mind paragraph 3
28 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/33/25).
29 Ibid., Thirty-third Session, Second Committee, 24th meeting, paras. 1-14.
so A/33/134.
s1 A/CONF.74/36, chap. l.

87

of Governing Council decision 6/13 A of 24 May
1978,32 so as to meet the approved target;
6. Requests the United Nations Environment Programme to continue its catalytic and co-ordinating role
in the field of the marine environment and ecological
balance of regional seas and invites the Governments
concerned to conclude, as appropriate, through cooperation among themselves and with the assistance of
the United Nations Environment Programme and regional commissions, conventions and other arrangemen ts in arder to promote the protection of the marine
environment of regional seas;
7. Invites Member States, as appropriate, to ratify
and implement the international conventions and protocols designed to protect the environment in every
respect and further urges Governments to promote the
conclusion of such conventions and protocols.
85th plenary meeting
15 December 1978
33/87.

Co-operation in the field of the environment concerning natural resources shared
by two or more States

The General Assembly,
Affirming the principies stated in the Declaration of
the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment,33
Recalling its resolution 3129 (XXVIII) of 13 December 1973, entitled "Co-operation in the field of the
environment concerning natural resources shared by
two or more States",
Recalling further the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States, contained in its resolution 3281
(XXIX) of 12 December 1974,
Noting that the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme has, by decision 6/14
of 19 May 1978,34 approved the final report of the
Intergovernmental Working Group of Experts on Natural Resources Shared by Two or More States, established under Governing Council decision 44 (III) of
25 April 1975, containing the draft principies of conduct in the field of the environment for the guidance
of States in the conservation and harmonious utilization of natural resources shared by two or more
States and the declarations and reservations expressed
thereon, 35
Recognizing the right of States to provide specific
solutions on a bilateral or regional basis,
Desiring to promote effective co-operation among
States for the development of international law regarding the conservation and harmonious utilization of
natural resources shared by two or more States,
l. Notes the valuable work done by the Intergovernmental Working Group of Experts on Natural
Resources Shared by Two or More States in carrying
out the tasks entrusted to it in regard to the im32 See O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/33/25), annex l.
33 Report of the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment, Stockholm, 5-16 June 1972 (United Nations.
publication, Sales No. E.73.11.A.14 and corrigendum), chap. I.
34 See O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtythird Session, Supp/ement No. 25 (A/33/25), annex l.
35 UNEP/GC.6/17.

88

General Assembly-Thirty-third Seseion

plementation of General Assembly resolution 3129
(XXVIII);
2. Takes note of the report of the Group of Experts, its approval, as adopted, by the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme
and its transmission to the General Assembly with an
invitation to adopt the draft principles;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to transmit the
report to Governments for their study and comments
regarding the principles and to report thereon, taking
into account also other significant information, with a
view to enabling the General Assembly to take a decision at its thirty-fourth session.
85 th plenary meeting
15 December 1978
33/88.

Measures to be taken for the henefit of
the Sudano-Sahelian region

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/170 of 19 December
1977,
Aware of the seriousness of desertification in the
Sudano-Sahelian region and of the urgency of implementing in that region the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification,36 adopted by the United Nations Conference on Desertification, held at Nairobi from 29
August to 9 September 1977,
Having considered the report of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on the work of its sixth session,37 particularly
the parts of that report on measures to be taken for
the benefit of the Sudano-Sahelian region,
Bearing in mind section II of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1978/37 of 21 July 1978,
Stressing the need for bodies of the United Nations
system, other international agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to support
the efforts of the countries of the Sudano-Sahelian
region to combat desertification, particularly by planning and implementing projects and strengthening subregional and regional structures,
Recalling its resolution 3054 (XXVIII) of 17 October 1973, in which it defined the functions of the
United Nations Sahelian Office,
Recalling further that it is of vital importance that
the United Nations Sahelian Office should continue
to maintain close co-operation with the Permanent
Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel
with a view to the full implementation of the programmes drawn up by the Committee and its member
States,
l. Endorses decision 6/11 B of 24 May 1978 of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme38 and decision 25/10 of 27 June
1978 of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme;39
36 A/CONF.74/36,
37 Otficial Records

chap. l.
of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/33/25).
38 lbid., annex l.
89 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978, Supplement No. 13 (E/1978/53/Rev.l), chap. XX.

2. Decides to designate the United Nations Sahelian Office, in addition to its current functions, as the
arm of the United Nations to be responsible for assisting, on behalf of the United Nations Environment
Programme, the efforts of the fifteen countries of the
Sudano-Sahelian region situated south of the Sabara
and north of the equator4° to implement the Plan of
Action to Combat Desertification;
3. Authorizes, to that end, the organizational enlargement of the United Nations Sahelian Office and
its regional office at Ouagadougou, without prejudice
to the work undertaken in implementation of the
recovery and rehabilitation programme in the SudanoSahelian region in conformity with the functions
of the United Nations Sahelian Office as defined
in paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 3054
(XXVIII), this process, in accordance with paragraph
1 above, to be the joint responsibility of the United
Nations Development Programme and the United
Nations Environment Programme;
4. Invites the specialized agencies and other organizations and programmes of the United Nations
system concerned to co-operate fully with the United
Nations Sahelian Office in its efforts to ensure the
complete effectiveness of assistance provided to the
fifteen countries of the Sudano-Sahelian region for the
implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to submit to the
General Assembly an annual report on the implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan
of Action to Combat Desertification.
85 th plenary meeting
15 December 1978
33/89.

Plan of Action to Combat Desertification

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/169 and 32/172 of 19
December 1977 containing its decisions on the report
of the United Nations Conference on Desertification,
held at Nairobi from 29 August to 9 September 1977,41
Having considered:
(a)
The report of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme on the work
of its sixth session, 42 containing, inter alia, a chapter
and decisions on matters arising out of the United
Nations Conference on Desertification,
( b) The report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the resolutions adopted by the
United Nations Conference on Desertification,43
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General
on the study of additional measures and means of
financing for the implementation of the Plan of Action
4 0 Cape Verde, Chad, Ethiopia, Gambia, Kenya, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Somalia, Sudan, Uganda,
United Republic of Cameroon and Upper Volta.
41 A/CONF.74/36.
4 2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/33/25).
43 A/33/259.
