XIV. RF.SOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORT OF THE
LEAGUE OF NATIONS COMMin"EE
24(1). TRAHSFER OF CERTAIN FuNCTIONS, ACTM-

League of Natioru and which the United Nations
is likely to continue.

TIES AND AssETS OF THE l.EAGUE
OF NATIONS

Ther-efore:
The General Ássembly declares that the United
Nations is willing to accept the custody of the instruments and to charge the Secretariat of the
United Nations with the task of performing for
the parties the functions, pertaining to a secretariat, fon:nerly entrusted to the League of Natioru.

I
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS BELONGING TO THE
LEAGUE OF NATIONS UNDEII. INTERNATIONAL
AoREEMENTS

Under various treaties and international conventions, agreements and other instrwnents, the
League of Nations and its organ-s exercise, or may
be requested to exercise, numerous functions or
powers for the continuance of which, after the
dissolution of the League, it is, or may be, dcsirable
that the United Nations should provide.
Certain Members of the United Nations, which
are parties to sorne of these instrwnents and are
Members of the League of Nations, have informed
the General Assembly that, at the forthcoming
session of the Assembly of the League, they intend
to move a resolution whereby the Members of the
League would, so far as this is necessary, assent and
give effect to the steps contemplated below.

Functions and Powers o/ a TechnicoJ and
N on-PoliticoJ Character
Among the instruments referred to at the beginning of this resolution are sorne of a technical and
non-political character which contain provisioru,
relating to the substance of the instruments, whoee
due execution is dependent on the exercisc, by the
League of Nations or particular organs of the
League, of functions or powers conferred hy the
instruments. Certain of these instruments are intimately connected with activities which the United
Nations will or may continue.
lt is necessary, however, to examine carefully
which of the organs of the United Nations or
which of the specialized agencies brought into relationship with the U nited Nations should, in the
future, exercise the functions and powers in question, in so far as they are maintained.
B.

There/Me:
1. The General Assembly reserves the right to
decide, after due examination, not to assume any
particular function or power, and to determine
which organ of the United Nations or which specialized agency brought into relationship with the
United Nations should cxercise cach particular
function or power assumed.
2. T he General Assembly records tha t those
Member-s of the United Nation.s which are parties
to the instruments referred to above assent by this
resolution to the steps contemplated below and
express their resolve to use their good offices to
secure the co-operation of the other parties to the
instruments so far as this may be necessary.

Therefore:
The General Assembly is willing, subject to these
reservations, to take the necessary measures to ensure the continued exercise of these functions and
powers, and refers the matter to the Economic and
Social Council.
C. Functions and Power-s under Treaties, lnternational Conventions, Agreements and Other lnstruments Having a Political Character
The General Assembly will itself examine, or
will submit to the appropriate organ of the United
Nations, any request from the parties that the
United Nations should assume the exercise of functions or power-s entrusted to the League of Nations
by treaties, intemational conventions, agreements
and other instruments having a political character.

3. The General Assembly declares that the
United Nations is willing in principie, and subject
to the provision.s of this resolution and of the Charter of the United Nation.s, to assume the exercise
of certain functions and power-s previously entrusted to the League of Nations, and adopts the
following decisions, set forth in A, B, and C below.
A. Functions pertaining to a Secretariat
Under certain of the instruments referred to at
the beginning of this resolution, the League of
Nations has, for the general convenience of the
parties, undertaken to act as custodian of the original signed texts of the instruments, and to perform
certain functions, pertaining to a secretariat, which
do not affect the operation of the instruments and
do not relate to the substantive rights and obligations of the parties. These functions include: The
receipt of additional signatures and of instruments
of ratification, accession and denunciation; receipt
of notice of extension of the instruments to colonies or possessions of a party orto protectorates or
territories for which it holds a manda te; notificaúon of such acts to other parties and other interested States; the issue of certified copie-s; and the
circulation of information or documents which the
partie-s have undertaken to communicate to each
other. Any interruption in the performance of
the-se functions would be contrary to the interests
of all the parties. It would be convenient for the
United Nations to have the custody of those instruments which are connccted with activities of the

II
NoN-POLITICAL FuNCTIONS AND ACTIVITIES OF THE
LEAGUE OF

NATIONS

OTHER THAN THOSE MEN·

TIONED IN SECTION

I

\. The General Assembly requests the Economic
and Social Council to survey the functions and
activities of a non-política! character which have
hitherto been perfon:ned by the League of Nations
in order to determine which of them should, with
such modifications as are desirable, be assumed by
organs of the United Nations or be entrusted to
specialized agencies which have been brought int6
relationship with the United Natioru. Pending the
adoption of the measures decided upon as the result of this examination, the Council should, on or
before the dissolution of the League, assume and
continue provisionally the work hitherto done by
the following League dep,irtments: the Economic,
Financia! and Transit Department, particularly the
research and statistical work; the Health Section,
particularly the epidemiological service; the Opium
Section and the secretariats of the Pen:nanent Central Opium Board and Superviso!) Body.

35

2. The General Assembly requests the Secretary-General to make provision for taking over and
maintaining in operation the Library and Archives
and for completing the League of Nations treaty
series.

League of Nations, approves of both the report of
the Committee set up by the Preparatory Commission and of the common plan submitted by it
(document A/18 and Corr. 1, Add. 1 and 2.)

3. The General Assembly considers that it would
also be desirable for the Secretary-General to engage for the work referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2
above, on appropriate terms, such members of the
experienced personnel by whom it is at present
being performed as the Secretary-General may
select.

APPOINTMENT OF A NreoTIATING CoMMITTEE

IV
The General Assembly approves of the setting
up of a small negotiating committee to assist the
Secretary-General in negotiating further agreements in connection with the transfer of certain
assets in Geneva, and in connection with the premises in the Peace Palace in The Hague. This committee shall consist of one representative designated by the delegations, if they so desire, of each
of the same eight Mernbers as previously constituted the Committee created by the Preparatory
Comrnission: Chile, China, France, Poland, Union
of South Africa, Union of Soviet Socialist Repub!ics, United Kingdorn and UnitPd Statt'S of Arner1ca.
Tw/(nty-nínth plenary meeting, 12 Frbruary 1946.

III
TRANSFER OF THE AssETS OF THE LEAGUE OF
NATIONS TO THE UNITED NATIONS

The General Assembly, having considered the
report of the Committee set up by the Preparatory
Commission to discuss and establish with the
Supervisory Commission of the League of Nations
a common plan for the transfrr of the assets of the

36
