S/PV.8988

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8988

th meeting
Monday, 7 March 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Nusseibeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-27860 (E)
*2227860*

S/PV.8988

Threats to international peace and security

from a humanitarian operational perspective. And yet
the humanitarian community did plan.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; and
Ms. Catherine Russell, Executive Director of the United
Nations Children’s Fund.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I congratulate you, Madam
President, on presiding over the Security Council in
these extraordinary times.
We are here, of course, to speak about the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine. And yet, none of
us want to be here today. We already had enough on
our hands — many other unnecessary and unwanted
conflicts, leaving misery in their wake. We had no
need for another war that would have such a swift and
sweeping impact for what Filippo Grandi has called
“the fastest growing refugee crisis in Europe since the
Second World War”. Today indeed is not a day we had
in mind.
In the weeks before the military offensive began in
Ukraine and despite the din of commentary, rhetoric
and prediction, humanitarian organizations went
about their business. They had been working in the
Donbas region, providing 1.5 million people there with
humanitarian aid, which they have been doing quietly
and without fanfare over the past eight years. And they
are doing it still today, however and whenever they can.
But of course, the humanitarian agencies also prepared
for worse to come.
Two weeks ago, few thought the scenario in
which we find ourselves today — one of such intense
conflict — was thinkable. It was essentially unplannable
2/25

07/03/2022

We looked to the possible numbers, with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), the International Organization for
Migration, our non-governmental organization (NGO)
partners, UNICEF and the World Food Programme. We
estimated together who might be in need, who might
be on the move and those vulnerable people who might
need help at home. We looked at possible routes and
methods of delivery. The World Food Programme
mobilized its considerable logistics capabilities to get
supply chains up and running from a standing start.
We knew that the operation would need the best of
talent. All humanitarian agencies, including my Office,
sent in surge staff in the days before that offensive
began. And as the unthinkable became the reality, the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners started a
scalable and agile, adaptable and resilient humanitarian
operation fit for the changing situation.
The Secretary-General, at record speed, appointed
Amin Awad, a person of the widest experience of fastmoving operations, including in that very region, as
his Crisis Coordinator. Mr. Awad, supported by Osnat
Lubrani, the experienced Resident and Humanitarian
Coordinator, is in Ukraine as we meet in this
Chamber today.
In the first days of the offensive, our staff, like so
many in Ukraine, spent their days and nights working
from bunkers and basements. And yet they managed to
produce the two robust response plans, which Filippo
Grandi and I launched last week in Geneva, to a very
generous donor response.
Do I need to describe what we have all seen and
heard on the news? Simply put, millions of lives
shattered. People cannot stay home with shops shut,
power and water cut, shells falling and phones switched
off. They cannot find what they need even if they
have money to pay for it. As we have seen, even as the
television cameras roll, many cannot even flee in safety
either in this conflict.
It has been 11 days of escalating violence, fear and
pain. As of 6 March, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights reported at
least 1,207 civilian casualties, including at least 406
dead. The real figure could be considerably higher.
UNHCR reports that more than 1.7 million refugees
22-27860

07/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

have fled — and that figure is probably out of date
already — in 11 days.
Humanitarian assistance has continued in areas
where security permits. Under the leadership of the
Crisis Coordinator and the Resident and Humanitarian
Coordinator in country, we have new plans now on how
to deliver where humanitarian needs are most acute.
This includes cities that we have seen so much on
during these last days, such as Mariupol, Kharkiv and
Kherson. Our response is being scaled up from hubs in
Vynnytsya, Uzhgorod and Lviv.
The United Nations and its partners — and we will
hear from Catherine Russel in a minute — have already
provided food to hundreds of thousands of people.
The World Food Programme is setting up supply
chain operations to deliver immediate food and cash
assistance to 3 to 5 million people inside Ukraine.
The World Health Organization has shipped trauma
care, emergency surgery equipment and other supplies
that will help thousands of people in days to come. And
more supplies are on their way.
UNHCR is providing assistance, albeit on a small
scale at the moment, through a network of shops and
supermarkets in Mariupol, in collaboration with NGOs.
Médecins sans Frontières never left. It is training
trauma surgeons and providing support for the people
in that city.
UNHCR is bringing in thousands of blankets,
mattresses and other non-food items from Poland — I
thank Poland — and shipping them to transit centres.
And I look forward to hearing a lot more about the
experience of children from Catherine Russell and the
vital work of UNICEF and its partners.
The Ukrainian Red Cross has distributed
humanitarian assistance to thousands via its emergency
stockpiles, including hygiene and food kits, warm
clothing and medicine. I would like to take the
chance to salute the more than 4,000 Ukraine Red
Cross volunteers across the country, who are used to
conflict; the community workers of local NGOs; and
the truck drivers carrying basic necessities into volatile
areas. These are people all in harm’s way who have no
hesitation in carrying out their mission.
I see three immediate priorities to lessen the pain
and suffering we are all watching unfold in real time.

S/PV. 8988

First, the parties need to take constant care to
spare civilians and civilian homes and infrastructure in
their military operations. That includes allowing safe
passage for civilians to leave areas of active hostilities
on a voluntary basis, in the direction they choose. All
civilians, whether they stay or leave, must be respected
and protected.
Secondly, we need safe passage for humanitarian
supplies into areas of active hostilities. Civilians in
places like Mariupol, Kharkiv, Melitopol and elsewhere
desperately need aid, especially life-saving medical
supplies, the kind that have been brought in by the
World Health Organization in these past days. Many
modalities are possible, but safe passage must take
place in line with the parties’ obligations under the laws
of war.
Thirdly, we urgently need a system of constant
communication with parties to the conflict and
assurances to enable the delivery of humanitarian
aid. We have seen these systems in place in other
countries, as Security Council members know well. A
humanitarian notification system, as we term it, can
support the delivery of aid at the scale needed.
I have already conveyed these three points to the
authorities of Ukraine and the Russian Federation.
On the third point, thanks to cooperation with the
Russian Federation, my office sent a team to Moscow to
work on better humanitarian civil-military coordination
that can allow us to scale up, precisely to begin to
establish a humanitarian notification system. This
follows last Friday’s phone call between the SecretaryGeneral and the Minister of Defence of the Russian
Federation, Sergei Shoigu. United Nations teams have
held the first technical meeting with the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence. I welcome cooperation by
both sides and sincerely hope to see further progress in
the hours ahead.
People are watching as this unnecessary conflict
engulfs cities and civilians. As well as what is
happening in Ukraine, they have an extra sense of
dread over the impact this will have on the wider world.
I include myself in this category. I am deeply worried
about the consequences on vulnerable people living
half a world away. Food prices are spiking and supplies
are uncertain. We did not need that either. People in
the Sahel, Yemen, the Horn of Africa, Afghanistan and
Madagascar already face profound food insecurity.

22-278603/25

S/PV.8988

Threats to international peace and security

Record-level fuel prices mean life becomes harder
still in places like Lebanon, where generators keep
hospitals open and water treatment plants working.
And with regard to the extraordinary generosity, which
I welcome and praise, of donors to the launch of the
regional plan and the Ukraine humanitarian response
plan, we hope that will not divert those donors from
other pressing humanitarian crises. This may be the
latest one, but not the only one.
We have planned, we have mobilized and we have
fundraised to meet the challenge we face. We have the
capacity and the know-how to meet the most urgent
needs in Ukraine, on the basis of cooperation with the
parties. But I would like to stress this last point: make
no mistake, we are unable to meet the needs of civilians
today. All those points that I have made are points in
preparation and supply and redeployment and getting to
the right place. But we are failing to meet the needs of
civilians today. I hope we will not fail them tomorrow.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Ms. Russell.
Ms. Russell: I would like to express my appreciation
to Ambassador Thomas-Greenfield and Ambassador
Hoxha for convening today’s meeting. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Nusseibeh for hosting this
briefing during the United Arab Emirates’ Security
Council presidency.
This is my first time briefing the Security Council
as UNICEF Executive Director. I regret that it has been
made necessary by the rapidly worsening situation in
Ukraine and the unconscionable impact the conflict is
having on Ukraine’s children.
The past eight years of conflict in Ukraine have
already inflicted profound and lasting harm to children.
With the escalation of the conflict, the immediate and
very real threat to Ukraine’s 7.5 million children has
grown. Homes, schools, orphanages and hospitals have
all come under attack. Civilian infrastructure, such as
water and sanitation facilities, have been hit, leaving
millions without access to safe water.
For many, life has moved underground as families
seek safety in shelters, subways or basements, often
for hours on end. Women are giving birth in makeshift
maternity wards with limited medical supplies. Most
stores are closed, making it hard for people to buy
essential items, including basic necessities for children
4/25

07/03/2022

like diapers and medication. Even if stores were open,
millions of people are too afraid to venture outside
for food or water because of continued shelling
and shooting.
The intensification of the armed conflict poses
severe human costs, which are increasing exponentially
by the day. As of today, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights recorded 1,207
civilian casualties in Ukraine. Since 24 February,
at least 27 children have been killed and 42 children
have been wounded. Countless more have been
severely traumatized.
As the fighting has now reached densely populated
areas and across the country, we expect child casualties
to increase. We also expect the displacement crisis to
continue growing rapidly. As of yesterday, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) reported in excess of 1.7 million refugees
fleeing to hosting countries. Half of the people on the
move are children.
UNICEF is working closely with the UNHCR to
reach them with protection and assistance in receiving
countries. I just returned from the Romania-Ukraine
border, where thousands of women and children have
travelled to escape the fighting. I met with mothers and
children who had to flee their homes at a moment’s
notice. They told me how it felt to leave everything
they know behind and to leave husbands, fathers and
elderly loved ones, not knowing when or if they would
see each other again. The children talked about being
suddenly pulled out of school, of losing beloved toys
and the terrifying sound of shelling and gunfire. So
many children have been deeply traumatized.
UNICEF and our partners are working 24 hours a
day to meet the rapidly escalating humanitarian needs in
Ukraine and neighbouring countries by trucking in safe
water for drinking and hygiene, providing emergency
medical services and providing shelter and protection
for those displaced from their homes. At present, we
have some 135 people working for UNICEF in Ukraine
and we are sending more to meet in-country needs.
UNICEF-supported child protection mobile teams are
reaching children wherever they can with psychosocial
care, mental health support and protection services.
The operating environment in Ukraine is extremely
complex. Access constraints and rapidly changing front
lines make it much more difficult to deliver critical
supplies and services. The safety and well-being of
22-27860

07/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

our staff on the ground remains a top priority. I also
want to spotlight our local partners and other local
humanitarian actors, who continue to operate under
extremely difficult security conditions, especially those
working in the Donetsk and Luhansk oblast regions,
which have been hit hard over the past several weeks.
I am very glad to tell the Council that on Sunday,
UNICEF delivered 40 tons of life-saving medical items
for children and mothers to 22 hospitals in five of
the most affected regions. That equipment, including
midwifery and obstetrics kits, resuscitation and surgical
kits, oxygen concentrators for shelters and hospitals
and first-aid kits for front-line workers, was enough to
meet the needs of 20,000 children and their mothers. In
coordination with the Ministry of Health, UNICEF is
assessing further needs and preparing other shipments.
UNICEF and our partners need flexible resources
and safe, uninterrupted access to rapidly scale up
our efforts to meet children’s urgent needs wherever
they are, whether still in Ukraine or on the move. In
collaboration with UNHCR, we have deployed teams to
Poland, Hungary, Czechia and Slovakia and have built
on our ongoing presence in Romania, the Republic of
Moldova and Belarus to support the urgent needs
of children.
We have begun operating “Blue Dot” safe spaces
in hosting countries at border crossings, where children
are first registered. The hubs provide a one-stop safe
space for children and their families. They offer a
range of services, including places for children to
play, psychosocial support, basic legal counselling,
recreational kits and hygiene products. I visited one
of them last week. Staff at those hubs are also able to
identify unaccompanied and separated children.
Children without parental care are at a heightened
risk of violence, abuse and exploitation. When
those children are moved across borders, the risks
are multiplied. The risk of trafficking also soars in
emergencies. UNICEF and UNHCR have urged all
hosting countries to take measures to identify and
register unaccompanied and separated children fleeing
Ukraine after allowing them access to the country.
Temporary foster care and other community-based
care, provided through a Government system, can help
protect children who have been displaced without their
families, but we want to stress that adoption should
never occur during or immediately after emergencies.

S/PV. 8988

Every effort should be made to reunify children with
their families.
Inside Ukraine, UNICEF is also deeply concerned
about the safety and well-being of the nearly 100,000
children, half of whom have disabilities, who live in
institutions and boarding schools. We have received
reports of institutions that are understandably seeking
to move children to safety in neighbouring countries and
beyond. Many of those children have living relatives or
legal guardians. All of those children have the right to
be protected.
While we recognize that humanitarian evacuations
may become necessary to save lives, special measures
must be taken to contact relatives and obtain consent to
move those children to safety and to reunify them with
their families once the threat has passed.
With the spread of the conflict, we should all be
extremely concerned about the risk posed to children
by landmines and explosive remnants of war. Even
prior to the recent escalation, eastern Ukraine was one
of the most mine-contaminated stretches of land in the
world. That brutal reality is rapidly extending to other
parts of the country. We will continue doing everything
we can for children in Ukraine. We are committed to
stay and deliver, but we need the Council’s support.
What is happening to children in Ukraine is a
moral outrage. Images of a mother and her two children
and a friend lying dead on the street, hit by a mortar as
they tried to flee to safety, must shock the conscience
of the world. We must act to protect children from
such brutality. UNICEF calls upon the members of
the Council to remind all parties of their legal and
moral obligation to protect children and spare them
from attack.
We remain extremely concerned about attacks on
the civilian infrastructure necessary to help children
weather the conflict, including schools, hospitals,
water and sanitation facilities, and critical energy
infrastructure. We call on all parties to refrain from
fighting near or targeting those protected areas and
from cyberattacks that can disrupt critical services for
children and families.
We appeal to all parties to avoid the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas, including cluster
munitions, which pose the gravest risk of harm to
children. We urge all parties to protect civilians from

22-278605/25

S/PV.8988

Threats to international peace and security

further harm related to contamination from landmines
and explosive remnants of war.
UNICEF respectfully asks the Council to send a
strong message to all parties of their obligation to ensure
the safety of humanitarian personnel and equipment
and to permit and facilitate our work. That also means
ensuring that sanctions and other restrictive measures
do not impede humanitarian action.
Finally, we have renewed our call for an immediate
suspension of ongoing military actions in Ukraine. We
need a ceasefire and adequate guarantees to enable safe
and rapid humanitarian access to all people in need
across Ukraine. That will allow critical humanitarian
assistance and protection to reach those in need and will
allow families in those most affected areas to venture
out to get food and water, seek medical care and leave
their homes to find safety.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize
that UNICEF is a humanitarian actor abiding by
humanitarian principles. Over the past eight years,
UNICEF has worked on both sides of the line of contact
in eastern Ukraine. We are committed to providing
humanitarian assistance and protection to all children
in need across Ukraine and in neighbouring countries,
but the brutality must come to an end.
Children in Ukraine need help and protection.
They need supplies and other critical support. They
need access to basic social services, such as health and
education. They need hope for the future. But, above
all, children in Ukraine need peace. It is the only
sustainable solution.
I thank you, Madam President, for this opportunity
to speak to the Security Council today.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Russell
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Executive Director Russell at her
first briefing to the Security Council. We welcome her
to this setting. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths. Both their briefings were extraordinarily
sobering, but we very much appreciate the work that
they do. I also want to say that we are so appreciative
and so proud and grateful to UNICEF, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other
6/25

07/03/2022

humanitarian agency staff on the ground in Ukraine
and throughout the region. We have seen the images
of them coordinating deliveries from bomb shelters
and continuing to provide assistance to the Ukrainian
people under difficult and dangerous conditions. They
are testament to the life-saving work of the United
Nations humanitarian agencies and their indispensable
role helping vulnerable civilians suffering the
consequences of war.
We are outraged by increased reports of Moscow’s
attacks harming Ukrainian civilians in its unprovoked
and unjustified war against the Ukrainian people.
President Putin’s war of choice has already turned half
a million children into refugees. More than 1.7 million
civilians have already fled Ukraine into surrounding
countries, That does not include those who have been
internally displaced. We have seen the images of the
elderly fleeing, a woman killed in her wheelchair,
children dying in their mother’s arms and a woman
being rushed bleeding to a hospital. Those are the
images that we see daily of what is happening on the
ground in Ukraine.
Last week, I had the opportunity to speak to my
counterparts from Romania, Poland, Hungary, Slovakia
and Moldova, where their Governments’ international
organizations and non-governmental organizations
have been working non-stop to welcome all those who
are fleeing. What I heard was staggering. My Polish
colleague, who is sitting in the Chamber with us today,
shared that 100 refugees are crossing into Poland every
minute — 100 a minute. We should just do the maths.
We talked about many of the challenges that
those neighbouring countries are facing and how the
United States can help to keep their borders open to
all those seeking international protection, including
those who may experience communication barriers
with border agents due to disabilities or other factors.
We are committed to providing support, and we know
that their needs will only increase if Russia does not
cease its violence. We know that because of what we
have seen over the past week from the reckless attack
on Europe’s largest nuclear power plant and the siege
of cities across Ukraine to the tragic images and
alarming reports from those who are unable to leave
Ukraine to seek safety. The world is haunted by such
images of homes, hospitals, schools and orphanages
being destroyed, demolished in front of our eyes, child
cancer patients unable to receive chemotherapy, babies
delivered in basements instead of wards and hundreds
22-27860

07/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

of thousands of civilians without access to electricity
for heat or drinking water to stay alive.
Ukrainian cities are under siege, under relentless
Russian shelling. Hospitals are running out of supplies.
Food is dwindling and civilian casualties are mounting,
while the most vulnerable groups — those with
disabilities, the elderly and children — continue to bear
the brunt of the suffering. We have seen besiegement
before, from Leningrad to Aleppo. Those are tragedies
of immense proportions.
The United States is closely coordinating with the
Government of Ukraine, neighbouring countries and
international organizations, including those within the
United Nations system, to monitor the situation, and we
will work with them to address the humanitarian needs,
both in Ukraine and in the region.
While we are heartened by the international
community’s pledges of more than $1.5 billion in
humanitarian support so far, we know that, as long as
Russia pursues is relentless and brutal campaign, the
need for assistance will only increase. We all need
to ensure that those pledged funds are flexible and
mobilized as quickly as possible, given the escalating
needs on the ground.
But, perhaps, most important of all, we must heed
the call that we heard today from the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs. That means a
sustained pause in hostilities to allow the safe passage
of civilians who wish to leave areas of active conflict,
the safe passage of humanitarian supplies and the free
and safe movement of those delivering humanitarian
assistance. We need Russia’s firm, clear, public and
unequivocal commitment to allowing and facilitating
immediate, unhindered humanitarian access for
humanitarian partners in Ukraine. Very specifically, we
call for the Russian Federation to agree to, and honour
in good faith, Ukrainian proposals for time-bound
humanitarian safe passage in specific agreed-upon
locations. We call for the establishment of a groundlevel notification system that will facilitate the safe
movement of humanitarian convoys and flights. That is
imperative for ensuring that humanitarian supplies and
commodities can be reliably transported into Ukraine
to reach those most in need.
I also want to note today that the United States is
increasingly concerned about the protection of civilians
in this conflict, particularly women and girls, who are
vulnerable to gender-based violence, and lesbian, gay,

S/PV. 8988

bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex Ukrainians, as
well as Ukraine’s population of older adults and people
with disabilities. We also call for the protection and
care of all vulnerable children, including separated and
unaccompanied children and those in institutional care.
Children should never, never be involved in conflict. I
reiterate: children should never be involved in conflict.
They must be protected.
The humanitarian toll of President Putin’s war on
Ukraine is mounting. Children are dying. People are
fleeing their homes. And for what? As UNICEF has
reported, we already know that dozens of children
have been killed in Putin’s war. As we work to confirm
cases, we know that the actual numbers are actually
far greater. Young children have also been severely
traumatized by the violence and destruction. They
have witnessed so many things to the point that they
have stopped speaking. The physical and psychological
wounds of this war will be long-lasting.
It is clear that Mr. Putin has a plan to destroy and
terrorize Ukraine. If the past two weeks have shown us
anything, it is that the Ukrainian people are not going
to give up and that many Russian people themselves,
including many Russian soldiers, do not want this war.
Unfortunately, Mr. Putin does not seem to be listening,
and we are concerned that the world needs to be
prepared for a very long and very difficult road ahead.
The Ukrainians are defending themselves bravely,
and we will continue to stand with them and support
them. But President Putin is clearly willing to sacrifice
the lives of thousands of Russian soldiers to achieve
his personal ambitions. We have been warning Moscow
for weeks that, in the end, Russia will be weaker, not
stronger, for launching this war.
That is already proving true. The question is: How
much devastation is President Putin willing to wreak for
this enormous mistake? We continue to call on Russia
to change course, withdraw its forces and de-escalate
through diplomacy, and we support Ukraine’s call for
a ceasefire.
In the meantime, we applaud those doing
everything in their power to alleviate the suffering
that Putin has unleashed on the Ukrainian people.
Whatever course Russia’s invasion may take, we must
do everything — and I stress everything — we can to
help the people of Ukraine. Kyiv continues to stand and
we stand with Kyiv. We stand with Ukrainians.

22-278607/25

S/PV.8988

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Executive Director
Russell and welcome her to the Security Council. I
also thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for his
sobering and painful briefing. In addition, I thank them
both for everything that they and their teams are doing
in meeting as far as they can the huge and increasing
humanitarian needs in Ukraine.
Today marks the twelfth day of the unprovoked and
unjustified aggression against Ukraine — the war of
choice — that is becoming a world obsession. As in
every day of this senseless war, Ukraine and its brave
citizens find themselves in the well-known sickening
inevitability of every conflict. Civilians are killed,
children are traumatized and women are suffering.
In less than two weeks, Russia has managed to
create out of nothing and for no reason the fastest
and largest mass refugee crisis in Europe since the
Second World War. We were told that the so-called
special operation — the domestic nickname and the
new Russian definition for aggression — would not
target civilians. In reality, civilians are assaulted and
trapped under the rubble. Toddlers are sheltering in
cellars and subway tunnels, and as we saw last week,
nuclear power plants are under the threat of deliberate
or accidental attacks.
Fuelled by anger, owing to the heroic Ukrainian
resistance,
the
civilian
population,
civilian
infrastructure, residential areas, schools and
hospitals — everything, as we heard — have become
a target. Even diplomatic representation is not spared,
as happened today with our own honorary consulate
in Kharkiv.
The huge humanitarian needs across the country
are multiplying by the hour. Hundreds of thousands
are without safe drinking water because of damage to
system infrastructure and many have been cut off from
access to other essential services like health care. More
than 1.5 million people are on the move, searching
for shelter and safety, including in neighbouring
countries. Families have been walking long distances
in freezing temperatures to find shelter, most of them
in neighbouring countries. Half of them are children.
We applaud the way in which Poland, Moldova,
Hungary and Slovakia have responded in welcoming
and sheltering hundreds of thousands of displaced
people. They must not be left alone. The escalating
aggression in Ukraine has been terrifying, especially
for children. Tens of thousands of children have seen
8/25

07/03/2022

their daily lives and routines shattered. Thousands are
separated from their families, in shock and desperate
for safety. That is what Russia is doing.
I therefore have some very simple direct questions.
What in the world can justify exposing children
to such extreme violence and unbearable levels of fear
and anxiety? Where is the humanity of a great nation?
Where is the responsibility of a great Power? Where are
the commitments of a permanent member of this organ?
Does international humanitarian law continue to have
any meaning for Russia today? The answers lie under
the blood of innocent Ukrainians.
Russia’s actions are a gross violation of the Geneva
Conventions and are classified as a war crime under
the Rome Statute. It must be made clear that if anyone
in Russia thinks that what they are doing in Ukraine is
a rendezvous with history and that they will get away
with atrocities and crimes against humanity, they must
think twice. There will be accountability. Albania was
among 38 countries to refer Ukraine to the Office of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court. We
fully support his work to gather proof and document
crimes committed to present them to the Court.
It is therefore urgent to open secure humanitarian
corridors for the safe evacuation of civilians and the
delivery of medicines and food. The Russian side must
stop ignoring the appeals of international humanitarian
organizations, in particular the International Committee
of the Red Cross, to cease fire in order to create safe
conditions for the departure of civilians and wounded,
without discrimination on the basis of race, ethnicity,
nationality or migration status. Differentiation among
people, on any grounds, especially on the basis of race
or ethnicity, is legally unjustifiable and morally and
ethically unacceptable.
There is a devastating bloody war on the ground,
but there is another nasty war in the background.
The latter concerns information. We remain worried
about developments within Russia itself with regard
to freedom of information. With the latest measures
taken by the Parliament, authorities in Russia have
shut down foreign broadcasters, whose work has
become impossible under the law that criminalizes
independent reporting in the country. The last major
local independent broadcasters, the Dozhd television
network and Echo Moskvy radio station, were shut
down last week.
22-27860

07/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

We know from our own terrible communist past
that attacking freedom of information in that way is
the first sign of a dictatorship. When a Government
is afraid of its own people, it has a fundamental
problem. Russian citizens have the right to know why
their country attacked its neighbour, they need to be
informed about the actions of their army against the
people of Ukraine. Mothers must know why their sons
are dying and Russians deserve better than doctored
propaganda. Otherwise they would only hear about the
fictional Ukrainian genocide in Donbas, which never
happened; about Ukraine attacking Russia, which never
happened; or about Russia winning the war, which is
not happening.
The protection of civilians should remain a top
priority. Yet, as bombardments intensify, fuelled by
the anger caused by the heroic Ukrainian resistance,
we are also worried about the destruction of cultural
heritage. Indiscriminate bombardments have already
destroyed architectural ensembles in Kharkhiv and
risk inflicting irreparable damage to Ukraine’s wider
cultural heritage. Such heritage is a testimony to the
past, as well as a vector of peace for the future, which
Russia is assaulting.
Let me conclude with the cry of a woman,
Oleksandra, living in Kharkhiv. It was last week and
I do not know whether she is still alive. She said, “My
city is being shelled, but my mom won’t believe me”.
Her mom, who lives in Russia, would respond to her
call that she heard on television that the Russian army
would never target civilians and that it is Ukrainians
who are killing their own people.
Twelve days ago, Ukraine was guilty because
it exists. Now they are guilty because they do not
surrender. What will tomorrow be made of for them?
We call on Russia to come to its senses and stop. We
call on Russia to halt its aggression and go home. The
world knows what they are doing. What is happening is
a global air-raid siren — a warning of how important
multilateralism is, how much we need it to work and
how essential it is to do everything possible to stop
this war and make the aggressor pay for it. When one
behaves like a rogue State, one should not expect to be
treated differently.
Albania reaffirms its unwavering support for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.

S/PV. 8988

This position was reiterated just a few hours ago by a
resolution adopted by the Albanian Parliament.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Martin Griffiths for his views.
We welcome the new Executive Director of UNICEF,
Catherine Russell, to this meeting and thank her for
her briefing. We wish to note that we have seen the
unbiased reaction of the Fund to the Ukraine crisis
over the past eight years of its duration. The Fund did
not turn a blind eye to the bombing of Donbas, the
territories of Donetsk and Luhansk or the humanitarian
and psychological issues encountered by children. We
hope that unbiased approach will continue in the future.
We believe that the views of UNICEF should be
based on reliable, tried and tested information. We
welcome the consideration, in the humanitarian plan, of
the dangerous mass proliferation on Ukrainian territory
of small arms and light weapons, many of which have
fallen into the hands of radical elements, including
those who have been deliberately released from prison.
The consequences of that irresponsible step taken by
Volodymyr Zelenskyy, who gave the order, are already
clear. The number of victims among civilians, at the
hands of radicals, is increasing, day by day, primarily
in Kyiv. We have been drawing attention to that issue
for some time.
We call upon all colleagues in the Security Council
to maintain the focus of today’s meeting on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine. We have already
had the opportunity to exchange political views on
events in the country. It is clear that our assessments
diverge from those of other Council members and
that they continue to rely on the views of Ukrainian
politicians, as well as on dubious or openly mendacious
material from social networks, and are determined to
cast a shadow over the conduct and goals of our special
military operation in Ukraine.
We agree with the representative of Albania about
the fact that an information war is under way — more
likely, a disinformation war. However, he forgot to
mention that in the West, in the free world, Russian
information resources are being turned off and any
information that contradicts the West’s version of
events and its fakes is not allowed to be broadcast.
The Permanent Representative of the United States
today accused us of not honouring our commitment to
creating safe humanitarian corridors. Let us get things
straight. We again wish to emphasize that a threat

22-278609/25

S/PV.8988

Threats to international peace and security

to civilians in Ukraine is posed not by the Russian
military, who do not target civil infrastructure, but by
the Ukrainian radicals and neo-Nazis who are holding
the populations of several cities as hostages. Using
civilians as human shields, they do not allow them
to leave the cities, despite the fact that humanitarian
corridors exist and that Russian units have declared a
ceasefire. There are many examples of that.
On 4 March, the Russian Ministry of Defence and
the Deputy Prime Minister of Ukraine, Irina Vereshuk,
agreed on parameters for humanitarian corridors from
Mariupol to Zaporizhzhya and from Volnovakha to
Dnipropetrovsk. They were supposed to open at 10
a.m. on 5 March. At Kyiv’s request, representatives of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
were invited to areas with open corridors. The Russian
side was ready to provide comprehensive assistance
in guaranteeing safe evacuation. We informed the
Secretariat of the entire plan in a timely fashion.
However, radicals in Mariupol violated the
agreement. As is clear from an intercepted radio
conversation between two commanders of the Azov
Nationalist Battalion, radicals were told to kneecap
those heading to humanitarian corridors. When those
who risked life and limb in an attempt to leave Mariupol
reached checkpoints to exit the city, they were shot on
site by Ukrainian Nazis. There is considerable video
evidence of those events.
According to our data, in Mariupol alone, some
200,000 civilians are in the cross-hairs of the Azov
Battalion and are trapped by radicals in that area. The
humanitarian situation in cities is deteriorating rapidly.
Humanitarians attempting to provide assistance are
unable to reach Mariupol to prevent the impending
catastrophe. The situation is critical for people in
other regions of the country as they, too, are blockaded
by nationalist battalions. We note that, day by day,
Ukrainian radicals are showing their true colours more
clearly. Local residents said that Ukraine’s armed forces
forced staff out of a maternity clinic No.1 in Mariupol
and then established a firing site in the clinic. They
also destroyed one of the nursery schools in the city. In
addition, we have stated that Ukrainian authorities have
categorically refused to cooperate in efforts to evacuate
people from Kharkov or Sumy.
In the light of the catastrophic humanitarian
situation and the fact that it is worsening in Kyiv,
Kharkov, Sumy and Mariupol and the request made
10/25

07/03/2022

by President Emmanuel Macron to President Putin,
Russian Armed Forces announced the start of a
ceasefire from 10 a.m. on 7 March 2022. Humanitarian
corridors will be opened in Kyiv, Mariupol and Sumy,
leading to Russian territory, for those who wish to
evacuate through that logistically reliable route, and to
Ukrainian territory.
That information was conveyed last night to Kyiv,
the specialized agencies of the United Nations, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the ICRC and other international organizations, via all
available information resources, including the media.
An official answer from Kyiv was received only today
at 7:10 a.m., Moscow time, and it ignored humanitarian
corridors leading to the Russian Federation.
The issue was raised in an official statement by
Ukrainian Deputy Prime Minister Vereshuk, who called
the proposal to open humanitarian corridors leading
to Russia “absurd and unacceptable”. It is clear to us
that the Kyiv regime uses all available and unavailable
methods to halt the exit of civilians, as well as foreigners
who wish to go to Russia, because they fear that once
those people are free, they will tell the truth about the
actions of Ukrainian radicals, as those who have been
able to escape the radicals have done. We refer here
to threats, intimidation, blackmail, physical violence
and orders to shoot on sight — directed at citizens and
foreigners. By way of illustration, the Mayor of Sumy,
Alexander Lysenko, along with the commander of a
nationalist battalion, made a statement today.
“There will be no green corridors. No civilians
will leave for Russia and those who try to do so will
be shot dead.”
While saying that Ukrainian civilians cannot be
evacuated to Russia, Ukrainian officials have ignored
the fact that Ukrainian refugees are already in Russia.
More than 168,000 people, including 43,469 children,
have been evacuated to Russia from the area in which
the special military operation is being conducted. In
the past 24 hours, 5,550 people, including 740 children,
have been evacuated to Russia. Some 19,256 private
vehicles, 900 of them in the past 24 hours, have crossed
the Russian border.
We are also establishing temporary accommodation
facilities. They are all ready to work with civilians
arriving from Ukraine. Regrettably, the issue of
evacuating people from other regions is also being
politicized, as is the issue of humanitarian assistance.
22-27860

07/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

In particular, the requests of the Ukrainian party
to guarantee evacuation from several settlements that
are under the control of the Russian Armed Forces
that were made to us less than three hours prior to the
opening of humanitarian corridors seem absurd. None
of the inhabitants of those areas said that they wanted to
evacuate. People are living peacefully in their homes.
They are under no threat.
In parallel, we were asked to organize the
evacuation of citizens from several cities, which, for
the time being, are under the control of nationalist
battalions. We were also asked to deliver alleged
humanitarian goods to Melitopol and Berdiansk, in
the Zaporizhzhya region, and Kherson. It also appears
cynical with regard to the people living in cities as
those regions are under full control of the Russian
Armed Forces and their populations continue to live
peacefully. They have everything they need, including
humanitarian assistance from Russia — some 50,000
tons of it has arrived in various regions of Ukraine .
We are also particularly concerned about the fact
that Ukrainian radicals continue to hold hostage more
than 1,500 foreigners in several cities, using them
as human shields. We are working around the clock
with the relevant diplomatic agencies to resolve that
issue. Foreigners encountered severe problems in their
attempts to leave for Europe. We refer here to citizens
from various countries, including African countries.
We have also taken note of a public statement by
Senegal as current Chair of the African Union on the
issue. We are shocked by news of the inhumane attacks
by nationalists on student dormitories, which have,
among other things, caused the death of Indian students.
With regard to the safety of United Nations personnel
in Ukraine — and for us that is a priority — Russian
troops guaranteed the exit of 180 United Nations staff
members from Kyiv. That support will continue as
needed. We are in constant contact with the Secretariat.
We are adopting a responsible approach to resolving the
humanitarian issues faced by Ukrainian civilians.
On 2 March, an inter-agency humanitarian
coordination unit was created on the basis of the
National Defence Management Centre in connection
with the special operation being carried out in
Ukraine. The unit is working around the clock. The
staff include the authorized representatives of all the
federal bodies of the executive branch of Government,
State corporations and federal subjects of the Russian

S/PV. 8988

Federation. Their main objective is to guarantee
multifaceted humanitarian assistance to the Ukrainian
population in the controlled regions and in the Donetsk
and Luhansk People’s Republics, as well as to ensure
the safe evacuation of peaceful Ukrainians and citizens
of other countries.
I must also mention another aspect. The
deployment of heavy weaponry, including anti-aircraft
defence systems, multiple-launch rocket systems and
bombardment artillery in heavily populated areas, are
not isolated incidents but have become a go-to method
for Ukrainian nationalist battalions. Attempts by
civilians to protest and to request that that weaponry be
removed have been brutally stopped through the threat
of use of weapons. Similar cowardice on the part of the
combatants who are using the civilian population as
hostages is not just deeply immoral but also violates
the norms of international humanitarian law, including
articles 57 and 58 of the First Additional Protocol to the
1949 Geneva Conventions.
Furthermore, in a number of cities, in particular
in Odesa, it has been reported that weaponry has
been placed near or inside objects of cultural heritage,
in violation of article 53 of that Additional Protocol.
The break-off in the evacuation of civilians using
humanitarian corridors is a violation of article 75 of
the Additional Protocol, and the footage published on
social networks of the torture and abuse of Russian
troops who are being imprisoned is a violation of article
14 of the Geneva Convention of 1949, which guarantees
respect for the person and the dignity of troops under
all circumstances.
I encourage colleagues to make the correct appraisal
of all those egregious incidents. We expect the same
from the leadership of the United Nations. Otherwise,
they would be encouraging Ukrainian radicals and
neo-Nazis to commit more crimes.
In conclusion, I wish to once again firmly
encourage our Western colleagues to convince the
Ukrainian leadership to think, finally, about the safety
of the Ukrainian and foreign citizens held hostage by
radicals and to join in efforts to open and ensure the
safety of humanitarian corridors — if, of course, they
still have any ways of influencing the nationalists; we
have increasing doubts about that. We for our part are
ready to do our work.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would first like to
thank UNICEF Executive Director Catherine Russell

22-2786011/25

S/PV.8988

Threats to international peace and security

and welcome her to the Chamber, and to thank her and
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths for their
briefings today. Their messages were really, really stark,
but we need to hear them. The international community
needs to hear the facts. We commend the vital work
of all humanitarians in Ukraine. Today, on the eve of
International Women’s Day, I salute the courage of all
women working on the ground in Ukraine to save lives.
The safety and security of all those brave individuals
must be ensured.
One of the youngest fleeing over the weekend was a
2-month-old boy called Andri, who crossed the border
from Ukraine into Poland. As his aunt, Valentina,
comforted Andri and his mother, she told the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
“I never thought I would have to leave my home, that I
would have to flee just to save my life”.
The Russian Federation’s invasion of Ukraine has
now created what is nothing short of a humanitarian
catastrophe. As a brutal war is waged, we are seeing
little to no regard for the safety of civilians. Andri and
Valentina represent just two of the 1.7 million people
who have become refugees in less than two weeks.
“We gathered some things and fled”, Valentina said.
She had reason to: we now know that something on the
order of 12 million people are in need of assistance.
Thousands have been killed or injured. The human cost
is mounting by the day — a humanitarian catastrophe
simply of tragic proportions.
In densely populated cities, in villages and towns,
Ukrainian civilians are forced to shelter for safety in
underground carparks and metro stations. Their daily
lives are upended. Everything is on hold. They are
terrorized. All the while the use of explosive weapons
is destroying their homes and the civilian infrastructure
that they rely on for survival.
We are hearing reports hourly of multiple attacks
on medical facilities, including maternity and children’s
hospitals, even oncology clinics – all protected under
international humanitarian law. We have looked on in
horror as attempts to evacuate an estimated 200,000
people from Mariupol have failed. The International
Committee of the Red Cross has been clear: whatever
is agreed, or not agreed, on humanitarian corridors or
other measures, civilians and civilian infrastructure
must be protected. That applies both to those who
choose to leave and those who choose to remain. That is
a core obligation under international humanitarian law.
12/25

07/03/2022

Each chilling violation of international law evokes
the darkest days of Europe’s past.
The humanitarian consequences of damage
to civilian infrastructure is not abstract. It means
interrupted supplies of electricity, which is critical for
the continued functioning of hospitals and essential
services. It means heating homes. It means enabling
parents to cook to feed their children.
The children’s hospital where Valentina worked as
a volunteer was hit by artillery at the beginning of the
invasion. As she looked at her nephew, she recalled the
children whom she saw killed in that attack. She says
simply, “They were so small”.
Ireland calls on the Russian Federation to uphold
its international obligations. That includes protecting
civilian health-care facilities and protecting medical
and humanitarian personnel. All parties must also
facilitate the safe passage and unhindered delivery of
humanitarian assistance, including medical and food
supplies, to those in need. A notification system and
emergency helpline should be established to facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian aid.
Ireland reiterates our call made at last Friday’s
meeting (see S/PV.8986) for the immediate cessation of
military activities by Russia against and at Ukraine’s
nuclear facilities, in order to avert nuclear disaster and
the subsequent humanitarian consequences. We note
that over the weekend the International Atomic Energy
Agency expressed grave concern at the situation at the
Zaporizhzhya plant.
As Ms. Russell so clearly set out for us today, the
women and children of Ukraine are in the midst of a
desperate protection crisis. The terror of war and the
trauma of family separation will have lifelong effects
on thousands of Ukrainian children. They will be
marked forever by these days.
As in all conflicts around the world, women and
girls are especially vulnerable to the abhorrent scourge
of sexual violence, sexual exploitation and abuse. All
women and girls in Ukraine must be protected from
rape and sexual violence, and we will work to ensure
that there will be no place to hide from accountability
for anyone who perpetrates crimes against them.
In the face of the massive exodus of refugees
from Ukraine, we once again commend our European
partners and Moldova for their continued generosity
22-27860

07/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8988

and solidarity. They are welcoming vulnerable people
seeking to leave Ukraine, without discrimination.

investigate allegations of war crimes and violations of
international law.

We appeal to all countries in the region to keep
their borders open to all those seeking safety and
protection. Ireland is fully committed to supporting
the humanitarian response both domestically and in
the region.

In response to this tragedy, the Prime Minister
of the United Kingdom today announced a further
$130 million of aid, which brings to a total the United
Kingdom’s support for Ukraine to $520 million. In
addition, individual members of the British public
have given over $130 million. This is intended to help
Ukrainians in need and support neighbouring countries
receive refugees. But as I have said before, what the
Ukrainian people really need is an end to this invasion.
We therefore appeal to the Russians to end their war
before they bring even more tragedy to Ukraine and
even more shame on their own nation.

The humanitarian impact of this war will be felt
not just on the European continent. It will affect the
food security situation in countries heavily reliant on
Ukrainian agricultural products in Africa, Asia and the
Middle East, reminding us at this table once again of
the inherent links between conflict and hunger.
Ireland once again urges the Russian Federation
to immediately cease hostilities, unconditionally
withdraw its forces from the entire territory of Ukraine
and refrain from further threat or use of force of any
kind against Ukraine or any other Member State.
Andri and his family speak to the human face of
this reprehensible conflict. Before any more lives are
ruined or lost to this war, before more children die,
before more families are separated, before it is too late,
we plead one more time with the Russian Federation to
choose dialogue and diplomacy over bombs and bullets.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
would like to start by thanking Mr. Martin Griffiths
and Ms. Catherine Russell for their sobering briefings.
I also want to add my thanks and appreciation for the
work of their organizations, the courage of their staff
and the integrity of their reporting.
Mr. Griffiths, Ms. Russell and colleagues have
described in sobering detail the humanitarian crisis in
Ukraine 1.7 million refugees — 1.7 million individual
lives destroyed. And the United Nations expects this
number to rise to 4 million in the coming weeks. We
have seen the devastation caused by Russian missiles
and bombardment, including reports of cluster
munitions, in Ukrainian cities — apartment blocks
torn apart, hospitals and schools in ruins, people left
without electricity, food, water or shelter. We cannot
turn the clock back.
Russia’s invasion has been met with fierce
resistance by the Ukrainian people. In response,
President Putin is directing a campaign of violence and
cruelty against civilians. Let me be clear: we will hold
Russia to account for its actions, and we will thoroughly

The great Russian writer Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn
wrote that man is given not only one life, but also a
conscience. I know that the Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation has spoken under instructions
today, but I ask that he report faithfully back to Moscow
what he has heard in this Chamber — the urgency of the
Security Council’s calls for peace.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Executive Director Russell and
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for their briefings.
As we have been informed, the humanitarian
situation in Ukraine 11 days after the beginning of the
conflict requires urgent and coordinated action, with
the participation of impartial humanitarian actors. The
challenge is enormous. Today there are already almost
1.7 million refugees — a number that will continue
to grow — and approximately one million internally
displaced persons, and surely many more who wish to
evacuate, but who have not yet been able to do so, the
majority of whom, we have been told, are women and
children. In addition, we have also been informed of
aggravating circumstances that have arisen in recent
days, including critical conditions for access to water
and food in besieged cities.
We urgently call for a sustained pause in hostilities.
Humanitarian aid cannot and must not be held
hostage to political considerations or military attacks.
Unrestricted and safe access for all humanitarian
workers in Ukraine and in all neighbouring countries
must be guaranteed, in accordance with international
humanitarian law. Likewise, the provisions of resolution
2573 (2021) on the protection of civilians, goods
indispensable for their survival and the infrastructure
essential for the delivery of humanitarian aid must

22-2786013/25

S/PV.8988

Threats to international peace and security

be complied with. We also recall that, in resolution
2573 (2021), the Security Council clearly requires all
parties to armed conflict to establish a humanitarian
pause to facilitate the safe, unimpeded and sustained
delivery of required assistance and related services by
impartial humanitarian actors, in accordance with the
humanitarian principles of neutrality, impartiality and
independence, and in accordance with international
law, including applicable provisions of international
humanitarian and refugee law.
I would like to emphasize four action-oriented
aspects on the ground. First, the use of cluster munitions
under any circumstances is deplorable. These weapons
have a devastating impact on the civilian population,
even after a conflict has ended. We urge the cessation
of the use of cluster munitions in Ukraine and call on
those States that have not done so to join the Cluster
Munitions Convention now.
Secondly, the direct impact of the conflict
on the most vulnerable — women, children and
disabled persons — must be urgently addressed.
We are particularly concerned about the situation of
unaccompanied minors in the massive exodus and call
for putting in place monitoring mechanisms that have
a gender focus and that take into consideration the
situation of children. We recognize and support the
involvement of UNICEF.
Thirdly, the establishment of an immediate
humanitarian pause is necessary to ensure access for
humanitarian operators, as well as the establishment
of safe evacuation and transit routes for civilians.
Attacks on civilians seeking refuge are in violation of
international humanitarian law.
And fourthly, the immediate impact of the conflict
is indeed multidimensional, so humanitarian aid must
include the provision of mental health and psychosocial
support services.
Together with France, we insist on holding
consultations with a view to the Security Council
adopting a largely humanitarian resolution, which
addresses the points that have been raised at today’s
meeting. It is urgent that the Council resume playing its
role as the main body responsible for international peace
and security. We hope that both today’s meeting and the
consultations that will follow will serve to advance the
dialogue and allow us to bring positions closer together
and reach agreements with a single purpose — to help
the people who urgently need this humanitarian aid.
14/25

07/03/2022

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Griffiths and Ms. Russell for their briefings.
A true humanitarian tragedy is unfolding before
our eyes. Russian aggression in Ukraine is killing
civilians, including children, every day. Essential
civilian infrastructure is being destroyed. Hospitals
and schools are under attack. The city of Mariupol is
under siege, depriving its 450,000 inhabitants of water,
food, heat and electricity. There are already 1.7 million
refugees, and it is only the beginning.
We welcome the solidarity shown to the Ukrainians
by European States, notably Poland, Hungary, Romania,
Slovakia and Moldova. France and its European Union
(EU) partners stand firmly by Ukraine. The EU has
announced €590 million in humanitarian aid. France
is also doing its part, announcing €100 million,
and it has already delivered more than 100 tons of
humanitarian aid.
The priority is an immediate cessation of hostilities
and full respect for international humanitarian law.
That is the nature of the commitment of President
Macron, who is in close contact with President Putin.
That is the message carried all around the world by
people marching in peace demonstrations over the
weekend. Increasingly, Russians are also voicing their
opposition to a war they do not want, despite attempts
to muzzle them.
It is essential to protect civilians, including children
and humanitarian workers and civilian infrastructure.
The Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation
spoke of the potential establishment of humanitarian
corridors and prepared a draft text in that regard to
President Macron. I would like to read from that text,
drafted a few hours ago. Let us be clear — humanitarian
corridors represent the possibility of allowing men and
women to leave. Russia is proposing humanitarian
corridors to Russia. I do not know many Ukrainians
who seek refuge in Russia. That is hypocritical.
That is why France and Mexico are proposing
a resolution that calls for an immediate cessation of
hostilities and full respect for international humanitarian
law. As Mr. Griffiths and Ms. Russell have indicated,
the Council must assume its full responsibilities and
put an end to this tragedy.
People trying to flee Ukraine must be allowed
to do so safely and unhindered. Ukraine has made
commitments in that regard. The protection of civilians
22-27860

07/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

and humanitarian access must be guaranteed throughout
the territory, both for those civilians who can leave and
for those who remain.
We call on the Russian Federation to comply
with the Charter of the United Nations and to respect
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law. Allegations of crimes must be
investigated and, if confirmed, must not go unpunished.
That is why France supports the International Criminal
Court and the Commission of Inquiry created by the
Human Rights Council.
France commends the people of Ukraine for their
courage. Within the United Nations and in all forums,
France will continue to mobilize alongside its partners
in order to support Ukraine and the Ukrainian people.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I join others in thanking
Under Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Catherine Russell, for
their briefings.
The worsening situation in Ukraine and ensuing
humanitarian crisis deserve our immediate and urgent
attention. As per the estimates of the United Nations,
more than 1.5 million refugees have sought shelter in
Ukraine’s neighbouring countries over the past 11 days.
That has led to a pressing humanitarian crises that
needs to be addressed expeditiously.
Numerous civilian lives have been lost so far,
including that of a young Indian student. India mourns
his death, and we convey our deepest condolences to
his family, just as we mourn the loss of each and every
civilian life in the conflict.
India has been consistent in calling for an
immediate end to all hostilities. Our Prime Minister
once again spoke to the leadership of both sides today
and reiterated our call for an immediate ceasefire and
the need for both parties to return to the path of dialogue
and diplomacy. We also reiterated our urgent demand
for safe and uninterrupted passage for all innocent
civilians, including Indian nationals remaining in
Ukraine. We are deeply concerned that despite our
repeated urgings to both sides, the safe corridor for our
students stranded in Sumy did not materialize.
We managed to facilitate the safe return of more
than 20,000 Indians from Ukraine. We have also
assisted nationals from other countries who approached
us in their return to their respective countries. And we
will remain open to doing so in the coming days. More

S/PV. 8988

than 80 evacuation flights have been criss-crossing the
skies to bring them home. We are appreciative of the
assistance rendered by the authorities of Ukraine and
its neighbouring countries in facilitating their return.
We note the joint launch of the SecretaryGeneral’s Humanitarian Flash Appeal and his Regional
Refugee Response Plan for Ukraine. We hope that the
international community will respond positively to the
humanitarian needs.
On its part, India has already sent seven tranches of
humanitarian supplies to Ukraine and its neighbouring
countries. Those include medicine, medical equipment,
tents, protective eye gear, water-storage tanks and
solar lamps, among other relief material. We are in
the process of identifying other such requirements and
sending more supplies.
Allow me to underscore that it is important that
humanitarian action always be guided by the principles
of humanitarian assistance — humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence. Those should not
be politicized.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Under-Secretary-General
Martin
Griffiths
and
Ms. Catherine Russell, Executive Director of UNICEF,
for their very informative briefings.
We take note of the appointment of Mr. Amin Awad
as United Nations Crisis Coordinator for Ukraine.
A dozen days after the start of the war in Ukraine,
we are holding today this second meeting on the
humanitarian situation, which allows us to assess
the situation on the ground, taking into account that
in times of armed conflict, the situation is likely to
evolve very quickly and that the context can alter our
projections or judgment of the reality.
Let us stick to the facts. On 24 February this
year, the security situation in the Ukraine flared up.
The fighting has caused significant loss of life and
led to almost 1 million people leaving the territory
of Ukraine to seek refuge in neighbouring countries.
The massive displacement of people, in particularly
difficult conditions due to the cold, has left them in
urgent need of food, water and other basic necessities.
In addition, the damage to, and destruction of, civilian
infrastructure in combat zones and those affected by air
strikes and bombing is likely to hamper people’s access
to water, food, health care and other basic services.

22-2786015/25

S/PV.8988

Threats to international peace and security

We are particularly concerned about the harm to
civilians, women and children. UNICEF estimates that
several million people are at risk. My country expresses
its solidarity with the people in distress and all those
suffering from the consequences of this war and calls on
the parties to the conflict to create safe and unrestricted
exit routes from combat zones.
We call on the warring parties to facilitate the
quick, safe and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian
assistance to those who need it and to protect civilians,
including humanitarian personnel and people in
vulnerable situations, in particular women, the elderly,
persons with disabilities and children, in accordance
with the Geneva Conventions of 1949.
We welcome the important and multifaceted action
of the international community, which is reflected in
donations in kind and in financing from bilateral and
multilateral partners, including the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund, which since the
beginning of the war activated their rapid financing
mechanisms and pledged to mobilize $3 billion,
including $550 million, in the very short term, to
support Ukraine. That mobilization provides invaluable
support to the humanitarian response plan that was just
launched by the United Nations.
We also express our appreciation for the generosity
of the countries neighbouring Ukraine, which have
shown exemplary selflessness in hosting refugees
fleeing the fighting.
I would like to call on everyone’s sense of
humanity to offer the same reception to all people in
distress, regardless of origin or race, including African
nationals and students, whose distress is no less great
in this situation of confusion and terror. We call for
their dignity to be respected and for equal treatment
of all persons in distress. Indeed, there are repeated
reports from various sources of discrimination and the
detention of African students in areas at risk. That is a
worrisome and morally unsustainable situation, which
must be unanimously and vigorously denounced.
My country calls on the warring parties to respect
the provisions of international humanitarian law,
in particular the Geneva Convention of 1949 and
its Additional Protocols, and to guarantee respect
for and protection of all medical personnel and
humanitarian workers.
16/25

07/03/2022

Gabon welcomes the establishment of humanitarian
corridors for civilians to evacuate combat zones and
urges the parties to the conflict to do everything
possible to bring about an immediate ceasefire.
I would like to reiterate the position that Gabon
clearly expressed in the General Assembly, namely,
that this situation cannot end without an immediate and
lasting resolution to stop the fighting. That will requires
all parties to engage in negotiations in good faith and
with a firm will to end the conflict and remove all its
deep-rooted causes.
In conclusion, I call on the members of the Security
Council to seize every opportunity that diplomacy
offers to reach a negotiated settlement and avoid an
escalation of hostilities. In my African culture, when
two people from the same village come to blows, it is
up to their relatives, neighbours and friends to arbitrate
and engage in finding peace. Experience has often
shown that the sooner friends and relatives intervene,
the sooner calm returns. And whenever those around
them take sides in the confrontation, it exacerbates
the situation.
Of course, once calm is restored it is always easier
to establish who is responsible in a holistic and peaceful
way. It is in the light of this Bantu wisdom of Africa
that I would like to reiterate to all parties our call for an
immediate ceasefire and de-escalation.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting and
express my appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths and Executive Director Russell for their
briefings and their efforts in minimizing the human
suffering in this tragic conflict.
Brazil reiterates its grave concern at the
humanitarian situation arising from the ongoing conflict
in Ukraine. First and foremost, we urge all parties to
establish a ceasefire and engage in negotiations.
The current situation can only bring more suffering
and losses, especially in Ukraine but potentially to the
whole region. While hostilities continue, we call on all
parties to fully respect international humanitarian law,
including when resorting to new military technologies
and cyber means. Parties must always uphold the
principles of distinction, proportionality, precaution
and humanity.
Brazil urges the parties to continue to establish
humanitarian pauses and create humanitarian corridors.
22-27860

07/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

We echo nonetheless the concerns of the International
Committee of the Red Cross regarding the need to
respect international humanitarian law rules, both for
those who choose to leave and for those who remain.
The rules of war are not optional.
We insist on our call for safe, timely and unimpeded
access for providing humanitarian assistance to those
in need, particularly the most vulnerable. We recall the
plea, echoed by many Member States, for neighbouring
countries to keep their borders open to refugees,
without any kind of discrimination. Brazil reiterates its
gratitude and solidarity to Poland, Slovakia, Hungary,
Moldova, Romania and others who are facilitating the
exit and reception of refugees.
When the lines between combatants and civilians
become blurred, we risk seeing a rise in civilian
casualties, especially in armed conflicts fought in
urban areas and when explosive weapons are used in
these contexts. In the worst cases, children may suffer
the direst consequences of armed conflicts.
Children in Ukraine must be protected from the
dangers of war and under no circumstances should be
recruited, used or allowed to join any military activity
or take any direct part in hostilities. Attacks against
civilian infrastructures, especially schools and medical
facilities, as well as water and sanitation systems, must
be avoided. Parties must respect the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child in its
entirety. Furthermore, no additional hardship should
be imposed on the affected populations and vulnerable
groups through broad economic sanctions.
Children forced to flee their homes to ensure their
own survival are especially vulnerable. The increasing
number of internally displaced children in Ukraine and
refugee children in neighbouring countries will require
support from the international community.
For our part, following the swift establishment
of a humanitarian visa policy for those fleeing the
conflict, which entered into force on 3 March, Brazilian
embassies in Bratislava, Bucharest, Budapest, Prague
and Warsaw have started to grant special visas
for displaced Ukrainians and stateless persons for
humanitarian reception purposes.,
A few days ago, the General Assembly sent a
political message urging the immediate peaceful
resolution of the conflict. This is a strong call of the
international community for peace.

S/PV. 8988

Now, the Security Council must play its part and
genuinely contribute to a peaceful solution to this
crisis. Garnering consensus in the Security Council
around basic humanitarian messages is imperative. We
must work collectively to widen humanitarian corridors
and assistance and also to open the path for dialogue
and diplomacy, guided by international law and the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I wish to thank UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths and Executive
Director Catherine Russel for their briefings and I thank
them for their work. I also welcome the participation of
the Permanent Representative of Ukraine.
The rapidly deteriorating humanitarian situation
in Ukraine is gravely concerning. Kenya offers its
condolences to the families who have lost loved ones to
the conflict in the past few days.
Kenya commends Ukraine’s neighbours for opening
their borders to refugees of multiple nationalities. We
urge them to ensure that the protections sought are
offered with no discrimination on any basis, particularly
with regard to race or religion.
We are disturbed by the reported widespread
damage to civilian objects and infrastructure. Kenya
draws the attention of the parties to the need to comply
with resolution 2573 (2021) on the protection of objects
indispensable to the survival of the civilian population.
Ukraine is a major producer of agricultural
products that are key to ensuring food security. The
humanitarian impact of the conflict will be felt far
beyond Ukraine because of the shock to the global
food supply system. Indeed, the closure of its ports as a
result of the conflict — not to mention the destruction
of infrastructure — is going to result in fewer grain and
fertilizer exports. The resulting sharp price increases
are likely to plunge many countries into food insecurity
and, as a result, possible political turmoil.
In addition to Ukraine’s key place in the global
food supply system being impacted by the conflict,
the world will also suffer greatly from the unilateral
and regional sanctions against the Russian Federation.
We have previously urged that humanitarian and legal
consideration be given to the impact of those sanctions
on the Russian people. Now we must add our concern
for the many, including in our own country, who will
suffer all over the world. While the sanctions are
aimed at responding to the inexcusable armed breach

22-2786017/25

S/PV.8988

Threats to international peace and security

of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity by
the Russian Federation, they will end up harming not
only the innocent in Russia but also millions around the
world, particularly in the Global South.
In that regard, I have two questions to pose to
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths.
First, could he make public his assessments of
the impact of the armed conflict in Ukraine and the
sanctions against the Russian Federation on the
humanitarian situation in other countries, particularly
with regard to food security?
Secondly, what are the preventive actions that
can be taken by the United Nations and the Security
Council to ensure that the shock to the global food
supply system does not translate into new crises?
I wish to welcome the joint commitment by
Ukraine and the Russian Federation to establish
humanitarian corridors for the safe passage of civilians
and humanitarian supplies. However, during this past
weekend, the humanitarian corridor openings failed.
We hope that the humanitarian corridors, particularly
those from Sumy, will be open to all foreign nationals
and civilians tomorrow. Civilians and foreign nationals
are not party to the conflict and must be protected at all
times. They are not and must not become a target. We
strongly urge both parties to ensure their safe passage.
We commend the United Nations and its partner
agencies for their continued efforts to provide
humanitarian assistance. In particular, we welcome
the identification of four humanitarian hubs in Lviv,
Vynnytsia, Uzhhorod and Chernivtsi.
Ultimately, the only way out of the crisis is
through a ceasefire and dialogue to protect Ukrainian
sovereignty and shape a stable European security order.
I conclude by reiterating Kenya’s recognition
of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Ukraine.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I would like to thank
you, Madam, for convening today’s session. I would
also like to express my delegation’s appreciation to the
UNICEF Executive Director, Ms. Catherine Russell,
for highlighting the impact that the conflict has had
on children in Ukraine. Let me also thank UnderSecretary-General Griffiths for the updated situational
report on the humanitarian crisis in Ukraine.
18/25

07/03/2022

Ghana is alarmed at the exponentially high
levels of the humanitarian crisis in Ukraine since the
Security Council’s first consideration of the matter
on 28 February (see S/PV.8983). At the time, it was
reported that about 100,000 people were displaced,
as some 500,000 more attempted to flee from heavy
artillery shelling, missiles and air strikes in cities.
Today — only a week later — nearly 1,200 casualties
have been recorded since the start of the conflict;
1.7 million people have fled the cities of Ukraine to
neighbouring countries; and some 160,000 people have
been internally displaced.
What remains unchanged, however, are our
principles and the responsibility to ensure the
protection of all persons suffering under the weight
of the raging conflict in Ukraine. We must therefore
uphold the legitimacy of the international norms of the
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols,
which require of conflicting parties a duty to preserve
the sanctity of human life by taking the necessary
precautions to spare the lives of civilians and avoid the
destruction of civilian infrastructure during the time of
war. All Member States are duty bound to comply with
their obligations under international law, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Failure to do so constitutes a serious violation that
cannot and must not be ignored.
It is regrettable that the agreement reached between
the two sides for the creation of humanitarian corridors
for safe evacuations and the passage of food and
medicines did not hold. We join other members of the
Council in reiterating the call for a humanitarian pause
to allow the evacuation of civilians, especially in the
cities of Mariupol and Kharkiv, where intense military
operations are ongoing.
We call for the immediate cessation of hostilities in
residential and civilian populated areas. It is also vital
that agreements be reached to allow windows of silence
that would enable the safe and unhindered passage of
humanitarian convoys to all areas in which civilians
remain in need of water, food and medical care.
Ghana further supports the call of the United Nations
for the urgent establishment of a notification system and
an emergency hotline with both the Russian Federation
and the Ukrainian Government to facilitate the delivery
of humanitarian aid and life-saving supplies.
Moreover, we are compelled to reiterate the absolute
importance for the parties to steer military hostilities
22-27860

07/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

away from all nuclear installations in Ukraine in order
to avoid the risk of a nuclear disaster. We urge the
International Atomic Energy Agency to continue to
monitor activities within Ukraine’s nuclear programme
and operationalize preventive mechanisms to avert any
accidental occurrences.
We take note of the complex environment within
which humanitarian agencies are operating and commend
them for their commitment. We also acknowledge those
Member States and international institutions that have
contributed to the humanitarian fund required to ensure
an adequate humanitarian response.
We are disheartened by the trauma and suffering
that children in Ukraine are experiencing during this
period. Those are the succeeding generations whom we
pledged to save from the scourge of war. We commend
UNICEF for its active engagement in humanitarian
operations and encourage humanitarian agencies in
their efforts to address the peculiar vulnerabilities of
children, as well as women, the elderly and persons
with disabilities.
I wish to take this opportunity to commend
Ukraine’s neighbouring countries and other European
countries that have opened their borders to offer refuge
to persons fleeing the conflict situation. We continue to
prevail on them to continue their efforts to be guided by
the principles of humanity and neutrality, impartiality
and independence.
In conclusion, I must once again echo the call on
the Russian Federation to end the aggression against
the internationally recognized borders of Ukraine and
withdraw its military forces. We firmly believe that
military options will not deliver the mutual demands for
security between the Russian Federation and Ukraine.
As the humanitarian situation in Ukraine worsens,
economic ramifications are already being felt globally.
We hope that the Council will take a unified path
to support efforts to resolve the conflict through
diplomacy and dialogue.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Let me begin by thanking
the briefers for their sobering accounts regarding the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine, particularly for
outlining the terrifying ordeal that many children
are facing.
We are seriously concerned by the staggering
numbers of civilian casualties in Ukraine. Children
have been killed and wounded. Children have lost their

S/PV. 8988

homes. Let me underline that Russia, and Russia alone,
bears the sole responsibility for this humanitarian
crisis. The Russian aggression against Ukraine must
stop now. Troops must be withdrawn immediately.
Civilians, including children, and civilian
infrastructure must be protected, in accordance
with international humanitarian law. We are deeply
concerned by the reported use of cluster munitions
by Russian forces in Ukraine. Those are inherently
indiscriminate weapons. They continue to kill and
injure children long after conflicts end. Children are
traumatized as they seek shelter from the bombing
and shelling, forced to flee across Ukraine and across
borders, putting them at risk of sexual and genderbased violence.
We are deeply concerned about unaccompanied
children separated from their families. Every effort
must be made to restore family links and trace missing
persons. Humanitarian organizations must give priority
to the assistance and protection of children affected by
the conflict, including their need for mental-health and
psychosocial support.
Russia’s warfare in urban and populated areas and
the use of heavy explosive weapons are causing terrible,
long-term harm to civilians and cause the most severe
physical harm to children, killing and maiming them.
With attacks on hospitals, water processing plants, food
systems and other civilian infrastructure, children are
being deprived of services essential to their life and
health. The fighting around nuclear plants endangers
the health and safety of today’s children and those of
future generations in Ukraine and beyond. Schools are
under attack. Such attacks represent a clear violation of
resolution 2601 (2021), on the protection of education
in armed conflict, which the Council unanimously
adopted only a few months ago. We call on the
Russian Federation to respect the civilian character of
schools and educational facilities, in accordance with
international humanitarian law.
We stand behind and support the call of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs today for
concrete steps to be taken to ensure the protection of
civilians and humanitarian access. We call on the parties
to the conflict to comply with their obligation under
international humanitarian law to allow and facilitate
safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access to those
in need. The space for humanitarian action must be
restored and protected in a way that ensures continuous

22-2786019/25

S/PV.8988

Threats to international peace and security

and sustained humanitarian access. Civilians must be
protected at all times. Ceasefire agreements and socalled humanitarian corridors to evacuate civilians
can be measures for that purpose. The evacuation of
civilians must be safe, voluntary and to destinations of
their own choosing. Unclear agreements will not meet
the needs of the civilian population. Those civilians
who are leaving, as well as those civilians who remain,
must be protected.
We commend the neighbouring countries for
keeping their borders open and for the great generosity
and solidarity shown towards those fleeing the conflict.
The door to safety and protection must remain open,
without discrimination. We also commend all the
humanitarian organizations, and in particular the
local organizations, for their heroic efforts to deliver
life-saving aid. Medical and humanitarian workers
must be protected. They are not a target.
Norway condemns Russia’s massive military
aggression against Ukraine. We reiterate our call on
Russia to withdraw its troops immediately and stop
causing further death, suffering and destruction. The
7.5 million children of Ukraine are seeing the places
where they live, play and learn being damaged and
destroyed. Their lives and future are at stake. This war
must stop now. Dialogue and diplomacy are the only
way forward.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and
Executive Director Russell for their respective briefings.
We remain concerned about the rapidly changing
situation in Ukraine and deeply deplore the increasing
number of civilian casualties. We call for maximum
restraint and the intensification of diplomatic efforts so
as to put an early end to the fighting, ensure the protection
of civilians, their property and their basic needs and
prevent a large-scale humanitarian crisis. Russia and
Ukraine have reached a consensus on the establishment
of humanitarian corridors through negotiations. We
hope that the two sides will overcome the difficulties
encountered in the implementation process so as to
ensure the safety and smooth functioning of those
humanitarian corridors.
Chinese State Councillor and Foreign Minister
Wang Yi today put forward a six-point proposal on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine.
20/25

07/03/2022

First, humanitarian operations must strictly abide
by the basic principles of humanity, neutrality and
impartiality, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 46/182, and prevent the politicization of
humanitarian issues.
Secondly, full attention should be paid to all
displaced persons inside and outside Ukraine, in
particular in order to provide humanitarian assistance
to the main countries that are hosting them and helping
them with adequate shelter.
Thirdly, the effective protection of civilians,
particularly the rights and interests of vulnerable
groups, such as women, children, the elderly and people
with disabilities, must be ensured. Efforts must be made
to prevent secondary humanitarian disasters, such as
food shortages and the spread of infectious diseases
in Ukraine.
Fourthly, efforts should be made to ensure safe
and smooth humanitarian operations, including by
providing rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access, protecting the safety and security of medical
and humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in
medical duties and protecting medical equipment and
transportation used in humanitarian operations and
critical civilian infrastructure.
Fifthly, the safety of foreign nationals in Ukraine
must be ensured, allowing their safe, guaranteed and
unrestricted departure from Ukraine and helping them
to return to their home countries.
Sixthly, the United Nations must be supported in
playing a coordinating role in channelling humanitarian
assistance in Ukraine and the work of the United Nations
Crisis Coordinator for Ukraine must be supported.
In the course of organizing the refuge and
evacuation of Chinese nationals, we have received
friendly assistance from the Government and the
various sectors of society in Ukraine. Countries such as
Russia, Moldova, Romania, Poland, Hungary, Slovakia
and Belarus have also provided valuable support.
In that regard, we express our heartfelt thanks to the
Governments and the people of those countries.
The fact that the situation in Ukraine has
deteriorated to where it is today is due to a combination
of complex factors. Resolving complex issues requires
calm and reason rather than adding fuel to the fire,
which will only result in escalation. To resolve the crisis
in Ukraine, it is imperative to abide by the purposes and
22-27860

07/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

principles of the Charter of the United Nations, respect
and ensure the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all countries, adhere to the principle of indivisibility of
security and address the legitimate security concerns
of the parties involved. It is imperative to adhere
to dialogue and negotiation and resolve the dispute
through peaceful means. China will support any efforts
that contribute to easing the situation and finding a
political settlement. China opposes any actions that are
not conducive to promoting a diplomatic solution but
instead fuel the fire and escalate the situation.
We are deeply concerned about the ever-increasing
unilateral sanctions, which are not an effective way to
finding lasting solutions to the issue at hand. On the
contrary, they will lead to disastrous humanitarian
consequences and their spillover effect will also result
in losses and damage to other countries. Exporting
offensive weapons and mercenaries into Ukraine could
exacerbate the situation and generate additional and
greater risks.
China will continue to advocate for and work
towards achieving peace. We encourage Russia and
Ukraine to continue direct negotiations and are hopeful
that those talks will be constructive and lead to peace.
China has always been committed to bringing about
peace through negotiations.
As early as the second day of the conflict, President
Xi Jinping spoke by telephone with President Vladimir
Putin and expressed his desire to see Russia and
Ukraine meet for peace talks as soon as possible, to
which President Putin also responded positively.
China also stands ready to carry out the required
mediation with the international community, as needed.
We also encourage the United States, NATO and
the European Union to hold talks with Russia on an
equal footing; confront the causes of antagonism and
issues that have built up over years; be extremely
mindful of the negative impact that the continuous
eastward expansion of NATO has had on Russia’s
security environment; and seek to establish a balanced,
effective and sustainable European security mechanism
in accordance with the principle of the indivisibility
of security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.

S/PV. 8988

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and
Ms. Catherine Russell, Executive Director of UNICEF,
for their briefings.
As those who have spoken before me have noted,
the humanitarian situation in Ukraine has reached
catastrophic levels. Today, more than 40 million
Ukrainians, including 7.5 million children, face
insecurity, damaged and destroyed infrastructure and
a severe lack of basic services. As was mentioned
earlier, nearly 1.7 million Ukrainians are either
internally displaced or refugees, while the number of
those who have been killed or injured continues to rise.
In light of these bitter realities, we as international
community need to do our utmost to urgently alleviate
the humanitarian suffering of Ukrainians, while we
intensify our efforts to end the fighting and find a
lasting solution to the current crisis.
In that regard, the United Arab Emirates notes the
importance of focusing on the following issues.
First, we call on all parties to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law. That
includes ensuring, first and foremost, that civilians
and civilian objects, including schools and hospitals,
are not targeted. We further note that the destruction
of Ukrainian infrastructure is severely affecting
humanitarian conditions. Access to urgently needed
services, such as water, health care and food supplies,
is increasingly difficult.
Humanitarian aid must reach those in need without
being preconditioned on any ceasefire agreement. The
safety of humanitarian personnel must be also ensured.
We stress the need to stop hostilities to allow affected
civilians to leave cities exposed to violence, including
Mariupol, Kharkiv and Sumy. We deeply regret the
collapse of the humanitarian corridors that have been
agreed and recognize that humanitarian corridors are
temporary and imperfect solutions. They are not an
alternative to respecting international humanitarian
law. However, properly established humanitarian
corridors can be an immediate measure as we explore
every means that can contribute to the protection
of civilians.
Secondly, there is an urgent need for realistic
initiatives that can contribute to building confidence
between the conflicting parties and ensuring respect
for international humanitarian law. For example,

22-2786021/25

S/PV.8988

Threats to international peace and security

the remains of the dead should be identified and
respected and, whenever possible, their return should
be arranged. All people, including the wounded, sick
and captured soldiers, are to be protected by the parties
under international humanitarian law.
Thirdly, we call on the international community
to intensify efforts to urgently provide humanitarian
support to Ukraine. That includes contributing to the
United Nations humanitarian Ukraine flash appeal and
the Regional Refugee Response Plan for Ukraine, as well
as other initiatives. In that regard, we commend the role
of the Secretariat in supporting and coordinating the
humanitarian response, which should focus particularly
on women and children. We also commend the efforts
made by neighbouring countries in receiving fleeing
Ukrainians. The United Arab Emirates will provide
$5 million to alleviate the suffering of Ukrainians.
Additionally, we have sent today 30 metric tons of
medical and relief aid to Ukraine.
In conclusion, we stress that resolving the
humanitarian crisis radically and preventing further
damage and casualties require, first and foremost,
restraint and an immediate ceasefire throughout
Ukraine. It also requires opening diplomatic channels to
sustainably end the conflict. We welcome the continued
high-level engagement of the international community
with both parties. We believe that such efforts will
contribute to a diplomatic solution in a manner that
maintains regional and international peace and security
while preserving the dignity and meeting the needs of
millions of civilians.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Twelve days of an allout Russian invasion in Ukraine, including from the
territory of Belarus, have brought us to the brink of
a humanitarian catastrophe of a potentially global
nature. I would like to thank all the countries that are
accepting Ukrainian refugees and have been letting
other foreign nationals into their territory. As we have
already heard, more than 1.7 million people, mostly
women and children, have already fled the unprovoked
war unleashed by Russia.
At Sachsenhausen in Germany in the spring of
1942, an extermination unit was built in the industrial
yard, with a crematorium and a neck shot unit. The gas
chamber was added in 1943. The SS cynically named
22/25

07/03/2022

the building Station Z. “Z” is the letter that the Russian
military is putting on its vehicles departing for Ukraine.
Some interpret “Z” as standing for the first letter in the
Russian word for victory. Some say it stands for the
first letter in the Russian word zapad, meaning “west”.
I would insist that it stands for the first letter of the
Russian word zvyeri, meaning “animals” — or rather,
“beasts”.
Russia continues to cynically disregard the norms
of international humanitarian law during hostilities.
Russian troops block the numerous attempts of the
Ukrainian authorities to evacuate civilians through
humanitarian corridors. They deny international
organizations access to provide humanitarian assistance
to the most affected places.
It is even more appalling that Russian troops have
opened fire on evacuees and evacuation vehicles and
shelled the roads allocated to humanitarian corridors.
For instance, they shelled depots with evacuation
buses near Mariupol, blew up the railway near Irpin
in the Kyiv region to prevent evacuation by train, and
destroyed the bridge on the way to Volnovakha — all
of which were the main routes for evacuating civilians.
As was stated today by the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Ukraine:
“Today, in violation of the previously reached
agreements, the Russian Federation yet again
disrupted the opening of the humanitarian corridors
for the evacuation of the civilian population
from besieged cities and the suburbs of the Kyiv,
Kharkiv, Donetsk and Kherson regions.
Russia’s armed forces continue their bombing
of and missile attacks on Kyiv, Mariupol,
Volnovakha, Sumy, Mykolaiv, Kharkiv and other
cities, towns and villages. This prevents the safe
exit of humanitarian convoys carrying Ukrainian
and foreign citizens, as well as the delivery of
medications and food.”
Today, hearings in Ukraine’s lawsuit against Russia
in a case of genocide have been commenced at the
International Court of Justice. As an immediate action,
Ukraine has appealed to the International Court of
Justice to impose precautionary measures in this case
in order to stop the bloodshed
We condemn Russia’s unwillingness to fully
implement General Assembly resolution ES-11/1,
“Aggression against Ukraine”, and in particular to
22-27860

07/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

immediately cease its use of force against Ukraine. In
fact, not only is Russia not fully implementing it — it
is not implementing it at all. First of all, Russia must
stop violating the ceasefire arrangements aimed at
ensuring rapid, safe and unhindered passage through
humanitarian corridors. It must put an end to spreading
disinformation and manipulating the lives of civilians.
Evacuation through humanitarian corridors is possible
only when the ceasefire regime is fully upheld. The
Ukrainian side is ready for that.
We also consider inappropriate any attempts by
Moscow to force civilians, Ukrainian citizens and
foreigners alike, in the besieged cities to flee to the
territory of Russia and Belarus, taking into account
the high probability of provocations, in particular the
evacuated being taken hostage or used by the Russian
armed forces as human shields. That looks especially
cynical when European borders are wide-open to
refugees from Ukraine. I totally agree with my friend,
Ambassador Nicolas de Rivière, who said that it is pure
hypocrisy to push Ukrainians into Belarus or Russia.
Ukraine calls on Member States to spare no effort in
forcing Russia to uphold the ceasefire regime in order to
open humanitarian corridors and prevent a large-scale
humanitarian catastrophe.
Life is very dynamic. Unfortunately, while we have
been sitting here and discussing our business, another
appalling example of Russia’s disregard for its own
commitments on humanitarian corridors has taken
place just now. According to available information from
my capital, Russia has undermined arrangements on
humanitarian corridors for tomorrow. I regret that we
did not have this information when all my colleagues
at this table called me to discuss this business. The
arrangement was made and broken by the Russians.
Despite a route through Poltava being agreed, including
with the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC), the Russian side has already sent us a letter
with routes to Russia and Belarus only. I call on the
Russian side to revert to the previously agreed routes
to allow Ukrainian and foreign citizens to leave for
Europe.
Today, more than a hundred Ukrainian cities
and villages, attacked and besieged by the aggressor
State, are on the verge of a humanitarian disaster. The
population does not have access to drinking water, food,
medicine, electricity, heating or other basic necessities.

S/PV. 8988

Much of the environmental damage inflicted on
Ukraine by the Russian invasion will likely prove
irreparable in the near to medium terms. The Chornobyl
disaster of 1986 teaches us that the effects of nuclear
accidents endure for hundreds and even thousands of
years. The carbon dioxide being released as a result
of Russia’s scorched-earth tactics will likewise linger
in the atmosphere for the long term, compounding the
effects of greenhouse gases on the climate.
So far, Ukraine has been one of the guarantors
of global food security. That status is now being
challenged by the Russian war against Ukraine. The
implications at the global level will be catastrophic.
As just two examples, 55 per cent of the sunflower oil
exported worldwide comes from Ukraine, and 60 per
cent of Ukrainian agricultural products are exported
through seaports. The closure of ports and the sea by
the Russian army threatens the global supply chain.
This means that defending Ukraine from the Russian
aggression also protects the world from hunger.
Given that the Russian leadership is attempting to
conceal real losses and resolutely denies any discussion
of the ways to return their soldiers bodies, Ukraine
is facing the additional threat of a health crisis. We
are speaking about dozens of thousands of bodies
decomposing in the fields of Ukraine — the bodies of
Russian soldiers. In this regard, we call on the ICRC to
set up a database of fallen occupiers and prisoners of
war through the ICRC Central Tracing Agency, as well
as to provide assistance in returning the remains of the
fallen occupiers to Russia.
According to the Ministry of Education, more than
211 Ukrainian schools have been damaged or destroyed
by the Russian military forces since the beginning of
the invasion. Thousands of Ukrainian children have
been deprived of their right to education.
According to the Ministry of Health of Ukraine,
as of 6 March, 34 hospitals had been destroyed.
The World Health Organization has reported that 6
Ukrainian doctors have been killed and 11 wounded
as a result of the Russian shelling. Given the threat of
bombing and shelling, hospitals and maternity wards
have moved their patients to basements. The country is
running low on critical medical supplies. We therefore
call on all United Nations humanitarian missions to
act decisively to respond to the growing humanitarian
crisis without delay.

22-2786023/25

S/PV.8988

Threats to international peace and security

Yesterday, the occupiers completely destroyed
the city airport of Vynnytsya. It must be noted that
the Assistant Secretary-General and United Nations
Crisis Coordinator for Ukraine, Mr. Amin Awad, had
announced that Vynnytsya was prepared to be a main
hub for all United Nations humanitarian missions.
The Russian occupiers are killing Ukrainian
children, consciously and cynically. At least 38 children
have already been killed since Russia’s full-scale
armed aggression against Ukraine; more than 70 have
been seriously wounded. Due to the ongoing shelling of
civilian infrastructure in many cities, this number may
be increasing right now.
Ukraine deeply regrets that more than 2,000 citizens
of India, China, Turkey, Pakistan and other countries
are suffering today alongside Ukrainians from Russian
aggression. The Government of Ukraine is in contact
24/7 with the diplomatic missions and consulates of
foreign countries to ensure that their citizens can
safely return to their countries as soon as possible. The
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine has established
an emergency hotline for foreign citizens wishing to
leave Ukraine because of the Russian armed aggression.
Ukrainian border guards, in cooperation with
colleagues from neighbouring European Union
countries and Moldova, are doing everything possible
to speed up the passage of all refugees from Ukraine
and have never created obstacles that would hinder this.
We would like to reiterate that the only root cause
of the ongoing, massive humanitarian crisis in Ukraine,
including the situation at the western border of Ukraine,
is the armed aggression of the Russian Federation
against Ukraine. Russia bears full responsibility for the
killing and injuring of innocent people, the destruction
of civilian infrastructure, and obstacles to the safe
departure of Ukrainians and foreign citizens.

07/03/2022

Government. Despite the war, the Ministry of Social
Policy and the Pension Fund have paid all pensions
to almost 13 million retired citizens of Ukraine. The
Government has prepared an assistance programme for
all Ukrainians who have lost their jobs as a result of
war. Private businesses and employees who have lost
their jobs due to the war will receive financial support
in March.
Ukrainian Railways has started procuring food,
fuel, medicine, electricity and other important goods
and services for the population. The enterprise will be
in close contact with military administrations to address
the most pressing needs of the people and the State.
People in Ukraine value the words of support they
have received. At the same time, they require concrete
actions to save their lives, their health and their property.
It is also already clear to everyone that the fragility of
the situation reaches beyond Ukraine, into Europe and
across the world. We expect the Council to be decisive
in responding to the worst humanitarian crisis we have
seen in Europe since the end of the Second World War.
Before I conclude, after the last Security Council
meeting on this issue (S/PV.8986), one of my colleagues
said, “You know, it looks like group therapy. We are all
here trying to bring one member to sanity.” And indeed,
when I listen to the representative of that country,
I think it is absolutely right that the Department of
Health of New York City is called the “Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene”, because it is very difficult
to cope after these meetings, at which we listen to the
persistent lies, delusions and delirium coming from that
particular country.
I think it is not only Russian diplomats in New York
who need mental assistance, but also those who today
posted this tweet:
“Foreign Minister Lavrov: ‘The goal of Russia’s
special military operation is to stop any war that
could take place on Ukrainian territory or that could
start from there.’ (Russian Embassy in London.
Retweeted by the Russian Foreign Ministry.)”

The Government of Ukraine is working 24/7 to
set up mechanisms to ensure reliable supplies of food,
medications and essential commodities throughout the
country. On 2 March, President Zelenskyy established
the Coordination Office on Humanitarian and Social
Issues. Ukraine has received more than 3,500 tons of
humanitarian aid, and we are grateful to all our partners
for this manifestation of support.

Let me remind Russian diplomats that in London, in
case of need of mental help, they can dial the National
Health Service hotline 111.

Despite enemy attacks, all systems ensuring the
proper functioning of the State are intact. There is
undeniable stability in the work of the Ukrainian

The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.

24/25

22-27860

07/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I have not taken the floor again to engage in
controversy with the Ambassador of Ukraine. I have a
different task, to which I will revert.
However, I cannot help saying a few words with
regard to some remarks made by the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine. He interpreted the letter
“Z” on the Russian military equipment currently
deployed in Ukraine to be the first letter of the Russian
word “zvyeri” — meaning beasts. But we have our own
opinion as to who the real beasts are. In particular, they
are the representatives of the armed forces of Ukraine
and nationalist battalions that have been crushing the
civilians of Donbas for eight years and are still doing so
to this day. As we speak, Luhansk is being bombed and
oil reservoirs are on fire. The same is true in Donetsk.
This has not stopped.
We have been accused of undermining evacuations
via humanitarian corridors, but the situation is the
exact opposite. It is the Ukrainian side that rejected
our proposal for a ceasefire and to evacuate people
through peace corridors. As we have already said, it
is nationalist battalions that are keeping people in
the cities, using them as human shield and deploying
equipment in residential quarters.
I have just received a video from a Telegram
channel. It shows nationalists from the Azov Battalion
shooting at civilians during an attempted evacuation
through a humanitarian corridor from Mariupol to
Novoazovsk on the M-23 highway. This is available on
the Internet.

S/PV. 8988

I have taken the floor to inform the Council that I
have received an emergency statement from the Joint
Coordination Headquarters for Humanitarian Response
in Ukraine, dated 7 March. I will not read out all of
it now. We will circulate this statement shortly among
Council members. It says that the Russian side has
offered to establish a ceasefire tomorrow, 8 March,
at 10 am Moscow time, and to open a humanitarian
corridor for the evacuation of civilians from Kyiv,
Chernihiv, Sumy, Kharkiv and Mariupol. My Ukrainian
colleague said that Ukraine is ready to work on that.
Let us see what response Ukrainian authorities give to
our proposal.
I must say that this proposal does not stipulate
that all evacuated Ukrainian citizens must head to
the territory of Russia. The proposal also envisages
evacuation towards Ukrainian cities to the west of
Kyiv. That will be the choice of those who are going
to evacuate.
Let me leave the last remark of the Ukrainian
representative unanswered. I do not quite understand
where he has acquired such a thorough knowledge of
the addresses of mental health facilities in New York. I
would be grateful if he could elaborate on that.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I will now adjourn the meeting so that the
Council can continue its discussion on the subject in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

22-2786025/25
