S/2003/682

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 July 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 1 July 2003 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
transmit herewith the report on the international security presence in Kosovo for the
period from 1 to 31 May 2003 (see annex).
I should be grateful if this letter could be brought to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-41512 (E)

020703

*0341512*

S/2003/682

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
Kosovo Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1-31 May 2003) there were just over 24,000 troops
of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in theatre.
Security
2.
Although the overall security situation in Kosovo during the month of May
was generally stable, some inter-ethnic incidents were reported. The most significant
related to ethnic tension in Mitrovica North and the murder of two Kosovar Serbs in
the Klokot/Vitina area. Although the number of murders, kidnappings, and rape
cases increased from the previous month, total incidents actually decreased
compared to reports from May 2002. The number of thefts decreased from the
previous month.
3.
Several incidents were reported in Mitrovica. These included the stoning of a
Kosovar Albanian bus in early May, and the stoning of a Kosovar Serb bus in
retaliation a few days later. On 7 May, Kosovar Serbs, who had blocked the main
road in Suvi Do, west of Mitrovica, threw stones at the KFOR troops attempting to
remove the barricades. Civic leaders, UNMIK police and KFOR met the following
day to discuss the incident. Kosovar Serbs later blocked the Popovce road to prevent
the resettlement of displaced Kosovar Albanians coming from Gornje Bitina. KFOR
subsequently increased the number of patrols and checkpoints to deal with the
tension, which remained high for several days afterwards.
4.
On 7 May, four Kosovar Albanians were injured, two of them seriously, in a
hand-grenade attack outside a nightclub in Pristina.
5.
On 15 May, five Kosovar Albanians were treated for gunshot wounds and
knife injuries in Mitrovica South. One of those injured was a Logistics Officer in the
Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC).
6.
On 17 May, the former deputy mayor of Klokot, a Kosovar Serb, was found
dead in Zabje. He had been shot in the head. Reportedly, a note marked “AKSh”
(Albanian National Army) was found beside the body. The following day, a Kosovar
Serb was found dead near the village of Vrbovac. He had also been shot in the head.
UNMIK police began an investigation into both cases once the areas had been
secured by KFOR.
7.
KFOR continued to conduct intelligence-based surveillance operations and
patrolling throughout the province to stop illegal activities and weapons smuggling,
and to minimize the risk of terrorist activity.
8.
During the period under review, KFOR collected 75 assorted weapons, 169
grenades and mines, and 12,448 rounds of ammunition.
9.
At the beginning of the reporting period, a car was stopped by KFOR at a
checkpoint near Batusa. The driver and a passenger ran away and escaped. Twenty
kilograms of marijuana were found in the car, the largest quantity confiscated this
year in the province. KFOR believes the border area near Morina to be the main
artery for the smuggling of drugs into Kosovo destined for Western Europe.

2

S/2003/682

Border/boundary security
10. KFOR continued to monitor border and boundary security, and reported 27
incidents of attempts to cross borders illegally, double the number of the previous
month.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
11. The security forces of Serbia and Montenegro continued to remain in
compliance with the terms and conditions of the Military Technical Agreement.
12. With regard to AKSh activities within the KPC, the SRSG and COMKFOR
sent a joint letter on 14 May to the Commander of the KPC expressing
dissatisfaction on the lack of progress in his investigation, and requesting answers to
specific questions by 23 May. The Commander of the KPC replied that he was
actively seeking out the members of the KPC with connections to extremist or
terrorist organizations.
13. Subsequently, on 27 May, in a meeting of the Civil Protection Development
Group, the co-chairmen (the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Commander of KFOR) accepted that General Ceku had done as much as he could
within his limited powers. A joint KFOR/UNMIK investigation board was therefore
established to follow up on General Ceku’s inquiry. It was noted that following the
request of General Ceku to all members of the KPC to sign an oath eschewing
association with terrorist groups, 51 members refused to sign.
14. A new KFOR Inspectorate for the KPC (KIKPC) has been established to deal
with day-to-day supervision and inspection of the Corps. During the reporting
period, the KIKPC focused on roll calls and the spring exercise TOKE, which was
held from 12 to 14 May. 1
15. On 8 May, General Ceku removed three senior KPC commanders from KPC
Protection Zone IV suspected of being linked to the bridge explosion in Loziste on
12 April.
16. During the reporting period, three roll calls involving 17 different sites were
carried out at short notice. The results showed a continued reduction in absenteeism,
with 4 out of a total of 536 persons absent without permission. The minimum
required presence of the KPC (set at 75 per cent at all times) was met with a result
of 78 per cent. This figure includes duty in barracks and elsewhere in Kosovo. The
results confirm the need to have a terms-of-service contract which will help to
monitor approved absence for leave and sickness.
17. In May, 27 cases of non-compliance were reported. These include 16 cases of
absenteeism, and others relating to illegal possession of weapons, disobeying orders
and misuse of position or inappropriate behaviour. Eighty cases remain open, of
which 55 will soon be closed.

__________________
1 During the TOKE exercise, incidents were staged without notice across the province. KFOR and

the management of the KPC monitored and assessed the reaction of the KPC headquarters and
units, which had received no warning of the type, timing or location of the incidents, and will
use the “lessons learned” to develop an effective training plan.

3

S/2003/682

Cooperation with international organizations
18. KFOR continues to provide assistance, on request, to international
organizations and non-governmental organizations working throughout Kosovo, and
to provide security assistance in support of UNMIK police operations.
Outlook
19. It is expected that there will be an increase in criminal and other illegal
activities over the summer months, particularly smuggling and attempts to cross
borders illegally. Other activities relating to dealing in counterfeit money and drugs
are also expected to increase throughout the province in the coming months.

4
