S/2003/290

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 March 2003
English
Original: French

Letter dated 6 March 2003 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 955 (1994) of
8 November 1994 by which the Council established the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda
and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States, between 1 January and
31 December 1994 (hereinafter referred to as “the International Tribunal for
Rwanda”).
I refer also to Security Council resolutions 1165 (1998) of 30 April 1998, 1329
(2000) of 30 November 2000, 1411 (2002) of 17 May 2002 and 1431 (2002) of
14 August 2002, by which the Council amended the Statute of the International
Tribunal for Rwanda which it had adopted in its resolution 955 (1994).
Articles 12 and 12 ter of the Statute of the International Tribunal for Rwanda,
as amended, read as follows:
“Article 12
Qualifications of judges
The permanent and ad litem judges shall be persons of high moral
character, impartiality and integrity who possess the qualifications required in
their respective countries for appointment to the highest judicial offices. In the
overall composition of the Chambers and sections of the Trial Chambers, due
account shall be taken of the experience of the judges in criminal law,
international law, including international humanitarian law and human rights
law.”
“Article 12 ter
Election and appointment of ad litem judges
1.
The ad litem judges of the International Tribunal for Rwanda shall be
elected by the General Assembly from a list submitted by the Security Council,
in the following manner:
(a) The Secretary-General shall invite nominations for ad litem judges
of the International Tribunal for Rwanda from States Members of the United

03-27453 (E)

130303

*0327453*

130303

S/2003/290

Nations and non-member States maintaining permanent observer missions at
United Nations Headquarters;
(b) Within sixty days of the date of the invitation of the SecretaryGeneral, each State may nominate up to four candidates meeting the
qualifications set out in article 12 of the present Statute, taking into account
the importance of a fair representation of female and male candidates;
(c) The Secretary-General shall forward the nominations received to
the Security Council. From the nominations received the Security Council
shall establish a list of not less than thirty-six candidates, taking due account
of the adequate representation of the principal legal systems of the world and
bearing in mind the importance of equitable geographical distribution;
(d) The President of the Security Council shall transmit the list of
candidates to the President of the General Assembly. From that list the General
Assembly shall elect the eighteen ad litem judges of the International Tribunal
for Rwanda. The candidates who receive an absolute majority of the votes of
the States Members of the United Nations and of the non-member States
maintaining permanent observer missions at United Nations Headquarters shall
be declared elected;
(e) The ad litem judges shall be elected for a term of four years. They
shall not be eligible for re-election.
2.
During their term, ad litem judges will be appointed by the SecretaryGeneral, upon request of the President of the International Tribunal for
Rwanda, to serve in the Trial Chambers for one or more trials, for a cumulative
period of up to, but not including, three years. When requesting the
appointment of any particular ad litem judge, the President of the International
Tribunal for Rwanda shall bear in mind the criteria set out in article 12 of the
present Statute regarding the composition of the Chambers and sections of the
Trial Chambers, the considerations set out in paragraphs 1 (b) and (c) above
and the number of votes the ad litem judge received in the General Assembly.”
The States Members of the United Nations and the non-member States
maintaining permanent missions at United Nations Headquarters were invited, by a
letter dated 3 January 2003, to nominate candidates for 18 posts of ad litem judge at
the International Tribunal for Rwanda and were informed that within 60 days of the
date of the invitation of the Secretary-General they might nominate up to four
candidates meeting the qualifications set out in article 12 of the Tribunal Statute as
amended.
They were also informed that, should they decide to nominate two or more
candidates, it would be permissible for them to nominate two candidates of the same
nationality, if they so wished. They were also informed that it would be permissible
for them, should they so desire, to nominate one or more candidates of the same
nationality as a permanent judge of the International Tribunal for Rwanda.
They were further notified that, should they decide to nominate one or more
candidates, they should then, in accordance with article 12 ter, paragraph 1 (b), of
the Tribunal Statute, take into account the importance of a fair representation of
female and male candidates.

2

S/2003/290

By virtue of article 12 ter, paragraph 1 (c), of the Tribunal Statute as amended,
I am hereby forwarding to the Security Council the 26 nominations I have received
from States Members of the United Nations and non-member States maintaining
permanent observer missions at United Nations Headquarters during the 60-day
period prescribed in article 12 ter, paragraph 1 (b). A list of the candidates arranged
in alphabetical order is annexed to this letter, as are the curricula vitae that were
transmitted to me with the nominations.*
I should like to note in this connection that the number of nominations I have
received is less than the minimum number (36) which, in accordance with article 12
ter, paragraph 1 (c), of the Tribunal Statute as amended, should be included in the
list that the Security Council is to establish for transmission to the General
Assembly.
I would stress here that, under article 12 ter, paragraph 1 (a), of the Tribunal
Statute as amended, ad litem judges elected to the Tribunal in accordance with
article 12 ter must serve in the Tribunal full-time during the period in which they are
appointed and may not engage in any other activity of a professional nature or
exercise any political or administrative function during this period.
I would also recall that, while ad litem judges are not required at any time to
establish their residence at the headquarters of the International Tribunal for Rwanda
in Arusha, they are required to be wholly at the disposal of the Tribunal during the
period in which they are to discharge their functions.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

__________________

* Annex circulated only to the members of the Security Council.

3
