United Nations

General Assembly

A/RES/56/65
Distr.: General
25 February 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 91

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/56/553)]

56/65.

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations 1 and the action taken by the Special Committee in respect of that
information,
Having also examined the report of the Secretary-General, 2
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it
requested the Special Committee to study the information transmitted to the
Secretary-General in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter and to take such
information fully into account in examining the situation with regard to the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960,
Recalling also its resolution 55/137 of 8 December 2000, in which it requested
the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under
resolution 1970 (XVIII),
Stressing the importance of timely transmission by the administering Powers
of adequate information under Article 73 e of the Charter, in particular in relation to
the preparation by the Secretariat of the working papers on the Territories
concerned,

_______________
1

A/56/23 (Part II), chap. VIII. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 23.
2
A/56/67.

01 48936

A/RES/56/65

1.
Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations;1
Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the General Assembly
2.
itself that a Non-Self-Governing Territory has attained a full measure of selfgovernment in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering Power
concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter
with respect to that Territory;
3.
Requests the administering Powers concerned to transmit or continue to
transmit to the Secretary-General the information prescribed in Article 73 e of the
Charter, as well as the fullest possible information on political and constitutional
developments in the Territories concerned, within a maximum period of six months
following the expiration of the administrative year in those Territories;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that adequate
information is drawn from all available published sources in connection with the
preparation of the working papers relating to the Territories concerned;
5.
Requests the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions
entrusted to it under General Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with
established procedures.
82nd plenary meeting
10 December 2001

2
