S/2021/827

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 September 2021
Original: English

Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is prepared pursuant to the presidential statement dated
26 October 2010 (S/PRST/2010/22), in which the Security Council requested annual
reports on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000); resolution 2122 (2013),
which called for updates of progress across all areas of the women, peace and security
agenda, highlighting gaps and challenges; and resolution 2493 (2019), which called
for reinforced measures to implement the agenda in full. It follows up on the
Secretary-General’s directives to the United Nations and the five goals for the decade
laid out in the reports of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security from
2019 and 2020, paying special attention to the goal of reversing the upward trajectory
in global military spending with a view to encouraging greater investment in the
social infrastructure and services that buttress human security.
2.
In October 2020, the international community commemorated the twentieth
anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security in hundreds of mostly virtual events throughout the world. By then, the
impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on both international peace
and security and on gender equality was already devastating and projected to worsen.
A year later, these forecasts have largely been proven right. For example, 100 million
people now experience food insecurity because of conflict, compared with 77 million
only a year ago. By the end of 2020 the number of people forcibly displaced owing
to conflict, humanitarian crises, persecution, violence and human rights violations
had grown to 82.4 million, the highest number on record and more than double the
level of a decade ago.
3.
Meanwhile, even though the response to the COVID-19 pandemic added to the
evidence of the effectiveness of women’s leadership at the highest levels, women
continued to be underrepresented in that response and in other decision -making
forums, pushed out of the workforce and subjected to a surge of violence across the
world as soon as lock-downs and quarantines were put into effect. This
marginalization has a negative impact on crisis prevention and recovery and on
international peace and security in general. Nearly a hundred studies indicate some
type of link between sex and gender inequality and violent outcomes. 1
__________________
1

21-13665 (E)

Dara K. Cohen and Sabrina Karim, “Does more equality for women mean less war? Rethink ing
sex and gender inequality and political violence”, International Organization, vol. 75, No. 3
(Summer 2021).

181021

*2113665*

S/2021/827

4.
The recent takeover of Afghanistan by the Taliban has attracted much of the
world’s attention. But in the months leading up to it, the United Nations had already
documented a record number of women killed in the country in 202 0, including civil
society activists and journalists, and the targeting of academics, vaccinators and even
women judges in the Supreme Court. And yet, Afghan women were not included
among the negotiators with the Taliban in 2020. When delegates representin g the
Taliban and the Government of Afghanistan met in Moscow in March 2021 to discuss
the peace negotiations, there was only one woman among them. This juxtaposition of
violence targeting women and their rights, on the one hand, and their extreme
marginalization and exclusion, on the other, still encapsulates the women and peace
and security agenda in 2021.
5.
Other examples of shortcomings are included in the present report, which is
informed by data and analysis provided by entities of the United Nation s system,
including peace operations and United Nations country teams; input from Member
States, regional organizations and civil society; and analysis of other globally
recognized data sources. Some examples include:
(a) In 2020, women represented only 23 per cent of delegates in peace
processes led or co-led by the United Nations. Without measures adopted by the
United Nations, this number would have been even lower;
(b) After a downward trend, the percentage of peace agreements with gender
provisions has started to rise, but at 28.6 per cent the share remains well below the
high of 37.1 per cent recorded in 2015. None of the ceasefire agreements reached
between 2018 and 2020 included gender provisions; 2
(c) As at 31 December 2020, only 5.2 per cent of military troops in peace
operations were women, which is below the 6.5 per cent target set by the United
Nations for 2020; 3
(d) Only 42 per cent of the over 3,100 policy measures adopted throughout
the world to respond to the social and economic consequences of COVID-19 can be
considered gender-sensitive, and a similar proportion is found in conflict-affected
countries; 4
(e) In countries that spend relatively more on the military as a share of
government spending, pandemic-related measures to support the particular needs of
women and girls during this crisis were significantly fewer; 5
(f) In humanitarian funding, sectors that address gender-based violence and
reproductive health received only 33 and 43 per cent of requested funding,
respectively, compared with average funding of 61 per cent for United Nations
appeals overall; 6

__________________

This includes both United Nations (co)-led and non-United Nations (co)-led peace agreements.
For more analysis, see Robert Forster and Christine Bell, “Gender mainstreaming in ceasefires:
comparative data and examples”, 2019.
3
See https://peacekeeping.un.org/en/gender.
4
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), COVID-19 Global Gender Response Tracker
database, available at https://data.undp.org/gendertracker/.
5
Ruth Carlitz, “Comparing military and human security spending”, research commissioned by
UN-Women (forthcoming).
6
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and UN-Women, Funding for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women and Girls in Humanitarian Programming (2020).
2

2/35

21-13665

S/2021/827

(g) In conflict and post-conflict countries, women hold only 18.9 per cent of
parliamentary seats, compared with 25.5 per cent globally, which itself is a figure that
is still too low; 7
(h) Women’s representation in public administration in fragile and conflict affected countries averages just 23 per cent, less than half of the average in all other
countries; 8
(i) Women make up only one quarter of members among COVID-19 task
forces examined across 36 conflict and post-conflict countries; 9
(j) Bilateral aid to women’s rights organizations and movements in fragile or
conflict-affected countries remains strikingly low, well below 1 per cent, and has been
stagnant since 2010. 10

II. Goals for the decade on women and peace and security:
reversing the upward trajectory in military spending
6.
Curbing military spending has been a chief strategic objective of the women’s
movement for peace and a core commitment of the United Nations since its
foundation. 11 It is especially resonant in the current moment, when people’s lives and
security are threatened by disease, forced displacement, hunger, racism, violent
misogyny and the climate crisis. Commitments to reducing mil itary expenditure and
controlling the availability of armaments had already been included in the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action in 1995 and reaffirmed more recently during the
2021 Generation Equality Forum. Recent research commissioned by UN -Women,
using data from 153 countries from 1990 to 2019, suggests a clear association
between militarization and gender inequality. This association is stronger in countries
with lower income or lower levels of democracy. 12 Measures to advance global
disarmament objectives are outlined in the Secretary-General’s Agenda for
Disarmament. Recently, in its resolution 75/43, the General Assembly expressed
concern at increasing global military expenditure, which co uld otherwise be spent on
development needs.
7.
Amid a global pandemic, unprecedented stress in meeting people’s social,
economic and health needs and a 3.3 per cent contraction of the global economy, 13
global military expenditure increased by 2.6 per cent, totalling nearly $2 trillion in
2020. 14 Military spending as a share of gross domestic product reached a global
average of 2.4 per cent, the largest increase since the global financial crisis in 2009. 15
The International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons noted that part of this
__________________

Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), “Monthly ranking of women in national parliaments”, as at
1 January 2021, Global Data on National Parliaments database. Available at https://data.ipu.org/
women-ranking?month=1&year=2021.
8
UNDP and University of Pittsburgh, Gender Equality in Public Administration (2021).
9
Based on calculations from UNDP and UN-Women, COVID-19 Global Gender Response Tracker
database.
10
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Creditor Reporting System
database, available at https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=crs1.
11
United Nations Efforts to Reduce Military Expenditure: A Historical Overview, UNODA
Occasional Papers, No. 33 (United Nations publication, 2019).
12
Adem Elveren, “Evidence on the impact of militarization on gender inequality: preliminary
findings”, research commissioned by UN-Women (forthcoming).
13
International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook: Managing Divergent Recoveries
(Washington, D.C., 2021).
14
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, “World military spending rises to almost
$2 trillion in 2020”, 26 April 2021.
15
Ibid.
7

21-13665

3/35

S/2021/827

spending went to bolstering and modernizing nuclear arsenals, with nine nucleararmed countries spending $72.6 billion on this in 2020, also a larger sum than the
previous year. 16
8.
The COVID-19 pandemic pushed many countries to take extraordinary fiscal
measures in response to the health emergency and to provide economic relief.
However, during 2020, military spending outpaced pandemic -related health spending
in much of the world, and particularly in fragile and conflict-affected countries.
Historically, conflict-affected countries spend two to three times more on defence
than on health care, whereas the opposite is true in more stable countries. Trends are
similar with regard to spending on social protection, such as benefits for sickness,
disability and unemployment, and old age pensions. For example, military spending
in Afghanistan has exceeded one third of total government spending over the past
decade, compared with 3 per cent of government spending devoted to social
protection. 17 Most of the highest annual increases took place in the Sahel region, in
countries such as Chad, Mauritania, Nigeria and Mali. In Burkina Faso, the
Government budgeted nearly 10 times as much for defence as for social protection.
South Sudan spends six times more on the military and on debt servicing than it does
on vital public services and has three times as many generals as doctors. 18 This is
compounded by the fact that many countries have weak democratic governance of the
security sector and thus overspend the military budget and underspend the budget on
social programmes, such as health or education infrastructure. Low -income countries
overspend their defence budgets by 51 per cent on average. 19
9.
However, conflict-affected countries can reverse this trend. In the Sudan for
example, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) collaborated with the University of Khartoum to bring together
government representatives, civil society, academia and the donor community to
discuss human rights and gender-based public budgeting, promote the adoption of a
national strategy for social protection and improve distribution of cash under the
Family Support Programme, which benefits economically marginalized women. A
few months later, in its new budget for 2021, the education budget in the Sudan
exceeded the defence budget for the first time.
10. Extensive academic literature has shown the cost of privileging warfare over
welfare and has provided increasing evidence of an inverse relationship between
military spending and economic growth, especially in low -income countries. 20 In
2017, military expenditure was the largest contributor (37 per cent) to the global
economic cost of violence, estimated at $14.7 trillion. 21 In addition, high military
spending in post-conflict settings significantly increases the risk of renewed conflict.
High military spending also entails an opportunity cost, as can be seen by comparing
it with the funding estimates associated with the Sustainable Development Goals. It
has been estimated that the cost of providing basic water, sanitation and hygiene to
unserved populations, achieving quality universal primary and early secondary

__________________

International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons, Complicit: 2020 Global Nuclear Weapons
Spending (Geneva, 2021).
17
Carlitz, “Comparing military and human security spending”.
18
Development Finance International and OXFAM, Fighting Inequality in the Time of COVID-19:
The Commitment to Reducing Inequality Index 2020 (2020).
19
Carlitz, “Comparing military and human security spending”.
20
Nan Tian, Diego Lopes da Silva and Alexandra Kuimova, “Military spending and the
achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in Rethinking Unconstrained
Military Spending, UNODA Occasional Paper, No. 35 (United Nations publication, 2019).
21
Institute for Economics and Peace, The Economic Value of Peace 2018: Measuring the Global
Economic Impact of Violence and Conflict (Sydney, 2018).
16

4/35

21-13665

S/2021/827

education for all and eliminating extreme poverty and hunger would cost only 2 per
cent, 6 per cent, and 13 per cent of global military spending, respectively. 22
11. Furthermore, recent research has found that pandemic -related measures to
support the particular needs of women and girls during this crisis were significantly
less likely to be enacted in countries that spend relatively more on their militaries as
a share of government spending. 23 Fragile and conflict-affected countries enacted
fewer than two measures on average to address the sharp increase in violence against
women during the pandemic, which suggests that military spending not only crowds
out broadly beneficial social spending but may also leave policymakers without the
ability or attention required to respond to the p articular needs of women and girls. In
comparison with the global annual military expenditure of nearly $2 trillion, it is
estimated that the direct and indirect annual cost of providing modern contraceptive
services to meet the needs of all the women and girls in developing countries would
be $12 billion (0.6 per cent of annual military spending). 24 A 2019 study by the
International Rescue Committee and VOICE found that two thirds of requests for
gender-based violence risk mitigation, prevention and respon se in humanitarian
emergencies went unfunded, and the actual allocated funding only amounted to
0.12 per cent of the $41.5 billion spent on humanitarian aid between 2016 and 2018.
Covering the funding appeals fully would have cost only $155.9 million. 25 In 2016,
the total operating budget of 740 feminist civil society organizations worldwide was
$106 million, less than the cost of one F-35 fighter plane. 26
12. Further research is needed to understand the contextual and policy pathways
towards reduced military spending and increased social spending that benefits women
and girls. For example, a new study has found that higher levels of military spending
are correlated with lower levels of women’s equality in terms of choice, agency and
participation in decision-making both during and after conflicts, and that the presence
of United Nations peace operations can contribute to avoiding renewed militarization
in post-conflict societies and to improving gender equality over a period of 5 to
10 years. 27
13. Despite all this evidence, and the advocacy of women’s groups in conflict affected countries, attention to military spending has been lacking in women and
peace and security normative frameworks, both globally and nationally. According to
research by the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR), only
39 per cent of national action plans adopted by 2020 had at least one mention of
weapons-related issues, although more than half of them had been developed in the
past five years. 28 Of the 10 Security Council resolutions on women and peace and
security, weapons and military expenditure are addressed in only 4 of them: 2106
(2013), 2122 (2013), 2242 (2015) and 2467 (2019). In these resolutions, the issue is
addressed only through a focus on small arms and light weapons and the Arms Trade
Treaty, article 7 (4) of which addresses the need to determine the risk of gender-based
violence in arms exports assessments. In annual debates at the Security Council on
these resolutions, fewer than 15 per cent of speakers representing Member States or
__________________

The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook (Part II), vol. 44 (United Nations publication, 2019).
Carlitz, “Comparing military and human security spending”.
24
Jacqueline E. Darroch, Adding It Up: Investing in Contraception and Maternal and Newborn
Health, 2017: Estimation Methodology (New York, Guttmacher Institute, 2018).
25
UNFPA and UN-Women, Funding for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women.
26
See www.wilpf.org/move-the-money/.
27
Michelle Benson and Ismene Gizelis, “Militarization and women’s empowerment in post -conflict
societies”, research commissioned by UN-Women (forthcoming).
28
Most mentions refer to small arms and light weapons, followed by mines, cluster munitions, and
explosive remnants of war. See Henri Myrttinen, Connecting the Dots: Arms Control,
Disarmament, and the Women, Peace and Security Agenda (Geneva, United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research, 2020).
22
23

21-13665

5/35

S/2021/827

regional blocs have referred to arms control or disarmament. Very few of the bilateral
and multilateral arms control agreements signed since 1945 have gender provisions.
14. To reverse the upward trajectory in military spending, it is important to improve
the reliability and availability of data, increase cooperation and confidence -building
measures among countries and have a better understanding of decision -making
processes at the national level, including the role and involvement of women in t hem.
For example, the United Nations has partnered with the World Bank and five research
organizations to articulate policy and guidance on security and defence sector
expenditure, with a focus on strengthening transparency and broadening donor
assistance, from equipment and training to addressing governance deficits in security
and defence forces. These governance deficits range from limited transparency in
military expenditure and weak civilian oversight to a patriarchal culture that can be
abusive and violent towards communities and discriminatory towards women, who
are extremely underrepresented in security forces and in positions of power that
influence military spending decisions.
15. The low representation of women in disarmament forums has been exte nsively
documented; it averages between 20 and 35 per cent. Historically, the First Committee
of the General Assembly has had a low proportion of women representatives,
especially among heads of delegations. 29 The High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs has committed to equal representation of women and men in all activities led
by the Office for Disarmament Affairs, and considerable progress has been made in
ensuring gender parity in groups of governmental experts. The Office systematically
tracks gender statistics in disarmament forums with the aim of making this data
publicly available, and UNIDIR is carrying out research on women’s employment in
technical roles related to conventional weapons and ammunitions, including as export
licensing officers, armourers, ammunition technical officers, deminers and others.
16. New initiatives and research seek to learn from the longstanding work to
integrate gender perspectives into the prevention of the proliferation of illicit small
arms and light weapons or into mine clearance programmes. As part of the multi-year
project of the Office for Disarmament Affairs on gender mainstreaming and small
arms control, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Cameroon have taken steps to include gender analysis and gender-responsive
monitoring in national small arms control mechanisms. The Seventh Biennial Meeting
of States on the Programme of Action on Small Arms, held in 2021, called for the full
and equal participation of women in all processes related to reducing the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons; the collection of data disaggregated by sex, age and
disability; and the harmonization of national action plans on women and peace and
security with national policies on small arms. A survey supported by the Mine Action
Service and implementing partners in 2021 showed that 100 per cent of the women
participants in a project that trained and employed women as part of a mixed -gender
demining team in Afghanistan felt that they were able to influence decision-making
in their communities, compared with 60 per cent at the start of the project.

__________________
29

6/35

Renata Hessmann Dalaqua, Kjølv Egeland and Torbjørn Graff Hugo, “Still behind the curve:
gender balance in arms control, non-proliferation and disarmament diplomacy”, 2019.
21-13665

S/2021/827

III. Update on progress, gaps and challenges across the women
and peace and security agenda: trends and emerging issues
A.

Advancing gender equality and the meaningful participation of
women in peace processes and political transitions
17. Gender equality is a question of power. But power will not redistribute itself
equally in a male-dominated world. There are clearly persistent gaps and stagnation
in women’s participation in political leadership, peace and security and access to
economic resources and decision-making. Championing positive measures to increase
women’s participation in peace processes and political transitions is criti cal to
ensuring de facto equality, contributing to the Secretary-General’s forward-looking
goals on women and peace and security for the decade and his call to action for human
rights, and rethinking processes to make them both more inclusive and sustainab le
over the long term (S/2019/800).
18. In response to the Secretary-General’s commitment in his 2019 report
(S/2019/800) and Security Council resolution 2493 (2019), the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs held context-specific high-level strategy meetings, which
identified key actions and approaches to enhancing United Nations support for ge nder
inclusion in ongoing peacemaking efforts in Yemen, 30 the Geneva International
Discussions 31 and Afghanistan. 32 For Yemen, this set out gender inclusion
commitments for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen and his
office. For the Geneva International Discussions, this resulted in steps to enhance the
inclusiveness of the process through different modes of engagement with the
Co-Chairs and mainstreaming gender perspectives.
19. Despite complications and delays because of restrictions on in -person meetings
related to COVID-19, all four peace processes led or co-led by the United Nations in
2020, two of which were led by women, 33 consulted with civil society and were
provided with gender expertise. 34 The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria regularly consulted with women civil society and human rights defenders,
including the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board, both virtually and in person. In the
Geneva International Discussions, the Co-Chairs consulted with women activists and
conflict-affected women. The United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
organized a multi-stakeholder consultation with women’s groups and activists, which
produced recommendations taken up by the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum,
including that the new interim Government of National Unity include at least 30 per
cent women. The Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to Yemen
conducted an innovative large-scale virtual consultation with over 500 civil society
representatives, of whom more than 30 per cent were women, as well as digital
consultations over two days with women peace actors on gender-inclusive ceasefires
and community safety. Overall, the pandemic demonstrated that digital inclusion is
not a panacea, and that both digital and physical spaces must be designed to ensure
equitable access for diverse women and to address gender-specific security risks.

__________________

Meeting held on 7 April 2020, and a follow-up meeting on 14 December 2020.
Meeting held on 13 November 2020, and an expert-level follow-up meeting on 22 February 2021.
32
Meeting held on 8 December 2020.
33
Two women, the United Nations Representative to the Geneva International Discussions, Ayşe Cih an
Sultanoğlu, and the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General to Libya, Stephanie
Williams, served as lead mediators in United Nations-led or co-led peace processes in 2020.
34
These included: (1) Libya (Intra-Libyan dialogue process, including the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum, the 5+5 Joint Military Commission and the Libyan Economic Dialogue); (2) the
Geneva International Discussions; (3) the Constitutional Committee of the Syrian Arab Republic;
and (4) a meeting on prisoner exchange in Yemen.
30
31

21-13665

7/35

S/2021/827

20. In line with the Secretary-General’s gender parity strategy, women’s
participation has increased as United Nations mediators, in other leadership positions
in peace and security, and on United Nations mediation support teams, demonstrating
that the Organization is leading by example. As at February 2021, women represented
57 per cent of heads or deputy heads of United Nations special political missions and
were leading efforts to find political solutions to crises. This is a substantial increase
from just 14 per cent in 2015. In 2020, women accounted for 40 per cent of staff in
United Nations mediation support teams.
21. Women were included as delegates in 3 out of 4 United Nations (co) -led process
(75 per cent) in 2020, and in 8 out of 13 total de legations. However, women
represented 23 per cent of delegates from parties to conflicts in these processes.
Without persistent measures supported by the United Nations, this number would
have been even smaller.
22. Governments and parties to conflicts must do more to ensure women’s
meaningful participation in peace processes. In 2021, the Secretary-General called on
Member States to implement measures, including temporary special measures such
as quotas, to increase women’s equal participation in peace, p olitical and other
decision-making processes. This has been included as a priority for senior leadership
support at the country level and is a strategic action for follow -up of the system under
the call to action for human rights.
23. Bold targets, practical and concrete mechanisms and the principle of inclusion
should be prioritized from the outset to increase the participation of women. The
consistent calls made by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria for
women’s direct and meaningful participation in the political process set the stage for
women making up nearly 30 per cent of the 150 members of the Constitutional
Committee of the Syrian Arab Republic. The Co-Chairs of the Geneva International
Discussions made inclusion of women a priority in the framework for the Discussions
in 2021.
24. However, targets and incentives are not always enough. The Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen publicly committed in October 2020 to reserved,
non-transferrable seats for Yemeni women in future talks, yet neither the Government
of Yemen nor the Houthi movement have thus far included women representatives in
their negotiating teams or high-level meetings. In the Sudan, despite the national
commitment to women’s participation in the Constitution al Declaration of October
2019, women made up only 10 per cent of the negotiators of the Juba Peace
Agreement and are underrepresented in the transitional government.
25. To counter women’s marginalization in formal negotiations, including when
parties fail to include women, the United Nations will actively seek alternatives to ensure
women’s track-one participation, such as inclusive selection measures and independent
delegations that prioritize women’s direct involvement. This should build on ongoing
active efforts to include women at the earliest stages of exploratory dialogues and talks.
The initial Libyan delegations to the political dialogue track in early 2020 were almost
exclusively made up of men. Through engagement with relevant actors and separate
multi-stakeholder consultations, UNSMIL promoted the direct participation of women
in the meeting of the political track launched in October 2020. As a result, the October
meeting of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum included 17 women out of 75 delegat es,
or 23 per cent. In the Syrian Arab Republic, the United Nations played a central role in
the configuration of the so-called “middle third” civil society delegation of the
Constitutional Committee, which included nearly 50 per cent women.
26. Ensuring that peace agreements address the rights, concerns and perspectives of
all women regardless of their ethnicity, race, sexual orientation, age or religion is
important to opening the door to women’s participation and rights in the
8/35

21-13665

S/2021/827

implementation phase. However, the inclusion of references to women, girls or gender
continues to fluctuate widely, and a low number of ceasefire agreements contain them.
After a downward trend, the percentage of peace agreements more broadly with
gender provisions has started to rise, but at 28.6 per cent in 2020 it remains well below
the 37.1 per cent recorded in 2015 (see figure I). Research shows that the agreements
most likely to mention women, girls or gender often arise at the comprehensive
agreement stage, and ceasefire agreements remain a key gap. None of the ceasefire
agreements reached between 2018 and 2020 included gender provisions or the
prohibition of sexual violence.
Figure I
Percentage of peace agreements with gender provisions, 2010–2020

Source: PA-X Peace Agreements Database (2021), v. 5. Political Settlements Research Programme, University of
Edinburgh, accessed June 2021.

27. Prioritizing women’s direct inclusion in post-agreement implementation is
essential to translating words into action. Building on the historic gender provisions
of the 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace in Colombia, women play a central role in its implementatio n. In the
Truth Commission, women make up 80 per cent of the management team, 60 per cent
of the technical team and 35 per cent of the commissioners. After years of advocacy
by women leaders, women’s representation in the monitoring commission on the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali increased from 3 to 31 per cent,
reaching the 30 per cent quota for the first time in 2020. As a result, the committee
discussed issues raised by Malian women, such as the closure of schools in central
and northern regions and the absence of health services in specific localities. Building
on the 2019 Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, where women participated in the negotiations for the first time, women
make up 16 per cent of those active in the implementation and monitoring
mechanisms at the national level and 30 per cent in the 41 local peace and
reconciliation committees. In South Sudan however, women’s representation remains
stagnant, with only two committees meeting the 35 per cent quota for women set out
in the peace agreement. Taking positive steps to amplify the voices of women,
including of young women, and women’s rights activists – whether as leaders of
peaceful protests in Lebanon and Myanmar, as members of women mediator

21-13665

9/35

S/2021/827

networks 35 or via inclusivity mechanisms, such as in the Syrian Arab Republic, Iraq
and Yemen – remains critical to leveraging pressure to promote women’s participation
and rights, so that women can lead in a wide range of policy areas.
28. Governments, mediators, regional organizations and the United Nations have
expressed their commitment to drastically accelerating action over the next five years
to meet global commitments on women’s full, equal and meaningful participation and
the inclusion of gender-related provisions in peace processes. Inclusive selection
measures such as in Libya, independent delegations such as in the Syrian Arab
Republic, greater use of temporary special measures and reinforced efforts by
Member States such as the Commitment 2025 initiative led by Finland and Spain, as
well as investment in better data collection, gender analysis and monitoring of results
across all peace efforts, will be key to making any radical shift on women’s
meaningful participation possible. The Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund’s
rapid response window on women’s participation in peace processes and the
implementation of peace agreements, established in direct response to the Secretary General’s 2019 recommendations and launched in January 2021, has already
demonstrated the value of increased access to flexible and targeted support.
Contributions to this window have enabled the Fund to support civil society -led peace
initiatives in Afghanistan, Liberia, Mali and South Sudan.

B.

Gender-responsive peacekeeping and peace operations
29. Women and peace and security is a core priority of the Secretary -General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. The Department of Peace Operations created
strategic opportunities for local women leaders to influence peacekeeping, which
culminated in a new call to action by the Secretary-General, urging peacekeeping
partners to invest in grass-roots women’s networks and support women’s mobilization
for peace. 36 In addition, the leadership of peace operations advocated for women’s
participation and leadership in their respective contexts and pushed for robust
mandates from the Security Council, including through their engagement with the
Council’s Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security. Mission
mandates on women and peace and security were generally strengthened over the past
year. However, in resolutions renewing peacekeeping mandates, the Security Council
added gender considerations to the request for support to the reform of security and
defence forces in only 4 out of 11 country-specific situations. 37
30. Despite challenges such as the pandemic, escalations of violence before and after
elections, military coups and disregard of some political actors for existing
commitments on gender equality or quotas for women, United Nations peacekeeping
operations remain steadfast in their support for women’s participation in peace and
political processes. Examples include supporting the Darfur Women’s Platform and
elevating women’s voices and influence in the Juba Peace Agreement for the Sudan;
facilitating women-led intercommunal dialogues through virtual platforms in Cyprus
and women’s engagement in the constitution-making process and legislation reform
on housing, land, and property in South Sudan; or, in the Central African Republic,
supporting the establishment of Women’s Situation Rooms in each prefecture, a hotline

__________________

In 2020, FemWise-Africa supported deployments to Côte d’Ivoire, Libya, Mali and South Sudan,
with continued support from the United Nations Office to the African Union.
36
United Nations, Department of Peace Operations, “Call to action: women transforming peace and
security”, 2020.
37
UNSMIL, the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA).
35

10/35

21-13665

S/2021/827

for the protection of women voters and electoral candidates, and women’s voter
registration ahead of the elections, which reached 46 per cent of the electoral roll.
31. Peace operations contributed to the protection of women and girls, their access
to justice, their participation in early warning systems, conflict prevention,
community violence reduction, and the response to COVID -19. In Kosovo, 38 the
mission supported domestic violence shelters and their continued operations during
the lock-downs. The United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei facilitated the
release of girls unlawfully detained for running away from forced m arriages, and
partnered with women’s groups to identify gender-specific triggers of local conflicts.
In the Central African Republic, the mission de-escalated situations where armed
groups had confiscated the assets of women electoral candidates and had bl ackmailed
them to guarantee their protection. Nearly half of the early warning mechanisms
supported by MINUSCA reached 30 per cent of women’s representation. In Darfur,
54 women-led protection networks established by the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) helped to build a protective environment in
anticipation of the security vacuum left by the departure of the Operation. In South
Sudan, gender-responsive patrols and mixed engagement teams deployed by the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) enhanced the security of women
leaders, peacebuilders and human rights defenders in several states. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO helped women’s groups to map out security
threats and hotspots for women and girls, and to inform interventions by protection
actors. In Ituri and South Kivu, women’s active engagement resulted in more than
900 militia members participating in the demobilization process. Women and girls
represented over a quarter of the beneficiaries of community violence reduction
projects in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, the Central African Republic
and the Sudan, but a much lower number in demobilization and reintegration
processes: as low as 2.3 per cent in Mali or 5 per cent in the Central African Republic.
32. Of the total allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse received across the United
Nations system in 2020, 17 per cent involved personnel in peace operations and special
political missions. Of the 66 reported allegations, 70 per cent were related to MINUSCA
and MONUSCO, a proportion similar to 2018 and 2019. The number of allegations
relating to incidents happening during the reporting period was the lowest since such
data started being compiled in 2010. The share of incidents that involved sexual abuse,
as opposed to sexual exploitation, was the lowest since 2010, and the proportion of child
victims fell below 20 per cent for the first time (see A/75/754). Beyond the United
Nations, other multilateral peace operations also had to address this issue. For example,
in the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, a former soldier accused of rape
was tried and imprisoned in Mauritania, and allegations against the Chadian battalio n in
the Niger resulted in prompt and open collaboration between the two countries to start
both internal and independent investigations.
33. As of December 2020, the United Nations exceeded the 2020 targets set in the
uniformed gender parity strategy 2018–2028 for military observers and staff officers
(19 per cent against 17 per cent), individual police officers (29 per cent against 22 per
cent) formed police units (14 per cent against 10 per cent) and justice and corrections
government-provided personnel (34 per cent against 27 per cent), but lagged behind
for military troops (5 per cent against 7 per cent), who represent the overwhelming
majority of total deployments (see figure II). Nevertheless, in 2020 the percentage of
women in police and military components increased and these numbers have
continued to inch up in the first half of 2021. By way of comparison, the percentage
__________________
38

21-13665

All references to Kosovo should be understood to be in the context of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999).
11/35

S/2021/827

of women in the police component saw only a small increase, from 9.6 to 10.2 per
cent between 2010 and 2015.
Figure II
Proportion of women in military and police personnel by types of positions, and justice
and corrections government-provided personnel in United Nations peacekeeping missions,
2010–2020

Sources: United Nations Peacekeeping gender data, accessed July 2021; the Department of Peace Operations .

34. At the leadership level, as at 31 December 2020, there were three women serving
in the most senior military positions in the field and four women leading United
Nations police components: a record number of women serving in such senior
uniformed positions in the Organization.
35. The focus on increasing the number of women active in peace operations must
continue, and the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations meets regularly with
heads of components to review progress and to prioritize the deployment of
contingents that are meeting their targets. The United Nations is strengthening its
efforts to create an enabling environment for the meaningful participation of w omen
in peace operations, which include gaining a better understanding of the challenges
faced by uniformed women, improving mission camp layouts for the military and the
police, supporting existing women’s networks at mission level and launching
networks such as the United Nations Women Corrections Officers Network in May
2021. The United Nations and Member States have also taken significant steps to
increase the number of women in peace operations. The Elsie Initiative Fund,
established by Canada and the United Nations with strong donor support, provides
financial and technical support to troop- and police-contributing countries and to
United Nations projects designed to incentivize the deployment of women military
and police in peace operations and to promote gender equality in the security sector.
36. Initiatives by Governments across the world to integrate gender equality into
the reform of their security sectors are a crucial part of this effort. For example, the
Lebanese national action plan mandates the relevant authorities to double the number
of women in the security sector annually between 2019 and 2023, and 43 per cent of
the most recent class of recruits to the military academy were women. In the Central
African Republic, MINUSCA has supported national security and defence institutions
in identifying barriers to women’s recruitment. Gender-sensitive recruitment
practices enabled the national police to reach over 31 per cent female representation.
In 2020, the Department of Peace Operations published a report on gender-responsive
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and security sector reform, and
highlighted the enormous gap between the expectations raised by the resolutions of
12/35

21-13665

S/2021/827

the Security Council and the paucity of political, technical and financial support made
available to the United Nations for their implementation, as well as the lack of a
global platform with data on the proportion and status of women in national security
services around the world. Currently, such data remains incomp lete, hampering
efforts to track progress and promote accountability. Promoting the participation of
women in the negotiation and implementation of security-related provisions of
ceasefires and peace agreements, including in Libya, Mali, South Sudan and Ye men,
remains challenging. The United Nations should continue to strengthen efforts in this
area, including in response to Security Council resolution 2553 (2020), in which, for
the first time, the Council encouraged Member States to develop context-specific
security sector reform strategies that mainstream a gender perspective and increase
women’s representation at all levels within the security sector.

C.

Protecting and promoting the human rights and leadership of
women and girls in conflict settings and in the context of
humanitarian emergencies
37. In November 2020, conflict erupted in the Tigray region of Ethiopia. Shortly
thereafter, health-care workers and human rights organizations began rep orting daily
cases of rape and gang rape committed by armed men, a horror of unknown scale but
a familiar pattern. 39 Earlier in 2021, the United Nations reported 2,500 verified cases
of conflict-related sexual violence committed in 2020 across 18 countries, mostly
against women and girls. More than 70 per cent of the 52 parties credibly suspected
of committing or being responsible for these atrocities have been listed by the United
Nations for five or more years without having taken any remedial or correcti ve action
(see S/2021/312). In 2020, sexual violence against children increased by 70 per cent
compared with 2019 (see S/2021/437). In the Central African Republic, five times the
incidents of conflict-related sexual violence were recorded in the first quarter of 2021
than in the last quarter of 2020. The number of real cases is likely much higher, as the
pandemic has made it harder for survivors to receive help or justice, or even for their
stories to be known and counted.
38. Misogynistic violence took many other forms. The United Nations has been
warning about the shadow pandemic of intimate partner violence since the beginning
of the lockdowns worldwide, and the increase in domestic violence against women
and girls has been staggering. 40 Many countries registered a sharp and immediate
surge in cases and calls for service, and conflict-affected countries were no exception,
as increases ranged from 20 per cent to 100 per cent in most cases. In a survey of
850 refugee and internally displaced women across 15 countries in Africa, 73 per cent
reported an increase in domestic violence. 41
39. This surge coincided with an increase in the demand for and sale of firearms in
many countries, which triples the risk of a woman being murdered, an d with
difficulties in accessing services that address gender-based violence in the first
months of the pandemic. For example, these services reached 220,000 people in the
Sudan in the first quarter of 2020, but only 120,000 in the second, once the measure s
to contain COVID-19 were in place. In 2020, the Spotlight Initiative devoted more
than $21 million to addressing violence against women in the context of the

__________________

Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary -General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
statement urging all parties to prohibit the use of sexual violence and cease hostilities in the
Tigray region of Ethiopia, New York, 21 January 2021.
40
See www.unwomen.org/en/news/in-focus/in-focus-gender-equality-in-covid-19response/violence-against-women-during-covid-19.
41
International Rescue Committee, “What happened? How the humanitarian response to
COVID-19 failed to protect women and girls”, October 2020.
39

21-13665

13/35

S/2021/827

COVID-19 response and obtained important results in conflict-affected countries. In
Mali, for example, the heads of the country’s two main religions reached millions of
people in television and radio messages denouncing violence against women, and the
number of people visiting Bamako’s one-stop centre increased by over 65 per cent
over the following weeks. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), the World Health Organization and UNFPA published updated
guidance, entitled Clinical Management of Rape and Intimate Partner Violence
Survivors. The Emergency Relief Coordinator directed the Central Emergency
Response Fund to allocate an additional $15.5 million to addressing gender-based
violence and announced a $25 million allocation in 2021 for gender-based violence
programming led by UNFPA and UN-Women. Women’s advocates strongly urged
governments and international partners to consider shelters and sexual and
reproductive health services, including family planning and safe abortion, as essential
and in need of continued support.
40. At the beginning of the pandemic, UNFPA projected that more than 47 million
women could lose access to contraception, leading to 7 million unintended
pregnancies. An estimated 60 per cent of preventable maternal deaths occur in
humanitarian crises or fragile settings, where only 20 per cent of the global population
lives. 42 In displacement camps in the Syrian Arab Republic, only half of pregnant
women were able to access obstetric and prenatal care. In Yemen, pregnant women
are often unable to safely access maternal care, and one woman dies from ch ildbirth
every two hours. In 2013, following a recommendation from the Secretary -General,
the Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution in which it noted the need for
access to the full range of sexual and reproductive health services, including fo r
pregnancies resulting from rape, without discrimination (see S/2013/525, para. 72 (a)
and resolution 2122 (2013)). In general, humanitarian partners made significant
efforts to maintain comparable levels of sexual and reproductive health services
during the pandemic.
41. During the COVID-19 crisis, rates of child marriage increased, especially in
fragile and conflict-affected countries. Of the 20 countries in the world with the
highest prevalence of child marriage, 18 are affected by crisis. The United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) estimated that pandemic-related disruptions to child
marriage prevention programmes could result in an additional 10 mil lion child
marriages. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
estimated that more than 11 million girls might not return to school after the
COVID-19 crisis. 43 More than 54 per cent of the girls not in formal education
worldwide are in crisis contexts. The number of women and girls at risk of female
genital mutilation has also increased. In early 2021, UNICEF and UNFPA warned of
2 million additional cases likely to occur over the next decade owing to the pandemic.
42. Based on 22 of 34 UNHCR operations where demographic data was available
at the end of 2020, women constituted on average 52 per cent of all internally
displaced persons, consistent with prior years. The highest reported ratios of women
were in the Sudan, Mali, Ukraine and Chad, at around 56 and 57 per cent. Despite
women and girls being the majority of the displaced, and being disproportionally
affected by family separation, gender-based discrimination and violence, difficulties
in accessing basic services and food insecurity, their representation in community
management and leadership structures in these camps is still lacking. According to
UNHCR, the number of operations reporting that female participation in leadership
structures had either improved or been maintained dropped from 56 per cent in 2019
to 48 per cent in 2020. The inter-agency humanitarian evaluation on gender equality
__________________
42
43

14/35

UNFPA, “Maternal mortality in humanitarian crises and in fragile settings”, 12 November 2015.
See https://en.unesco.org/covid19/educationresponse/girlseducation .
21-13665

S/2021/827

and the empowerment of women identified the lack of representation of women -led
organizations as a gap in humanitarian decision-making. However, there has been
notable progress since 2017, including an uptick in consultations with women and the
participation of local women-led organizations in the design and planning of the
humanitarian programme cycle. Other remaining gaps are the lack of consistent
access to and resources for gender expertise in emergencies, such as through the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee Gender Standby Capacity Project and other surge
mechanisms or sustained longer-term gender expertise; and the need for strengthen ed
coordination, leadership and accountability for gender, including through the use of
the Inter-Agency Standing Committee Gender Policy and Accountability Framework.
43. In humanitarian settings, the share of households headed by women typically
reaches one third, and those households report higher risks of malnutrition and food
insecurity. Nearly 100 million people now experience food insecurity as a result of
conflict, an astounding increase from 77 million in 2019. More than 30 million people
are one step away from famine, which is especially dangerous to women who are
pregnant, breastfeeding or taking care of children. In the north -west of the Syrian
Arab Republic, up to 37 per cent of mothers are malnourished. A rapid gender analysis
undertaken shortly after the explosion at the port of Beirut in August 2020 revealed
that 51 per cent of affected households were headed by women, and 8 per cent of
those women were elderly and living alone.
44. Women and girls are also abducted or trafficked, either by parties to conflicts or
by organized criminal bands in conflict settings. Of every 10 trafficking victims
globally, 5 are adult women and 2 are girls. While adequate information and analysis
about trafficking in conflict settings and its contribution to the war economy is still
lacking, with some exceptions such as Libya, trafficking does increase significantly
after sharp economic contraction. In the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, for
example, the United Nations verified 75 victims of trafficking between 2008 and
2015, but more than 600 between 2016 and 2018. Abductions of women and girls
have been one of the elements of the surge of violence in the Diffa and Tillabéri
regions of the Niger. Approximately 300 schoolgirls were abducted and later released
in northern Nigeria earlier in 2021, an occurrence that has only become more common
since the mass kidnapping of girls in Chibok in 2014.
45. Women are also affected by the disappearance and detention of male relatives,
are often directly targeted themselves or are further stigmatized and marginalized.
Many are also leading advocates for their relatives’ release. In countries such as the
Syrian Arab Republic or Yemen, women mediate between the autho rities,
humanitarian organizations and the families of the detainees, track political prisoners,
and often manage to negotiate their freedom. Less is known, however, about the fate
of women prisoners themselves. Most of the crisis-affected countries that released
thousands of prisoners to stem the spread of COVID-19 declined to provide data on
the number or percentage of women being released. In September 2020, 50 women
detainees were rounded up in a courtyard and at least 21 of them were gang raped, as
a result of a prison mutiny in Lubumbashi, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
an atrocity that received little attention or redress ( S/2020/1150, para. 24).
46. And yet, even as the pandemic drove up the projected estimates of girls being
forced to marry or drop out of school, or of women suffering violence in their homes,
the driving forces behind these trends were sexism and misogyny, enabled by
patriarchal social, religious and other institutions, and often intentionally spread by
powerful political actors. It was these actors’ mobilization that obstructed legislation
against gender-based violence in some countries, and their messages that inspired a
wave of political violence against women in public life, including young women;
those targeted ranged from elected officials and candidates to journalists, protesters
or defenders of human rights.
21-13665

15/35

S/2021/827

47. In 2020, OHCHR verified 35 cases of killings of women human rights
defenders, journalists and trade unionists in seven conflict-affected countries with
data, surpassing the reported numbers for 2018 and 2019. 44 Many more have been
threatened and harassed. Data on these attacks are incomplete, and women leaders are
often hesitant to report threats because they are highly defamatory in nature, typically
involving their personal lives. Lockdown measures forced many women activists to
move to online platforms, exposing them to digital security risks at the same time as
governments adopted broad digital surveillance measures. 45 According to Front Line
Defenders, the human rights defenders that were most targeted were those supporting
land, environmental and indigenous rights, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
intersex and queer (LGBTIQ) rights and women’s rights.
48. In November 2020, the prominent Libyan lawyer and women’s rights activist
Hanane Al-Barassi was shot dead in Benghazi by unidentified gunmen. She had
spoken out against corruption and cases of alleged assault and rape of women that
implicated members of armed groups in Benghazi. In March 2021, three young Afghan
women journalists were shot dead in Jalalabad on their way home from their jobs at a
local news outlet, only three months after the killing of the Afghan television and radio
presenter Malalai Maiwand. The 26-year-old journalist had been an advocate for
women’s rights and had spoken publicly about the challenges women journalists face
in Afghanistan. In Somalia, the Head of the Somali Police Force’s Sexual and Gender based Violence and Child Protection Unit in Garoowe, Puntland, was physically
assaulted by four police officers because she was reviewing the sexual violence cases
registered at the central police station, and a female journalist was detained after
following up on the assault. In Diinsoor in the Bay region, a local civil society leader
was targeted and killed by Al-Shabaab for her advocacy for women in close
collaboration with the Diinsoor district council, which had reached gender parity. In
Colombia, 10 of the 16 members of the Special Forum on Gender, which monitors the
implementation of the gender provisions of the peace agreement, reported threats made
directly against them, and one organization defending the rights of indigenous women
had to withdraw temporarily owing to the severity of the threats.
49. From Belarus to Myanmar, women were attacked, tortured or detained for their
participation in protests. Women were at the forefront of the demonstrations opposing
the military coup in Myanmar and played a key role in the civil diso bedience
movement, which was initiated by the staff of the Ministry of Health and Sports,
doctors and nurses, almost 80 per cent of them women and many of them young.
Union leaders and labour rights activists representing the country’s largely female
garment sector workforce were prominent figures in the protests. An assessment by
UN-Women found that almost 50 per cent of women’s organizations had to close their
operations due to security reasons, and the police raided and ransacked several of
their offices. In Colombia, young women and LGBTIQ persons reported sexual
violence allegedly committed by the national police during the demonstrations that
began in April 2021. Others were shot by armed civilians, including a young
indigenous woman leader who was wounded only a few months after having
participated as a guest speaker in global events to commemorate Generation Equality
and the twentieth anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), and who
collaborated with UN-Women and the Norwegian Embassy in their programme to
protect women leaders and human rights defenders in Colombia.
50. The periodic reports from peacekeeping and special political missions are
paying closer attention to this type of political violence, and the Peacebuilding Fund
allocated more than $19 million in 2020 to the protection of women and youth
__________________
44
45

16/35

Data from OHCHR, in cooperation with UNESCO and ILO.
Front Line Defenders, Global Analysis 2020 (2021).
21-13665

S/2021/827

peacebuilders and human rights defenders, including to support LGBTIQ rights
defenders through its Gender and Youth Promotion Initiative. It is encouraging that
several countries have included specific goals related to the protection of women
human rights defenders in their national action plans on women and peace and
security, and to note the increased number of initiatives led by OHC HR and the rest
of the United Nations system. In a landmark decision in April 2021, the Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women found that the Government of
Libya had violated the rights of a human rights defender who fled the country in 2012
after being harassed, tortured and forced to close her women’s rights organization.
However, the scale and severity of these attacks show that much more needs to be
done, including securing additional funding, to provide both individual protection and
a stronger enabling environment for these activists.

D.

Political participation and representation
51. Despite progress in women’s representation in decision-making over the past
decades, advancements towards achieving gender parity in political and public life have
been painfully slow. Women hold just 25.5 per cent of parliamentary seats worldwide,
and the proportion is even lower in conflict and post-conflict countries, at 18.9 per cent.
Globally, women constitute 36.3 per cent of local-level elected positions, and 25.9 per
cent at the local level in conflict-affected countries. Women serve as Heads of State or
Government in 22 countries. Women made up only one quarter of members among
COVID-19 task forces across conflict and post-conflict countries. Women’s
participation in public administration in fragile and conflict-affected countries averaged
just 23 per cent, less than half of the average in all other countries.
52. The long-term effects of historical discrimination, recently compounded by the
pandemic, have disadvantaged women in all spheres, including political and public
life. To reverse inequality and to implement international and national standards and
commitments, the adoption of temporary special measures, including gender quotas,
is required (see E/CN.6/20213). As the Secretary-General’s call to action for human
rights makes clear, commitment to non-discrimination alone is not enough: proactive
measures to increase women’s meaningful participation and representation are
needed.
53. Gender quotas, in addition to other temporary special measures, have proven to
be an effective way to achieve a major shift in the distribution of power. Women’s
parliamentary representation in conflict and post-conflict countries with legislated
quotas is twice the amount of those that lack such quotas: 23.3 per cent with quotas
compared with 11.6 per cent without. Women’s representation in locally elected
positions further accentuates this trend. The representation of women in local
government in conflict and post-conflict countries with legislated gender quotas is
28 per cent, compared with 11 per cent of those where quotas are not in use.
54. Targeted hiring and appointments have increased women’s share of executive
positions, as seen in countries where an executive commitment was made to appoint
gender-balanced cabinets. Women account for 21.9 per cent of ministers globally, and
just 19.2 per cent in conflict and post-conflict countries. 46 These measures have been
underutilized and offer a fast-track remedy where political will exists. In addition,
when quotas and other temporary special measures are adopted, it is important to ha ve
mechanisms in place to implement them and monitor their progress.
55. Consistent efforts are required at every stage to prevent reversals and
non-compliance. In Afghanistan, with the Taliban having taken power, gains made by

__________________
46

21-13665

IPU and UN-Women, “Map of women in politics: 2021”, 1 January 2021.
17/35

S/2021/827

women in political representation are evaporating. In Yemen, the Government’s
cabinet formation in December 2020 without a single woman minister represented a
negative development not seen in 20 years, and is closely tied to the negotiations of
the Riyadh Agreement, in which no women were represented. In Libya, despite the
30 per cent quota included in the road map to the 2021 elections, the Government of
National Unity cabinet formed in March 2021 included only 5 women out of
35 members; however, the cabinet did include a female Min ister for Foreign Affairs
and Minister for Justice for the first time. In South Sudan, contrary to the 35 per cent
quota set out in the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, only one woman occupies a gubern atorial position at the
state level. In the Central African Republic, a deterioration of the political and
security situation undermined women’s participation as voters and candidates, and
parties did not adhere to the 35 per cent quota for lists of candid ates proposed by the
electoral code. Despite this, women mobilized through protests, issuing calls for
peaceful elections, and voted, and women’s representation in the National Assembly
increased slightly from 8.5 to 12.5 per cent, and from 14.7 to 21.8 pe r cent in the
Government overall.
56. Reducing violence against women in politics is essential for reaching equality
in political and public life. The pandemic has amplified abuse, harassment and threats
in person and online against politically active wom en. Across regions, violence has
been used to silence women leaders and prevent them from running for office and
carrying out their duties in any position they hold. In conflict-affected countries with
precarious security situations and weak rule of law, threats and violence are
exacerbated. Women who participated in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in 2020
were threatened. According to a survey by UN-Women, Libyan women were nearly
twice as likely to cite political reasons as a source of violence in 202 1 as in 2018.
Member States must take comprehensive measures to ensure women can equally and
safely exercise their civil and political rights.

E.

Economic recovery and access to resources
57. The annual report for 2020 (S/2020/946) made a case for prioritizing care work
in decisions about recovery and reconstruction; investing in social protection
instruments, including basic income initiatives; rectifying austerity policies; and
boosting spending on education and health. As the global economy contracted in
2020, the accumulated effects of the pandemic have only made this case clearer.
58. According to the COVID-19 Global Gender Response Tracker developed by
UN-Women and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), approximately
42 per cent of the more than 3,100 policy measures identified across 219 countries
and territories across the world can be considered gender-sensitive. Among these,
nearly two thirds addressed violence against women and girls, but far fewer were
aimed at strengthening women’s economic security or supporting unpaid care work.
Among 1,700 measures related to social protection or the labour market, only 23 per
cent targeted women’s economic security or provided support for unpaid care.
Similarly, out of 580 fiscal and economic measures to help businesses weather the
crisis, only 12 per cent channelled resources to women-dominated sectors.
59. In countries affected by conflict, women have been the hardest hit by the
economic fallout of the pandemic and represent a disproportionate share of the
informal sector. Close to four in five women who are paid for their work in
post-conflict countries work in agriculture, and receive low wages and few legal
protections. Mandatory social distancing measures made it difficult or impossible for
women to sell their products in the market. Women took on heavier domestic burdens
and caregiving duties, and income losses impaired their ability to buy seeds and other

18/35

21-13665

S/2021/827

materials for the next planting season. 47 In the Great Lakes region, women-owned
small and medium-sized enterprises experienced the worst impacts, and cross-border
trade, another important source of income for many women, also diminished. In Haiti,
the garment and apparel sector, which represents 90 per cent of the country’s
manufacturing exports and has a workforce that is 70 per cent female, was the hardest
hit. In Lebanon, the unemployment rate for women is expected to increase from 14 per
cent before the pandemic to 26 per cent. In the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
women’s participation in the labour force was only 21 per cent in 2018. By 2020, it
had dropped even further, to 16 per cent, and 27 per cent of women -led businesses
shut down as a result of the lockdowns.
60. Only three fragile countries adopted measures to support unpaid care work.
There is a continued expectation that women’s care work is a catch -all safety net that
can absorb the costs of wars, disasters or pandemics to the detriment of women’s own
economic aspirations or participation in public life. However, this safety net has a
limit, and when the care burden of women is invisible and unsupported it condemns
women to extreme poverty 48 and leaves their children vulnerable to recruitment by
armed groups and violent extremists. In Colombia, the Government has recognized
that the lack of childcare is a major barrier to the economic recovery of women,
including for female former combatants engaged in productive projects as part of their
economic reintegration.
61. Targeted measures are needed to ensure women’s inclusion in economic as well
as other decision-making forums. In Libya, there were only 4 women among the
35 participants in the economic dialogue track of the Berlin process. However,
following pressure from women’s organizations and engagement by UNSMIL, the
number of women participants was increased to 13. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the national solidarity fund addressing the socioeconomic impact of
COVID-19 is overseen by a management committee made up of 2 women and 10 men.
Efforts to address these imbalances often have to be mandated, including through
clear and specific quotas.
62. During the reporting period, the United Nations continued to look for solutions
to lockdowns, mobility restrictions and other disruptions brought about by the
pandemic. In Guinea-Bissau, UNICEF partnered with the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau and the Network on Peace and Security for
Women in the ECOWAS Region to set up additional markets and decongest the central
market in Bissau, where the sellers are predominantly women, and distribute among
them masks produced by an association of women with disabilities. When school
closures impeded families’ access to school meals provided by the World Food
Programme, the Programme worked with women smallholder farmers to grow food
locally to feed those families. In Yemen, UNDP trained Yemeni women in front -line
conflict communities to own and manage community energy microgr ids as
entrepreneurs, which won UNDP a humanitarian award, cut energy costs by 65 per
cent and provided 10,000 people with access to sustainable energy.
63. The pandemic has exacerbated an already dire situation for women and girls in
conflict countries. Research from Georgetown University 49 shows that only 44 per
cent of women are likely to be in paid work in fragile and conflict -affected countries,
__________________

Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace and Security and Permanent Mission of the United Arab
Emirates to the United Nations, Advancing Women’s Participation in Post-Conflict
Reconstruction (2020).
48
Jay Lingham and Melissa Johnston, “The hidden work of po st-conflict recovery”,
openDemocracy, 2 October 2019.
49
Yvonne Quek, Women’s Work Amid Fragility and Conflict: Key Patterns and Constraints
(Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace and Security, 2019).
47

21-13665

19/35

S/2021/827

compared with 66 per cent of men in the same countries. Women fare much worse in
countries experiencing protracted conflicts, where this percentage drops below 20 per
cent, than in post-conflict countries, a variation that is not observed among men.
Women own 10 per cent of micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises in fragile and
conflict-affected countries, compared with nearly 30 per cent in other developing
countries. Not many conflict-affected countries have data on women’s land
ownership, but those that do show that it remains low (in Mali, it is just 3 per cent).
The fertility rate for fragile and conflict-affected countries averages five children,
double the average for developing countries that are not affected by conflict, and
access to contraception is much lower. Social norms and expectations regarding
women’s roles, fear of harassment, high costs of transportation and childcare, low and
unenforced minimum wages, perceptions of workplace inequality and discriminatory
laws and regulations are all important barriers that prevent women from formally
entering the workforce, especially refugee women who face discrimination and legal
barriers to the labour market based on both their gender and their displacement status.

F.

Rule of law and women’s access to justice
64. In Guatemala, the group of elderly indigenous women from the Maya Kekchi
community known as the abuelas of Sepur Zarco have become local, national and
international leaders in the quest for justice, and continue to monitor implementation
of the reparations judgment in their case. The visibility and leadership of the abuelas
have motivated other survivors of sexual and gender-based violence in their country
to seek justice in high-profile criminal cases. This experience exemplifies how the
meaningful participation of diverse women in justice efforts, including as survivors,
activists or justice professionals, has transformative potential and is essential to
building inclusive rule of law systems and social cohesion.
65. In countries emerging from conflict and authoritarianism, the reform of laws
that discriminate against women and girls is another important guarantee of
non-repetition with regard to violations and abuses suffered. In Iraq, the Council of
Representatives adopted the Yazidi Female Survivors Law, which established a legal
imperative for the prosecution of members of Da’esh for i nternational crimes and
reparations for the survivors of those crimes, and recognizes crimes committed not
just against Yazidis, but also the Christian, Shabak and Turkmen communities. In
Libya, the United Nations has supported the development of a draft law on combating
violence against women, in line with international human rights standards. In South
Sudan, UNMISS and UNDP supported the development of a family law that protects
women’s rights with regard to issues of marriage, divorce, custody of childre n and
inheritance, following extensive consultations with women’s networks over several
years. In Kosovo, the parliament incorporated the Council of Europe Convention on
Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence into its
Constitution. In the Sudan, women’s advocacy led to significant legal reforms
concerning the protection of human rights and gender equality, including the revision
of provisions of the Penal Code referring to “immodest attire”, the criminalization of
female genital mutilation and cutting, and the elimination of the requirement that a
guardian must give permission for mothers to travel with their children.
66. During the reporting period, there have also been important steps towards
accountability for crimes and violations against women and girls in conflict-affected
contexts. In November 2020, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, former armed
group commanders Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka and Serafin Lionso were convicted of war
crimes, including rape and sexual slavery, committed in North Kivu (S/2021/312,
para. 30). In July 2020, the International Criminal Court convicted Dominic Ongwen,
a former member of the Lord’s Resistance Army in Uganda, of war crimes and crimes

20/35

21-13665

S/2021/827

against humanity, including forced pregnancy – the first conviction at the Court for
this crime. In Germany, the trial of Anwar R., a former official of the Syrian General
Security Directorate, for torture as a crime against humanity, including rape and
aggravated sexual assault, began in April 2020. South Sudan continued to deploy
mobile courts to remote areas, with technical and logistical support from the
peacekeeping mission. In the Sudan, in June 2021, the Government signalled its
willingness to turn former president Omer Al-Bashir and other wanted officials over
to the International Criminal Court for genocide and war crimes including rape. In
July 2021, the Basic Court of Pristina issued the first-ever conviction for conflictrelated sexual violence by a court of Kosovo. 50
67. Despite advances in high-profile criminal cases, the COVID-19 pandemic has
exposed deep inequalities in women’s access to justice in everyday situations,
particularly in conflict-affected countries where women’s justice needs were already
most acute. In the Occupied Palestinian Territory, the complete lockdown of the
family courts in the West Bank and Gaza has had a heavy impact on the ability of
women and children to claim alimony, maintenance, custody, visitation rights,
protection orders and inheritance rights. 51 In Afghanistan, court proceedings ground
to a halt and women were prevented from submitting and moving forward with their
cases. 52 On the other hand, targeted interventions backed up by adequate resources
can have a significant impact. Spotlight Initiative programmes, operating in many
conflict-affected countries, had a positive impact on the number of convictions of
perpetrators of violence against women and girls. In Nigeria, the Spotlight Initiative
supported the establishment of a presidential special investigations panel on sexual
and gender-based violence, a historic milestone that is already enhancing women’s
access to justice. With United Nations support, the Supreme Judicial Council in Libya
established two courts in Tripoli and Benghazi dedicated to violence against women
and children, and selected five female judges out of six to administer these two courts.
68. The United Nations system has continued to advance its joint approach to rule
of law support through the Global Focal Point for the Rule of Law arrangement,
adjusting and scaling up its efforts in response to the pandemic, including its efforts
to close the justice gap for women and girls in conflict-affected settings and promote
the representation of women in law enforcement and the justice and security sectors.
The United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict assisted national authorities in strengthening institutional safeguards against
impunity in contexts such as Nigeria, South Sudan, Guinea, the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

G.

Preventing and countering terrorism and violent extremism
69. Since the adoption by the Security Council of resolution 2242 (2015), which
called for the integration of the women and peace and security agenda in an effort to
counter violent extremism and terrorism, there has been a significant increase in
gender-related recommendations to Member States by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate; a growing number of references to gender in
Security Council resolutions on issues such as the prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration of foreign terrorist fighters, the links between terrorism, trafficking in
persons and conflict-related sexual violence, and efforts to counter terrorist

__________________

On 5 July 2021, the Pristina Basic Court convicted a former police officer of rape and other
crimes in 1999. The decision marks the first time a court of Kosovo has convicted a suspect of
sexual violence in relation to the conflict. See Alexandrah Bakker, “Monthly news updates:
domestic prosecution of international crimes – July 2021”, 3 August 2021.
51
UN-Women and others, “Justice for women amidst COVID-19”, May 2020.
52
Ibid.
50

21-13665

21/35

S/2021/827

narratives; and an exponential growth in research on this area, incl uding the gender
dimensions of extreme right-wing terrorism.
70. Serious concerns continue to be raised, however, including during the six -week
global digital consultation on this topic held in 2020, involving more than 140 civil
society representatives from 43 countries across the world. 53 There continues to be
near-complete impunity for human trafficking, crimes of sexual violence and
violations of women’s rights perpetrated in the context of organized crime and
terrorism. The situation of thousands of women who have suspected links to groups
designated by the Security Council as terrorist who are held in detention centres and
camps in Libya or the Syrian Arab Republic, often accompanied by their children, is
dire, and is made worse by restrictions to humanitarian access owing to the pandemic,
further delays in repatriation and underinvestment in suitable rehabilitation
programmes. The main approaches to counter-terrorism continue to focus on military
and criminal justice approaches, take place in spaces that are dominated by male
actors, are informed by gender stereotypes and biases, consider women only
superficially and often limit them to their roles as mothers and wives, and include
mass surveillance and sweeping legislation that may curtail the activit ies or funding
of women’s rights organizations and defenders. In more extreme cases, counter terrorism legislation is used to target women’s rights directly.
71. In spite of the pandemic, the United Nations continued to work with Member
States to repatriate women and girls held in prolonged detention in camps in the north eastern part of the Syrian Arab Republic to countries such as Tunisia, Kazakhstan,
Tajikistan or Uzbekistan. In Somalia, the focus on women’s rehabilitation has
improved significantly over the past two years, as the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia and the International Organization for Migration operate two
rehabilitation centres for women formerly associated with Al-Shabaab. These
programmes have benefited 279 women and 304 men, with 128 women graduates in
2020 alone. The United Nations also supports women-led initiatives, from Peace
Villages in Indonesia to the creation of a women’s rapid action and mobilization
platform in Muslim Mindanao in the Philippines, which is a netwo rk of grass-roots
mediators who are now considered essential workers in promoting peace education
and developing counter-narratives to tackle extremist propaganda, misinformation
and hate speech. Of the 45 projects related to preventing violent extremism r un by
UNDP, 75 per cent contribute to gender equality as a significant objective, and 11 per
cent treat it the principal objective.
72. As examples of good practice, the national action plan on women and peace and
security in Jordan includes a dedicated goal on gender-responsive prevention of
violent extremism, with funds allocated to its implementation, and is already
reporting positive results. Women’s organizations in the United Republic of Tanzania
are well represented in a national advisory council on preventing violent extremism,
guiding the development of the national strategy and action plan.

H.

Climate change and its peace and security implications
73. The climate crisis continues to exacerbate conditions that threaten peace and
security, disproportionately affecting already fragile or conflict-affected countries. 54
Since 2007, the Security Council has held several debates on climate security matters.
The adverse effects of climate change on stability have been recognized by the

__________________

UN-Women, “Global digital consultation: civil society voices on the gendered dimensions of
violent extremism and counter-terrorism responses”, January 2021.
54
Adrien Detges and others, 10 Insights on Climate Impacts and Peace: A Summary of What We
Know (Adelphi and Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, 2020).
53

22/35

21-13665

S/2021/827

Council in resolutions and presidential statements in 11 different contexts, 55 as well
as in its resolution 2242 (2015) on women and peace and security. The Chair of the
Secretary General’s Youth Advisory Group on Climate Change, Nisreen Elsaim, in
her statement at the high-level open debate on climate and security in February 2021,
noted that climate-related emergencies cause the loss of livelihoods, displacement and
migration, major disruptions in access to health and life-saving sexual and
reproductive health services and increases in gender-based violence and harmful
practices.
74. During the reporting period, improvements were seen in both the uptake and
integration of considerations linked to the environment an d climate change into
policies and programmes related to the women and peace and security agenda, and
the integration of gender-related considerations into emerging priorities on climate
change and security. The policy report Gender, Climate and Security: Sustaining
Inclusive Peace on the Frontlines of Climate Change documented lessons learned
from successful pilot projects aimed at addressing the gender dimensions of climate related security risks. This has contributed to enhanced awareness and new
investments in inter-agency programming to simultaneously address climate
adaptation, peacebuilding and gender equality supported by the Peacebuilding Fund,
including in such settings as the Gambia, the Niger and the Blue Nile State in the
Sudan, and to address transboundary issues between Mali and the Niger. The
inter-agency climate security mechanism, a joint initiative of the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, UNDP and the United Nations Environment
Programme to help the United Nations system address climate-related security risks
more systematically, has increased efforts to integrate a gender perspective into its
work, including by applying gender-sensitive risk assessment methodologies in its
field work and reviewing good practices regarding the integration of climate security
and gender linkages into peacebuilding efforts.
75. Continued efforts are needed to address the linkages between gender, climate
and security, and the meaningful participation of women and marginalized groups in
national policymaking and planning and legal reforms regarding the distribution of
natural resources in conflict-affected countries. These include processes to support
nationally determined contributions, national adaptation plans, national climate
change action plans, land tenure policies and the reduction of emissions from
deforestation and forest degradation. It also includes support for the advocacy efforts
of women’s organizations and networks to address climate-related security risks.
76. Much focus is now given to climate financing. It is essential that a gender
perspective be taken into account when making decisions, applying climate finance
instruments and ensuring women’s participation in the allocation of financial
resources, especially in crisis and conflict settings. The gender, climate and security
nexus offers a unique opportunity for funds dedicated to climate change mitigation
and adaptation to address the root causes of conflict and have a greater transformative
impact, such as through the Green Climate Fund and the Global Environment Facility.
77. As climate change fuels renewed waves of environmental activism, taking
action to protect natural resources and defend environmental rights is becoming ever
more dangerous. The increase in violence and threats against environmental defenders
who are women, in particular indigenous women, is alarming. Their protection should
be an integral part of the global agenda for peacebuilding and for sustaining peace.

__________________
55

21-13665

At the time of writing: the subregion of Central Africa, the Central African Republic, Cyprus,
Darfur, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, the Lake Chad basin, Mali, Somalia, South
Sudan and West Africa and the Sahel.
23/35

S/2021/827

IV. Action to realize women and peace and
security commitments
A.

Planning for action and monitoring results at the national and
regional levels
78. The implementation of the women and peace and security agenda is the
responsibility of all Member States. That includes ensuring that global commitments
on gender equality and women and peace and security are translated into national
laws, policies and practices and are upheld in externally facing policies and
programmes, including in terms of international security and development
cooperation, humanitarian aid and support for mediation and peacebuilding efforts
globally. Across the agenda, many gaps remain between the normative framework and
its implementation, gaps that are at risk of increasing unless targeted efforts are
integrated into COVID-19 recovery efforts.
79. There is broad recognition of the need to urgently tackle implementation gaps
and prevent any backsliding. The strong support for the Compact on Women, Peace
and Security and Humanitarian Action, 56 which was launched at the Generation
Equality Forum in Paris on 2 July 2021, is a clear expression of this need to realize
commitments. As at August 2021, 149 signatories, including Member States, regional
organizations, United Nations entities, the private sector, civil society and academia,
had endorsed the Compact’s preamble and framework actions by investing in at least
one of the proposed actions. Guided by the Compact’s Board and catalytic members,
the Compact will establish a voluntary monitoring and accountability process to
realize existing Compact commitments, strengthen coordination across its existing
mechanisms, systems, networks, partnerships and capacities, and promote financing
for and wider awareness and visibility of the women and peace and security agenda
and gender equality in humanitarian action.
80. National action plans have the potential to be important tools to guide
implementation efforts. As of August 2021, 98 countries and territories (50 per cent
of United Nations Member States) had adopted dedicated action plans on women and
peace and security, and 12 regional organizations had regional strategies or plans in
place. More countries have taken steps to improve monitoring, evaluation and
reporting of their national action plans and 86 per cent of countries with such plans
have monitoring indicators to track progress. In 2021, pursuant to the Women, Peace,
and Security Act of 2017, the United States of America presented its first report
evaluating progress in advancing its strategy on women and peace and security. The
integration of national action plan priorities into sectoral policies and plans has also
been emphasized. For example, alongside its national action plan, the Ministry of
Defence in the Netherlands has adopted a defence action plan and the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs has a dedicated plan under development.
81. The Women and Peace and Security Focal Points Network, 57 currently chaired
by Canada and Uruguay, stressed the need for a women and peace and security agenda
that is both inward and outward facing and fit for purpose in order to address current
and escalating crises. The Network convened seven virtual meetings for Member
States, regional organizations and civil society and developed recommendations on
ways to design and implement impact-driven national action plans, support women
peacebuilders, include indigenous communities and racially diverse populations in
implementation efforts in a meaningful way and integrate intergenerational

__________________

See https://forum.generationequality.org/women-peace-security-and-humanitarian-action-wpsha-compact.
57
See https://wpsfocalpointsnetwork.org/.
56

24/35

21-13665

S/2021/827

leadership. South Africa and Switzerland will serve as Co -Chairs of the Network in
2022. Moving forward, it is crucial that the Network and its members increase efforts
to influence the core decisions on peace and security in their respective governments.
82. Member States are encouraged to make greater use of human rights mechanisms
to enhance accountability with regard to women and peace and security. For example,
only 7 per cent of recommendations issued in the context of the universal periodic
review between 2017 and 2021 were directly related to gender-related issues (see
A/HRC/48/32).

B.

Leadership, coordination and accountability within the
United Nations
83. In 2019, as part of the preparations for the twentieth anniversary of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), the Secretary-General issued 10 directives to United
Nations entities, including to review their expenditures, operational and strategic
frameworks, accountability tools, internal analyses, public messaging, engagement
with women’s organizations and technical capacity to lead by example on women and
peace and security (S/2019/800, para. 120). So far, entities have taken important steps
to implement these commitments, but progress has been uneven. For example, none
of the United Nations country teams have reported setting the necessary benchmarks,
as directed in the report, to allocate a minimum of 15 per cent of programmatic
budgets to gender equality while improving the mainstreaming of gender in all areas
of expenditure.
84. Accountability frameworks and compacts for special representatives of the
Secretary-General were updated to include objectives related to women and peace and
security, from progress in implementing mandated tasks to consistent political advocacy
and the strengthening of partnerships with women’s civil society organizations. The
Department of Peace Operations continued to invest in data-driven accountability, and
eight peacekeeping missions systematically monitored and analysed progress, trends and
challenges using 15 core indicators related to women and peace and security. The
Peacebuilding Commission adopted an implementation plan to improve monitoring and
accountability in implementing its gender strategy. In addition, the number of women
peacebuilders briefing the Commission increased significantly, from 6 in 2019 to a
record 25 in 2020. United Nations senior leaders regularly raised women and peace and
security issues, often joining forces across the United Nations system to amplify their
messages, whether on the twentieth anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), on the response to the pandemic and links to the disarmament agenda or on
specific peace and security developments in a given country. Such efforts have also
resulted in an increase in gender-related references in discussions at meetings of and
recommendations by the Executive Committee.
85. One of the most progressive and forward-leaning models of integration of
gender equality in strategic planning was the transition in the Sudan from what had
been the largest peacekeeping operation to a much smaller special political mission.
As this was a complex process, it required systematic engagement and prioritization
on gender equality at both the leadership and technical levels across the United
Nations system and at various stages. These efforts, which built on gains made on
women and peace and security by UNAMID, resulted in gender equality issues being
reflected in all key planning documents and the setup of the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan. The Security Council confir med this by
including strong and comprehensive instructions on women and peace and security in
the mission mandate. This example should serve as a model for other such transitions
and reconfigurations of United Nations presence.

21-13665

25/35

S/2021/827

86. Engagement with women’s organizations can be extensive and extensively
reported (and in some cases regularly scheduled, as in Colombia or Yemen) and
prioritized (such as by the new United Nations leadership in the Sudan and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo). However, the Organization will continue to
improve on following up on the outcomes of such engagement, ensuring that it is
substantive and intentional, rather than ad hoc, and investing in strategic partnerships
with local women leaders and networks. Many United Natio ns country teams include
a stand-alone outcome on gender equality and women’s empowerment in their
development coordination frameworks and gender analysis as part of the United
Nations common country analysis. However, the quality of this analysis and its use
in policy and programmatic decisions can still be greatly improved. Often, analysis
on women and peace and security is limited to references to women or gender and
reporting on meetings about inclusion, rather than examples of actual inclusion. There
is still a need for more analysis and evidence of the consequences of exclusion and
the impact of inequality as a driver of conflict, and for stronger use of this analysis in
strategic planning. Meanwhile, the reporting period did show appreciable progress in
efforts by the United Nations, including peacekeeping and political missions, to
monitor and report on hate speech, threats and attacks against women activists and
human rights defenders. However, civil society partners report that the United Nations
often falls short in providing protection in these situations.
87. The directives set out in the report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security in 2019 (S/2019/800) also instructed heads of entities and missions to
prioritize and budget for dedicated capacity and expertise within their offices, including
at senior levels, on the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda in
budget requests to Member States in special political missions and peacekeeping
operations, and to ensure that posts were filled and placed within offices of senior
leadership. Of the current peacekeeping missions, eight have gender units, with a total
of 52 gender advisors and officers, but only 4 hold positions at the senior level (P-5),
and some missions have additional positions at the P-3 and P-4 levels. In addition, there
were 15 gender advisers in the United Nations police as at 31 December 2020, and 4 in
military components. As at that date, and across 19 special political missions, there
were 146 staff engaged in providing gender expertise and support, including 22 full time gender advisers, most of whom were funded through the regular budget. One
quarter of special political missions had a senior gender adviser at the P-5 level. Almost
all senior gender advisers were located in the office of the head of the mission. 58 In
addition, across peacekeeping and special political missions there were senior women
protection advisers in the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Iraq, Mali, Somalia and South Sudan. Women protection advisers should also
be deployed to advise resident and humanitarian coordinators in all relevant situations
of concern, as mandated in Security Council resolution 2467 (2019). During 2020,
many special political missions were affected by the liquidity crisis and hiring freezes,
which hindered attempts to increase the availability of their gender expertise an d
capacity. In some contexts, peacekeeping missions had to defend their current capacity
from attempts at cuts during budget negotiations.
88. For the United Nations, part of leading by example involves living up to the
commitments to gender parity, and the Organization continues to make steady
progress in this regard (see figure III). For example, as of February 2021, women
comprised 48 per cent of all heads and deputy heads of mission, a substantial increase
from 20 per cent in 2015. Several field missions have shown that progress is possible,
__________________
58

26/35

Almost all gender advisers in special political missions are now located in the offices of special
representatives or special envoys, with a few in the offices of their deputies. The gender adviser
for the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa was located in the mission ’s section on
political affairs.
21-13665

S/2021/827

regardless of the context. The United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
grew from 5 staff members when it was established in 2017 to 216 personnel deployed
in Iraq as of May 2021, while maintaining gender parity. As of January 2021, in the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, the head of mission, the force
commander and the senior police adviser were women, as were other ch iefs of major
units, and close to 10 per cent of the military component and 43 per cent of the police
component were women. Women representation in the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia stands at 49 per cent of civilian personnel, 60 per cent of United
Nations Volunteers and 33 per cent of international observers. The Organization will
remain committed to ensuring that it can soon report similar results across all United
Nations entities and field operations.
Figure III
Percentage of women represented in United Nations mission leadership, 2010 –2020

Sources: Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs; Department of Peace Operations.

89. Building on the indicators created to measure progress on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) (S/2010/498, annex), a strengthened
monitoring and accountability framework has been proposed to better grapple with
the complexity inherent in the agenda, developments over the past decade and the
need to make data more accessible. Consultations with United Nations entities on
these issues have contributed to enhanced knowledge on and engagement with the
women and peace and security agenda within the system and new opportunities for
strengthened partnerships, synergies and joint action to address data gaps and
leverage technology.

C.

Financing for the women and peace and security agenda
90. The COVID-19 crisis and discussions regarding the road to recovery have
placed decisions linked to budgets, financing and resourcing under greater scrutiny.
Choices made now will affect recovery, peace and stability for years to come, as well
as the international community’s ability to prevent and respond to future crises.
91. Bilateral aid to fragile and conflict-affected contexts and countries has
continued to increase, reaching $47.2 billion in 2019. 59 Of this aid, $20.6 billion

__________________
59

21-13665

As at July 2021, the latest data available was through 2019. The Development Assistance
Committee included 30 members.
27/35

S/2021/827

(44 per cent) was committed to support gender equality in these contexts (see
figure IV). The percentage of bilateral aid dedicated to gender equality as a principal
objective of that aid rose to 5.6 per cent ($2.7 billion) in 2019. However, there has
been little change over time. Despite new funding commitments, the share of bilateral
aid supporting feminist, women-led and women’s rights organizations and
movements in fragile or conflict-affected countries remains strikingly low: only
0.4 per cent ($179 million). 60 Only $18 million was received by local women’s rights
organizations based in fragile or conflict-affected countries, and groups working to
reduce intersecting forms of marginalization receive even lower funding. 61 National
machineries for gender equality also remain strikingly underfunded.
Figure IV
Bilateral aid in support of gender equality and women’s rights in fragile or conflict -affected
contexts, 2010–2019

Source: OECD, aid project targeting gender equality and women’s movements, and Creditor Reporting System
data, accessed 30 June 2021.

92. While none of the fragile and conflict-affected countries were on track to
achieve Sustainable Development Goal 5 on gender equality and women’s
empowerment before the pandemic, mounting evidence indicate s that hard-won
__________________

Such aid is intended to support feminist, women-led and women’s rights organizations and
movements and institutions (governmental and non-governmental) to enhance their effectiveness,
influence and sustainability. The data have been collected and tracked as purpose code 15170 in
the OECD Creditor Reporting System. This aid is usually channelled via non -governmental
organizations and civil society (over 50 per cent); multilateral organizations, including support
for dedicated pooled funds such as the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund (roughly 20 to
30 per cent); the public sector; and research institutions. The data analysed excluded aid
channelled through government institutions.
61
Association for Women’s Rights in Development, “New brief: where is the money for feminist
organizing?”, 24 May 2021.
60

28/35

21-13665

S/2021/827

progress is rapidly backsliding. 62 There remains a need to increase the share of
bilateral aid in support of gender equality and the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda in these contexts. The bulk of this aid continues to be
contributed by a small pool of donors, and only a few donors have set minimum
targets for aid focused on gender equality.
93. During the reporting period, and in follow-up to the High-level Task Force on
Financing for Gender Equality established by the Secretary-General, the United
Nations has increased efforts to strengthen the pool of resources for gender equality
and to review and improve systems for tracking gender equality allocations (see
E/2021/52). Certain entities have increased their overall spending on gender equality.
In 2020, UNDP allocated $2,840 million (63 per cent of total expenditure) to
programmes or projects contributing to gender equality, $316 million (7 per cent) of
which was dedicated to promoting gender equality as the principal objective. 63 The
same year, its Crisis Bureau made a series of commitments to incentivize and increase
the investments on gender equality made by its offices in fragile and crisis -affected
countries. UNICEF allocated $3,045 million (56 per cent of total expenditure) to
contribute to gender equality; 17 per cent of that figure was focused on gender
equality as a principal objective. Meanwhile, in addition to committing at least 17 per
cent of its annual multi-year appeal budget towards initiatives aimed at women’s
empowerment and programmes that recognize and help advance the crucial role of
women in conflict prevention, the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
also established a new $3 million window for women and peace and security. For
UN-Women, the total expenditure on peace and security programming and
humanitarian interventions stood at $105.52 million in 77 countries, up from 65 in
2019. However, several entities still lack mechanisms to track these expenditures.
94. Building on the experience of the Peacebuilding Fund, greater focus has been
placed on systems that track gender-focused allocations across pooled funds. The
Gender Equality Marker was tested with success during the second cal l for the
COVID-19 response and recovery multi-partner trust fund. This call exceeded the
30 per cent target set for funding allocated to programmes that had identified gender
equality as their principal objective and reached 73 per cent of $30.8 million
contributing to gender equality (see figure V). 64 The Gender Equality Marker will be
expanded to funds that do not yet incorporate this.
95. In 2020, the Peacebuilding Fund approved investments of $173 million in
41 contexts and allocated 40 per cent towards improving gender equality, the same
share as the previous two years. The Fund dedicated 13.5 per cent to projects that had
gender equality as a principal objective, and 66.7 per cent to projects that had it as a
significant objective. 65 In 2020, the Fund approved $36.6 million through the Gender
and Youth Promotion Initiative, including $19.2 million to advance human rights and
support human rights defenders and peacebuilders, including to specifically support
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex human rights defenders and
peacebuilders.
96. Of the $847.1 million allocated by the Central Emergency Response Fund to
deliver humanitarian assistance in 2020, $147.8 million (17.5 per cent) was allocated
__________________

OECD, States of Fragility 2020 (Paris, 2020).
Gender Equality Marker codes 3 or 2b indicate programmes/projects with gender equality/
women’s empowerment as the principal objective.
64
The COVID-19 response and recovery multi-partner trust fund did not approve proposals with a
Gender Equality Marker code of 0, and it discouraged interventions with a Gender Equality
Marker code of 1.
65
The Peacebuilding Fund does not approve projects with a Gender Equality Marker code of 0, an d
it discourages interventions with a Gender Equality Marker code of 1.
62
63

21-13665

29/35

S/2021/827

to projects likely to contribute to gender equality, including across age groups. 66
Another $349.4 million (41.4 per cent) was provided to projects likely to contribute
to gender equality, but without attention to age groups. 67 Support for women and girls,
including tackling gender-based violence, reproductive health and economic
empowerment, was identified as a priority area – but was underfunded – in countrybased pooled funds as well.
Figure V
Share of funding from United Nations multi-donor trust funds allocated to programmes/
projects contributing to gender equality and/or the empowerment of women and girls in
developing countries, 2020
(Percentage)

Sources: Peacebuilding Support Office of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs; Multi -Partner
Trust Fund Office; Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Note: The COVID-19 response and recovery multi-partner trust fund approved $75 million in the first call and
second call for proposals. The information about funding distribution against Gender Equa lity Markers is
available in the second call approved in 2020 and early 2021.

97. Sectors that address gender-based violence and sexual and reproductive health
services are funded at only 33 and 43 per cent respectively, compared with an average
funding of 61 per cent for United Nations appeals overall. In the United Nations __________________
66
67

30/35

Gender with Age Marker code 4.
Gender with Age Marker code 3.
21-13665

S/2021/827

coordinated appeal to specifically respond to COVID-19 in humanitarian settings, 68
attention to gender equality was limited in its initial launch, but the challenges and
capacities of women and girls in crisis settings were prioritized in later iterations of
the appeal.
98. There has been increased donor commitment and support to dedicated
mechanisms such as the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund. Since its launch in
2016, the Fund has supported 400 local organizations in conflict-affected and
humanitarian settings and reached close to 10 million people across 25 countries
around the world. 69 In Mali, for example, women’s representation in targeted local
peace committees increased by 150 per cent, which contributed to quality dialogue
among stakeholders and improved social cohesion within communities. On 8 March
2021, the Fund launched a new campaign aimed at investing in 1,000 women leaders
and their civil society organizations working to build more peaceful and resilient
communities. Its goal is to raise $112 million by the end of 2025.
99. The COVID-19 pandemic, combined with increasing security risks, continues
to present grave threats to the critical work and the very existence of local civil society
organizations working on the front lines of crises. Early in 2021, the Women’s Peace
and Humanitarian Fund conducted a survey with its partners that found that 84 per
cent of civil society respondents felt that their organization’s exis tence was at risk
due to lack of funding – a striking increase from the 30 per cent reported in 2020.
Through the COVID-19 emergency response window launched in 2020, the Fund has
provided much-needed programmatic and institutional support to over 60 local
women’s organizations across 18 conflict- and crisis-affected countries to address the
gender-specific impacts of the pandemic. At present, the funding window is facing a
funding gap of over $30 million. Greater prioritization of women’s organizations in
crisis settings is needed in the recovery phase from the pandemic.

V. Work of the Security Council
100. Compared with 2019, in 2020 the Security Council invited fewer women to
speak on behalf of civil society and adopted a smaller percentage of resolutions that
included explicit references to women and peace and security.
101. Some of these trends can be explained by the temporary working methods used
by the Security Council during the first months of the pandemic. The percentage of
resolutions with relevant language on women or gender issues, for example, dropped
from 67.3 to 61.4 per cent, but this can be attributed to the relatively high number of
technical rollovers and short resolutions throughout the year. At the same time, the
percentage of presidential statements with references to women and peace and
security jumped from 40 per cent in 2019 to 77 per cent in 2020.
102. The percentage of women from civil society who briefed the Security Council
decreased in the first half of 2020, dropping by 40 per cent compared with the first
half of 2019, and totalled 28 at year end, split evenly between thematic m eetings and
country-specific meetings. Their statements provided vivid accounts on the situations
of women and girls in many conflicts, and contained repeated pleas for the Council
to act on their recommendations. The Council heard about Syrian soldiers re moving
baby formula from aid trucks that had been approved by the Government and dumping
it on the ground, about Yemeni mothers whose children have survived so many
bombings that they are now fearful of the sound of rain, and were reminded that the
sale of Yazidi women still takes place online, as 2,800 remain in captivity and 200,000
__________________
68
69

21-13665

The Global Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID-19.
See https://wphfund.org/.
31/35

S/2021/827

live in camps for the displaced only hours away from their homeland, seven years
after the attack on Sinjar in Iraq. Earlier in 2021, Caroline Atim from South Sudan, a
deaf woman, briefed the Council using sign language during the annual debate on
conflict-related sexual violence. She drew attention to the multiple forms of
discrimination faced by women with disabilities, despite the adoption of resolution
2475 (2019) on 20 June 2019, the first-ever Security Council resolution on protection
of persons with disabilities in conflict.
103. The increase in targeted attacks against women leaders, activists and human
rights defenders was frequently brought up in discussions of the Security Council.
These threats and harassment are sometimes directed at women who have briefed the
Council. The reports submitted by peacekeeping and special political missions and
the monitoring teams or panels of experts that service sanctions regimes provide more
detailed information about these incidents. In its resolutions on South Sudan and
Libya, the Council recognized explicitly the need to protect women’s rights
organizations from threats and reprisals.
104. Sanctions committees continue to be underutilized as a means to hold
perpetrators accountable for violations of women’s rights, but some good practices
are emerging. The latest renewal of the sanctions regime for South Sudan, resolution
2577 (2021), included the implementation of an action plan for the armed forces on
addressing conflict-related sexual violence among the key benchmarks used to review
the arms embargo measures, as well as an explicit request to include gender expertise
on the Panel of Experts on South Sudan and integrate gender as a cross -cutting issue
across its investigations and reporting. In 2021, the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) on Yemen added an individual to its
list because of his role in a policy of intimidation, detention and sexual violence
against politically active women, the first listing by the Committee in si x years. The
reports from the expert teams that monitor sanctions in Mali and the Sudan contained
extensive examples of United Nations-verified incidents of sexual violence and
physical assault on women and girls, including for alleged violations of dress codes
or the perceived affiliation of a male relative with an enemy group. The gender
balance in these teams has improved, from 19 per cent in 2016 to 36 per cent in 2020.
Most sanctions regimes now have mandates that include sexual violence among their
designation criteria and the Special Representative of the Secretary -General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict regularly shares information on implicated individuals
and entities with relevant committees.
105. The Security Council strengthened the specificity and scope of women and
peace and security references in resolutions on Mali, Libya, the Sudan, South Sudan,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central African Republic, including
as priority tasks in mission mandates, and adopted the first-ever resolution on
peacekeeping fully devoted to women and gender equality, resolution 2538 (2020),
which was backed by 97 sponsors.
106. The Security Council’s Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security continued to hold regular meetings on country-specific situations, and held
one of the first high-level meetings to explore the impact of the pandemic on women
and peace and security. Shortly afterward, the first resolution of the Security Council
on COVID-19, resolution 2532 (2020), called for concrete actions to ensure the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women in the response. In addition, the periodic
reports submitted to the Council by peacekeeping and special political missions also
integrate women and peace and security issues. For example, all 33 reports prepared
by the Department of Peace Operations in 2020 contained gender analysis or data
disaggregated by sex. The same applied to 41 of 42 reports prepared by the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, 88 per cent of which also included

32/35

21-13665

S/2021/827

recommendations on women and peace and security, a percentage that has been
increasing gradually, compared with 63 per cent in 201 7.
107. While information and analysis on attacks against women human rights
defenders have improved, as requested in my previous report, such data still need to
lead to concerted action by Member States and the United Nations to protect civic
space, including for the women who speak to the Security Council. These actions
range from properly assessing the risks and monitoring threats, to planning for
contingencies, to making rapid and flexible funding available for the protection of
women peacebuilders and human rights defenders in emergency individual cases and
taking all necessary measures to enhance digital and physical security, in consultation
with the briefers themselves and civil society experts, such as the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security.

VI. Conclusions
108. From Mexico City to Paris, the resounding expression of political and financial
support to gender equality galvanized by the Generation Equality Forum in 2021
could not have come at a better time. In addition to funding pl edges totalling
$40 billion, and promises to take specific actions, more than 100 stakeholders signed
on to the Compact on Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action, each of
them making concrete commitments to advance the agenda over the next five years.
The Compact’s objectives are in line with the goals for this decade that I proposed in
my annual report to the Security Council in 2020 ( S/2020/946).
109. In that report, I promised to hold the United Nations senior leadership
accountable for implementing their women and peace and security obligations
through annual reviews by my Executive Committee. The first such review identified
clear progress and important steps taken by United Nations entities, but also showed
that most United Nations country teams had yet to set benchmarks to allocate a
minimum of 15 per cent of programmatic budgets to gender equality and improve the
mainstreaming of gender in all areas of expenditure. We will work with resident
coordinators in conflict-affected countries to reverse this trend over the next two years
and will continue to review progress annually at meetings of the Executive Committee.
110. Since I took office, reaching gender parity within the United Nations syst em and
in peacekeeping has been one of my top priorities. Parity has been achieved among
senior leadership in the Secretariat ahead of the target dates set. Significant progress
has also been made in closing the gender gap at the senior mission leadership level in
both special political missions and peacekeeping operations. As a result, we are now
in a better position to demand far greater representation of women in peace and
security processes. My previous report called for a radical shift and tangible res ults
in women’s meaningful participation in peacebuilding, peacemaking and
peacekeeping. As emphasized in my call to action for human rights, this must remain
a non-negotiable priority for the United Nations. Supporting positive, proactive
measures to increase women’s participation in peace processes and political
transitions is part of a necessary strategy aimed at achieving sustainable peace and
women’s de facto equality. We have seen the difference women make when we have
parity in the United Nations, and when the representation of women in politics is
increased. Half of the top 20 countries with the highest share of women
parliamentarians use legislated quotas. Inclusive measures, bold targets and
incentives have also been key to broader inclusion in pea ce processes, from the
Geneva International Discussions to Libya to the Syrian Arab Republic.
111. The present moment also calls for a greater investment in women’s
participation, including through strategic partnerships with local women leaders and
21-13665

33/35

S/2021/827

networks, and in virtual diplomacy. The virtual meetings that replaced physical ones
as a result of the pandemic sometimes allowed for the involvement of more women,
including many who would not have been able to overcome the practical and logistical
barriers to participation in international processes, including visa and travel
requirements. However, they also exposed divisions with regard to access to political
power, technology, a lack of accessibility for women with disabilities and online
harassment. The digital gender divide has been known for some time, but it must
urgently be taken into account by peace and security actors. It is imperative that
governments and technology companies consult more than they already have with
women civil society groups to address both this divide and online violence.
112. Data and technology are critical tools for strengthening accountability to the
women and peace and security agenda and sustaining peace. Priority must be given
to closing data gaps, increasing capacity and resources and addressing technological
limitations, as we work together to make the gender data revolution on women and
peace and security a reality.
113. The present report devoted a special section to the goal of reversing the rise in
global military spending and greater investment in human security. I am encouraged
by signs of increased collaboration across the United Nations system to provide
women’s organizations and policymakers with evidence-based advocacy and ways to
shift spending paradigms. One proven pathway is to increase the number of women
in elected and appointed positions. The international community can do more to
support the participation of women in decision-making on defence and security sector
expenditures, expand the use of gender-budgeting tools and programming to influence
military spending levels and strengthen citizen oversight of military budgeting
through enhanced transparency and accountability. I encourage United Nations
entities to join forces with civil society organizations in i nnovative campaigns
targeted at governments and parliamentarians, using new data and evidence globally
and in specific countries, to advocate for people-centred policies, reductions in
military spending and enhanced coherence on the implementation of the S ustainable
Development Goals. I invite all Member States, and especially members of the
Security Council, to join the new Compact on Women, Peace and Security and
Humanitarian Action, which proposes to reshape peace and security and humanitarian
action processes to systematically include women and girls in the decisions that affect
their lives and, inter alia, to progressively and responsibly shift military expenditure
to human security, conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
114. Next year’s report will be devoted to another of the five goals for the decade:
turning the unconditional defence of women’s rights into one of the most visible and
identifiable markers of the work of the United Nation on peace and security. It must
include recommendations for better protection for women human rights defenders and
against all political violence in public life, and lessons learned from recent
developments, including in Afghanistan and the evacuation or attempted evacuation
of women at risk. The past few years have seen the proliferation of guidance and
initiatives to stem the tide of violence against women activists and leaders. However,
there is still a paucity of effective measures to provide protection to individuals at
immediate risk or link participation with protection needs, and civil society
organizations that work to protect human rights defenders are underfunded. Member
States should consider, for example, expediting and facilitating the approval of
applications for asylum, temporary relocation or protected status as a result of genderbased persecution.
115. After eight years leading UN-Women and overseeing a significant increase in
the entity’s investment on women and peace and security, Phumzile Mlambo -Ngcuka
summarized the partial progress to date on women’s participation in decision-making
and the long way ahead with a simple statement: “One quarter is not enough. One
34/35

21-13665

S/2021/827

quarter is not equality.” 70 I will be guided by the same conviction during my second
term. We cannot hope to turn the climate crisis around, reduce social divisions and
build sustained peace without shifting power towards equality and justice, and we
cannot stop until we get there.

__________________
70

21-13665

Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Under-Secretary-General, Executive Director of UN-Women,
remarks at the opening ceremony of the Generation Equality Forum, Paris, 30 June 2021.
35/35
