S/PV.8424

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8424th meeting

Friday, 14 December 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Elé Ela
Mr. Amde
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-43833 (E)
*1843833*

S/PV.8424

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Griffiths is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Amman.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I come before the Security Council
today with some good news and a message of hope.
After two and half years of missed opportunities, I
think it is fair to say that the political process to find
a comprehensive solution to the conflict in Yemen has
finally resumed. During our consultations in Sweden this
week, parties to the conflict reached several agreements,
included in the Stockholm declaration, which came
into force on 13 December upon the publishing of the
documents. That is no small achievement, which was
made possible first and foremost by the commitment
of the parties. The credit goes to them. I was extremely
impressed by their dedication: all made concessions and
all engaged, in-depth and at length, intensively and in
good faith. Last week’s consultations saw the “highest
level of interaction between the parties ever seen in
consultations on Yemen”, as said by representatives
of the different parties we heard during the week we
were there.
I am sure that all members of the Council will share
my sincere gratitude to the Government of Sweden for
hosting us. Ambassador Olof Skoog and his colleagues
understood better than any of us what was needed to
make the consultations a success. I know that feeling
2/23

14/12/2018

was shared by all those present, including the leaders
of both delegations, and we thank them.
For members of the Council and members of the
international community, Sweden is also their success.
The agreements reached would not have been possible
without the extraordinary level of support from
world leaders. I certainly feel very privileged to have
been able to rely on them. I am thankful to Saudi Crown
Prince Mohammed Bin Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud,
who showed his personal support for the process at vital
times and for the agreements we negotiated in Sweden.
I am grateful to President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour, who followed our negotiations very closely,
returned to Riyadh during the process and whose
involvement was key on all files. It was President Hadi
himself who personally confirmed to the SecretaryGeneral, yesterday morning, his approval of the various
proposals before us, on behalf of his delegation.
I am also grateful to the leadership of Ansar
Allah, Abdulmalik al-Houthi, who demonstrated his
commitment to progress at the talks throughout the
consultations. I understand that he was in constant
communication with his own delegation. The heads of
both delegations, Foreign Minister Khaled Al-Yemany
and speaker Mohammed Abdul-Salam, had a very
difficult task, as is normally the case. But they led
their delegations with professionalism, discipline and
perseverance. It was not an easy exercise, but I thank
them both for their outstanding performance.
I also thank Foreign Secretary Jeremy Hunt, who,
as members of the Council know, made a flying visit
only yesterday to the talks at a crucial moment.
This outcome would not have happened without
the considerable support and logistical arrangements
to make the talks happen, and in particular from the
Sultanate of Oman, the Kingdom of Kuwait and the
Saudi-led coalition.
Last, but absolutely not least, allow me to place on
record here my personal thanks for the leadership of the
Secretary-General. As I have said to the Council before,
Mr. Guterres is very familiar with the issues on Yemen
and keeps us all very focused. We were in frequent
contact the past two weeks in particular. His meeting in
Buenos Aires at the Group of 20 with the Saudi Crown
Prince ensured the last-minute clearances essential to
move the 50 injured from Sana’a to Muscat just two days
before the consultations. He took time out from his as18-43833

14/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

ever arduous schedule in Europe to make a subsequent
visit to the consultations themselves in Sweden from
Wednesday night to Thursday night, for those vital last
24 hours, which was obviously instrumental in making
the agreements happen. Naturally, I am most grateful
for his leadership.
What did we achieve exactly? First, lest we forget,
both parties turned up on time. The Government of
Yemen had done that before, but they were now joined
by the delegation from Sana’a, and that was no small
achievement, given what had gone on before. Many
people and Governments can claim credit for that, and
I have already thanked them. But I am grateful also to
the two delegations for arriving ready to work.
Proceedings in Sweden consisted of eight days
of hard work. Meetings were punctual. The parties
laboured daily on texts, as well as principles. What
began as meetings of a formal nature became, over time,
true engagements between people from both sides who
know each other and seek agreement over difference.
I would not want to overstate the level of confidence
reached between the two sides at that first encounter,
but they did business together, almost always in good
spirits. But then more than mere attendance, of course,
there were a range of agreements made — the details
of which have all been published and are available to
members of the Council. What are those agreements?
First, and most dramatically, the parties finally
agreed to end the battles in Al-Hudaydah. For months,
the Council has called for just such an agreement,
and I believe we now have it. It entered into force
upon publishing those papers on 13 December. It
includes phased, but rapid, mutual withdrawals of
forces from both the three Al-Hudaydah ports and
the city. That will be achieved in the context of a
governorate-wide ceasefire.
The United Nations was asked to monitor the
compliance of the parties to those commitments. I am
sure the Council will want to address that requirement.
A robust and competent monitoring regime is not just
essential, it is also urgently needed, and both parties
have told us they would very much welcome it and,
indeed, depend upon it. At the instruction of the
Secretary-General, speaking himself from Sweden,
I understand that the relevant departments in New
York and elsewhere are already active on the planning
for urgent deployment, subject to the decisions of
the Council.

S/PV. 8424

I should add, too, that I spoke only this afternoon
to General Patrick Cammaert, who all members of
the Council know, I am sure, for his exceptional
achievements. He has kindly dropped his other
responsibilities to lead the monitoring component of the
agreement. We hope to see him out here in the region
as soon as the middle of next week. Being present in
the field soon is an essential part of the confidence that
needs to go with the implementation of the agreement.
Al-Hudaydah has been the focus of international
attention this year for a reason — not merely because it
is the centre of gravity of the conflict, but also because
it is the vital lifeline, as Mark Lowcock will no doubt
remind us today, for the humanitarian programme upon
which millions of Yemenis depend. The ghastly prospect
of famine, of which Mr. Lowcock has reminded us, has
made solving Al-Hudaydah and its propensity for battle
both urgent and necessary.
For that reason, the precise nature of the design of
the agreed withdrawals revolve around humanitarian
needs and requirements. Therefore, allowing the United
Nations the lead role in the ports, as a first step, is a vital
response to that humanitarian requirement. We hope to
see that happen within days. The United Nations will
take on a leading role in supporting the Yemen Red Sea
Ports Corporation in the management and inspections
at the Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Issa ports, which
will include enhanced monitoring by the United
Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism. The
United Nations country team, under the leadership of
my colleague and friend Lise Grande, has developed a
plan to seek specific support from Member States to the
port. Lise and her agency colleagues have been integral
to shaping the agreements on Al-Hudaydah, and two
of her colleagues were with us throughout the talks
in Sweden. I am very grateful to her and to them for
their presence. They will play a lead role in the civilian
aspects of the deal.
But I would like to stress one important aspect
of the Al-Hudaydah agreement. It is an outlier. Very
deliberately, the arrangements agreed on, particularly
as regards governance, and the temporary arrangements
of governance, in Al-Hudaydah, intend to set no
precedent for the future. They are time-bound. They do
not confer any new sense of legitimacy or sovereignty.
It is a humanitarian stop-gap to save lives and, we hope,
turn the tide of war towards peace.

18-438333/23

S/PV.8424

The situation in the Middle East

The parties have also reached a mutual
understanding to ease the situation in Taiz, with the
prospect of opening humanitarian corridors to allow
the safe passage of goods and people across the front
lines, the reduction of the fighting in the governorate
and the deployment of demining operations. The
parties in Sweden agreed to the establishment of a joint
committee between themselves and the United Nations
in the lead to secure negotiations on the agreements to
make those objectives happen as soon as possible. We
hope that the committee will meet soon and agree on a
plan to bring some respite to the people of Taiz from the
situation that they have suffered for many years.
Before arriving in Sweden, the parties, in the first
agreement between them in the course of the entire
conflict, had already agreed to the establishment of
a joint committee to provide and plan for the mutual
release of all prisoners. As I have said to the Council
before, this was the first injunction to me when I took
up these responsibilities by President Hadi Mansour,
who urged the United Nations to focus on the release of
prisoners, the important humanitarian nature of which
is so clear. The committee, which was established, met
frequently in Sweden, with the two sides exchanging
lists of up to 15,000 prisoners. They were very lucky
to have the full support and involvement and presence
in Sweden of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC). We hope, with the ICRC in the lead, for a
mass exchange, as soon as mid-January, of up to 4,000
prisoners released and able to return to their families.
We did not reach agreement on all the items that
were on the table in Sweden. We were not able to reach
an agreement on the opening of Sana’a airport, and
we were not able to reach agreement on the measures
needed to improve the operations and reach of the
Central Bank of Yemen as a condition for the full
payment of the salaries of all civil servants. However,
we will continue to work with the parties between
sessions to seek agreement on those issues, Finally, but
not least, the parties have agreed to reconvene at the
end of January. This was a particular point raised by the
Secretary-General with President Hadi Mansour when
they spoke yesterday.
In Sweden, the parties finally also discussed
my framework, elements of which I presented to the
Council in June. The key principle of that framework,
based on the three references — the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its implementation mechanism,
the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference
4/23

14/12/2018

and relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015), is to restore State institutions
and the State monopoly of force by providing a clear
political future to all parties and to all those who have
a say in resolving this conflict, and indeed to return
Yemen to a state of civil politics and peace.
The parties have agreed to discuss this framework
at the next round of consultations — ideally, as I
have mentioned, before the end of January. I am very
encouraged by this commitment. I am very pleased by
the generally positive responses of the parties to this
framework. I think it is fair to say that Ansar Allah is
in agreement with the general tenor of all its elements.
The Government of Yemen has some reservations,
which I very much understand and respect. The next
step will be serious consideration of the document and
its implications. In this way, we hope to move from
the essentially humanitarian theme of Sweden to a
first serious consideration of the issues that need to
be addressed between these parties if the conflict in
Yemen is finally to be resolved.
I also come before the Council today with a call for
caution. Our collective achievements this week were — I
hope Council members will agree — a significant step
forward, but what is in front of us is a daunting task. As
ever in the context of such negotiations, one realizes at
the end of negotiations that the hard work is only about
to begin.
People ask us whether we can trust the parties to
implement the agreements that they made together in
Sweden. All of us no doubt have different views on this.
My own is that this is not about whether we can trust one
or the other on this or that commitment. This is about
helping them both to make it happen, reporting on their
success and noting those areas where they fall short of
that. Therefore, verification is the key to building trust.
I personally hope that the Council will play a part in
keeping international attention on the minutiae of the
implementation of these agreements.
Having said that, I can also confirm the public and
private statements made to the Secretary-General by all
involved at those consultations that the promises will
not remain only on paper. We believe these statements.
We have reason to believe them, and we all hope to see
their promises reflected in the next days.
Before the consultations, I was asked by both sides
whether the other side was serious. This is a frequent
reference within the context of the conflict in Yemen,
18-43833

14/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

but, frankly, I was not really sure until about two weeks
ago. Today, I am more confident. However, more than
this, what Sweden demonstrated each day was the
existence of an absolute international consensus on
the need for progress and on the simple proposition
that only a political solution can resolve this conflict.
Among us in Sweden were the representatives of those
Governments accredited to the Government of Yemen.
Their ambassadors were with us. They were in daily
contact with the parties — the permanent members of
the Council very prominent among them. Without their
help, we would not have reached the point where we
are today. This sense of international consensus and
commitment was of great importance not just for the
parties in Sweden, but also evidently for the people in
Yemen, who are finding some small signs of hope for
the future.
As the Swedish Foreign Minister said to the press at
the closing of those consultations, no longer can Yemen
be considered a forgotten war. Now we can begin to
hope for a track that may lead to its early resolution.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: A fortnight ago in Yemen, I got
a glimpse of what life is like in the world’s worst
humanitarian crisis. I talked to families that had fled
violence raging in their communities, some of them had
been living for years under a plastic sheet. I met young
mothers who had rushed desperately malnourished
children to hospitals. For some, it was their second,
third or even fourth visit, because their families could
not afford the food or medicine to keep them well once
they had been discharged.
So, I can confirm again what humanitarian
agencies have known for a long time. A terrible tragedy
is unfolding in Yemen and it is getting worse. Millions
of people are starving, sick and desperate. They have
one message for the world — this war needs to stop.
Council members have just heard Martin Griffiths
describe the progress made this week in Sweden. For the
first time in a long time, we can see a sign that perhaps
things might start to get a bit better, but the people I
met see no tangible improvement yet. This week’s
success must not lead to complacency; in fact; it must
do the opposite. Commitments must be implemented.
Working towards peace must be accelerated. In the

S/PV. 8424

meantime, millions of Yemenis still desperately need
assistance and protection.
We have recently had further confirmation of
just how bad the situation has become. Last week,
a consortium of agencies published the Integrated
Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) analysis for
Yemen. Their report is the most detailed, rigorous food
security survey ever conducted in the country. Data was
collected in 330 of Yemen’s 333 districts, analysed and
scrutinized by multiple organizations and reviewed by
independent Headquarters experts before publication.
The results decisively confirm Yemen’s descent toward
famine. Even for experienced aid workers, the numbers
are shocking. More than 20 million Yemenis — twothirds of the population — are now food insecure. Ten
million of them are severely food insecure — more than
twice the number of four years ago. More than half the
districts across the country have slipped into emergency
conditions — nearly 60 per cent more than last year.
For the first time, the IPC document refers to what
are called “Phase 5” conditions in Yemen. The technical
term for Phase 5 is “catastrophe”. It is characterized
by extreme food gaps, very high malnutrition rates and
excess mortality. Nearly a quarter of a million Yemenis
are literally on the brink of starvation. The IPC is also
clear that the war is the primary cause of this crisis. It
is no coincidence that two-thirds of the people most at
risk of starvation live in Hajjah, Al-Hudaydah, Sa’ada
and Taiz. They are the places where the violence has
been most intense this year.
As we have told the Council before, the economic
crisis is also playing a major role. Yemenis’ livelihoods
and access to income have been decimated, and
agricultural production has fallen by nearly a third.
Those developments have left millions of more Yemenis
unable to afford food and other essential goods, and
food prices are 150 per cent higher than they were
before the crisis.
If there is any good news in the IPC report, it is
that humanitarian assistance — especially food aid
or money to buy food — is having a major impact. It
shows that millions of Yemenis are less hungry than
they would be without aid. The IPC also tells us what
areas and which people are worst affected. The United
Nations and partners are rushing now to reach those
people and prevent the catastrophe from spreading. We
will also do more survey work on an ongoing basis so
we can spot the most vulnerable before it is too late.

18-438335/23

S/PV.8424

The situation in the Middle East

Since October, I have been seeking the Council’s
support for five measures to prevent famine from
taking hold. Those five steps are more urgent than ever.
So where do we stand on them today?
The first is a cessation of hostilities. Up to now, we
have seen only a reduction in fighting in some areas, not
a full cessation. In the past week, nearly 450 conflict
incidents were reported across Yemen, about a third of
them in Al-Hudaydah. The agreement on Al-Hudaydah
that Martin just described brings us closer to a real
cessation. As the details are being worked out, we
continue to call for a full cessation of hostilities across
the country.
The second point is to protect the supply of food
and essential goods and to facilitate aid operations.
That means keeping all the ports open, easing entry
and movement restrictions, protecting humanitarian
supplies and facilitating aid workers in doing their
jobs. Restrictions on humanitarian access are a serious
and growing problem. I had a useful discussion in
Aden with the Prime Minister on imports. Last month,
the Government of Yemen lifted restrictions on food
imports introduced through Decree 75. In November,
food imports through the ports of Al-Hudaydah and
Saleef, where most food enters the country, rose by
15 per cent, although the total quantity remained below
what was needed.
We also call on the Government to lift restrictions
on fuel imports, which are needed to power hospital
generators and keep water networks running and for
other critical tasks across the country. Those restrictions
are currently blocking over 70,000 tons of fuel from
entering Al-Hudaydah port. I had a constructive
discussion with the Prime Minister on that, and I hope
to see positive action soon.
Operations at Aden port, where congestion has been
a severe problem, have also started to improve after the
Government instructed port authorities to accelerate
processing times following my discussions with the
Prime Minster. We hope that trend continues. As an
immediate step, we want to see the release of some 1,400
containers belonging to the World Food Programme
that have been stuck at Aden port for months.
The Red Sea Mills in Al-Hudaydah, which I have
talked about repeatedly over the past three months, are
an instructive example. Access to the mills has been
impossible since fighting escalated around them in
September. Fighters have regularly impinged upon the
6/23

14/12/2018

compound, and the site has been repeatedly struck by
mortar fire. Early last month, the mills came under the
control of Government-backed forces, but access since
then has been hampered by difficulties in moving across
front lines and concerns that the area — potentially
including the entrance to the mills — may have
been mined.
Because of all that, enough food to feed nearly
3.5 million people for a month has now sat useless in
a warehouse for more than three months. I discussed
the issue both with the operators of the mills in Sana’a
and with coalition authorities in Riyadh, but as of today
we have no idea if the Red Sea Mills can still operate
or how much of the donor-funded grain inside has been
damaged or spoiled.
The Red Sea Mills are just one site among a very
large number of mills, silos and warehouses located
in and around Al-Hudaydah. If those sites are hit or
damaged, aid operations could very quickly grind to
a halt. That is one reason why the progress Martin has
described concerning Al-Hudaydah is so important,
and why we must all do everything we can to make sure
that it translates into action.
In Sana’a, I raised my serious concerns about
the restrictions and bureaucratic impediments
that humanitarian organizations face, including
delays in visas, customs and the registration of
non-governmental organizations and unacceptable
interference with humanitarian operations. I raised
those issues with senior representatives of the de facto
authorities, including the President of the Supreme
Political Council. Those were constructive discussions,
but I have since heard worrying reports that a raft of
new restrictions has been introduced, especially for
protection activities. Some of those restrictions have
come from local authorities and not from the Sana’a
level. Based on the firm assurances I received during
my visit, I hope that de facto authorities in Sana’a will
move quickly to lift those and other restrictions. I am
following up on the assurances that I was given.
In all my conversations in Yemen, I also sought
commitments from all parties to ensure that fighters
stay away from hospitals and other civilian sites and that
no armed forces recruit children. Greater commitment
is needed on all sides for the protection of civilians,
especially women and girls, in this crisis.
The third area is stabilizing the economy. Foreign
currency injections over the past two months from the
18-43833

14/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
have been effective in stabilizing the exchange rate,
financing imports of essential goods and starting to
pay pensions and civil servant salaries. At present, the
Yemeni rial is trading at just over 500 to the dollar,
which represents a marked appreciation compared to a
few weeks ago. But a dollar still costs more than twice
as many rials as it did before the current conflict, and
research indicates that the exchange rate needs to come
down to about 440 rial to the dollar before it will have
a wider impact on people’s ability to afford food and
other essential goods.
To achieve that, as well as to finance imports, pay
salaries and pensions and meet minimum costs reliably,
the Government of Yemen is going to need billions
of dollars in external support for its budget in 2019.
Again, I had constructive discussions with the Prime
Minister on that. We are seeing some progress in paying
pensions and payment of some civil servant salaries on
both sides. However, as yesterday’s statement of the
International Monetary Fund made clear, we need more
decisions and more sustained action in a similar vein.
Otherwise, what we will see is that recent progress,
which is improving some people’s ability to buy food
and other essential goods, will simply be lost again.
The fourth area is funding for the United Nations
response plan. Agencies are moving now to expand
operations. We believe that next year we will need
to feed 12 million people every month, including
10 million severely food-insecure people and 2 million
displaced people in acute need. That figure of
12 million is a 50 per cent increase over this year. In
total, we plan to assist 15 million people — that is half
the population. That includes programmes to roll back
cholera and water-borne diseases, address malnutrition
and improve living conditions for the most vulnerable
displaced people.
To ensure that all the food, medicine, household
items and other supplies, as well as the aid workers,
reach their destinations quickly and safely, our
logistics programme must also be financed to expand
significantly. That will all require a lot more money.
The 2019 United Nations humanitarian response
plan is costed ay $4 billion; about half of that is for
emergency food assistance. The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates recently pledged
to provide another $500 million for humanitarian aid
in Yemen. That is on top of their joint contribution of
$930 million to the United Nations appeal this year.

S/PV. 8424

Our understanding is that most of this new money
will be channelled through next year’s United Nations
coordinated humanitarian response plan. That would
be a boost to our fund raising, and we hope that it
will jump-start contributions from other countries.
On 26 February, the Secretary-General will convene
a high-level pledging conference in Geneva, co-hosted
by the Governments of Switzerland and Sweden.
The fifth area is the most important, and that is for
the parties to continue to engage seriously with Martin’s
process, including implementing the agreements
reached in Sweden.
The five points I have been emphasizing are, to
remind the Council, a package and not a menu. We need
more action on all of them. Notwithstanding the good
news from Sweden, there is a long way to go. Earlier
today, I chaired another detailed discussion on Yemen
with the heads of all the key United Nations and other
operational humanitarian agencies. Our collective
assessment is that the good news we heard this week
has not yet had any material impact on the millions
of people who need assistance. Access, the economy
and resources are major priorities. The lesson is
twofold — progress is absolutely possible but we need
much more of it right now. So, I again ask for practical
and political support from the Council in the five areas
I have outlined.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
welcome the new Yemeni representative to the Council.
This is a good day for all of Yemen. I want to congratulate
and commend Mr. Griffiths and his team for the work
they have done to bring about these developments. But,
as Mr. Griffiths himself said, we should also thank
and commend the Swedish Government, the parties
themselves, Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed Bin
Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, President Hadi and the
representatives of the Governments of Kuwait, United
Arab Emirates and Oman. My Foreign Secretary Jeremy
Hunt was very pleased to have been able to join his
Swedish counterpart in Stockholm for these important
developments. Above all, I want to stress how much
we owe to Mr. Griffiths and his team and, of course,
to the Secretary-General. If I may say so, this is what
the United Nations is for. The Council’s united support

18-438337/23

S/PV.8424

The situation in the Middle East

has helped Mr. Griffiths and the United Nations get to
this point.
I will speak briefly today because I think we all
have important work to do now to support Mr. Griffiths.
I will comment on Mr. Lowcock’s remarks afterwards.
I was struck by what Mr. Griffiths said about trust
among the parties and about international consensus.
For the first time in two years, the people of Yemen
have been put first, and we commend all the parties
for taking that important step. We recognize their
leadership and we endorse the agreements they have
reached, but Mr. Griffiths’ cautions about it being a
humanitarian stopgap are very well taken.
I want to refer now to what Mr. Lowcock said about
the humanitarian situation on the ground. It is a very
sobering reminder of the human consequences still at
stake and of how many starving, sick and desperate
people remain in the most vulnerable of situations. We
therefore have no time to lose. As Mr. Lowcock said,
we need to bring about tangible improvements for the
people of Yemen, and we need to do that as swiftly as
we can.
I thank the Governments of Sweden and Switzerland
for agreeing to hold a pledging conference. Mr. Lowcock
set out an update on his five asks and refined them. We
support that. As the penholder, the United Kingdom
will resume work on the draft resolution with all of our
colleagues. We plan to endorse the agreements reached,
support their implementation and set out urgent next
steps. As requested, we will want to address the
monitoring requirements with colleagues. We welcome
the news about General Cammaert. That is an extremely
good step forward. We understand the importance
of monitoring compliance and of the United Nations
having a leading role in supporting the ports. We
hope to be able to work expeditiously with colleagues
to bring about a draft resolution that will give the
firmest possible support what has been achieved so far
and provide Mr. Griffiths and the parties with a solid
foundation as they move towards the end of January
agreement and framework. We wish him the best of
luck with that.
It is vital that the parties that have made such good
strides thus far continue to act in good faith and take
urgent steps to fully implement those agreements. I
would ask all colleagues on the Council to join me in
pledging that the Council will do its very best to stay
united and to work tirelessly, together with partners
8/23

14/12/2018

throughout the United Nations membership, to support
what has been achieved and advance the work to the
desperately needed next stage.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs for, their valuable briefings. I would also
like to welcome the new Representative of Yemen,
His Excellency Mr. Abdullah Al-Saadi, whom I wish
every success.
In my statement I will focus on two main topics:
first, the consultations in Sweden between the Yemeni
parties; and secondly, developments in the humanitarian
and economic situation in Yemen.
On the first topic, we listened with great interest
to the briefing of Mr. Griffiths, which delivers a
message of hope with a view to mitigating the scale of
the crisis that has beset Yemen since 2014. The round
of consultations between the Yemeni parties — hosted
by the Government of the Kingdom of Sweden, which
we thank for providing all the necessary elements
for its success — is a reflection of the international
community’s commitment and concern to address that
crisis, which has reached regrettable proportions and
threatens regional peace and security. It also resulted in
negative consequences for the humanitarian, economic,
and political situations in brotherly Yemen.
The relative and noticeable progress achieved
in that round of consultations should be considered
a great success in the light of the Yemeni crisis and
its circumstances. That progress would not have been
achieved without such key factors as the unity of the
Security Council vis-à-vis the Yemeni issue, as well as
the great role played by the coalition countries through
their legitimate support for efforts to overcome all
obstacles to the convening of those consultations, not to
mention the serious commitment of Yemeni stakeholders
to actively engaging in them and cooperating with the
Special Envoy.
The State of Kuwait has been supporting efforts
to resolve conflicts through peaceful means and
mediation, all the more so given that the United Nations
role as mediator. We believe in the utmost importance
of the United Nations and the resolutions taken by its
various organs, especially the Security Council as the
responsible organ for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
18-43833

14/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

In the light of all this, and given that the solution
to the crisis in Yemen must be a political one, the State
of Kuwait provided a private plane to transport most
of the Yemeni delegation from the Yemeni capital,
Sana’a, to Sweden in order to participate in the recent
consultations. We hope that all Yemeni parties will
invest in the outcome of those consultations and
complete the steps specified hereto in order to achieve
a comprehensive agreement that will eventually end
the disastrous repercussions of the crisis faced by
brotherly Yemen.
On the second topic, developments in the
humanitarian and economic situation in Yemen, the
consultations in Sweden did not lead to a compromise
regarding all issues that were discussed there. However,
there has been agreement on the port and city of
Al-Hudaydah, as well as a declaration of understanding
on Taiz. Moreover, an agreement was reached on
an implementation mechanism for the exchange of
prisoners, which will help to address the adverse
humanitarian impact on the brotherly Yemeni people.
The port and the city of Al-Hudaydah exemplify
the aggravated difficult humanitarian situation. We
believe that the staged agreement reached would,
if implemented, lead to a ceasefire and the mutual
redeployment of forces to areas outside the ports and
cities, allowing the United Nations greater freedom of
movement to ensure the safe arrival of humanitarian
aid without being impeded or looted as before.
Undoubtedly, the agreement would also facilitate the
arrival of commodities and commercial goods. The
United Nations would scale up its Verification and
Inspection Mechanism in that regard.
It is important that revenues from the three ports
be channelled to the Central Bank in Al-Hudaydah in
order to pay the salaries of civil servants throughout
Yemen. That would have a positive impact and alleviate
the difficult economic repercussions of the crisis while
improving the exchange rate of the national currency,
which has recently risen to and stabilized at 450 rials
to the dollar.
The Yemeni city of Taiz has endured a painful siege
for the past three years. Its inhabitants have suffered
deplorable circumstances. We hope that the declaration
of understanding reached by the Yemeni parties will
end the negative impacts of the siege and spare its
inhabitants the risks of the humanitarian crisis. We also
hope that Yemeni parties will be seriously committed to

S/PV. 8424

implementing the outcomes of the consultations held in
Sweden, insofar as that will be a key factor in alleviating
the humanitarian suffering and crystallize the efforts of
the international community and the important donors
towards supporting the humanitarian situation.
Brotherly Yemen looks to the international
community and the Security Council to support the
positive tangible results of the consultations reached
in Sweden. Those results have specific features and
will constitute the bedrock of future consultations, to
be held early next year. The Council must maintain its
consensus-based spirit concerning Yemen, reflecting
its unity and ensuring that no messages may be
misinterpreted by any Yemeni party.
To conclude, we reiterate our support for the efforts
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Martin Griffiths. We underline the importance of
his efforts to end the crisis in Yemen being based on
the three political terms of reference, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its implementation
mechanism, the outcomes of the National Dialogue
and the relevant Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 2216 (2015). That would ensure
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Yemen, as well as non-interference in Yemen’s
domestic affairs.
Mrs. Haley (United States): I thank Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, for their briefings.
For millions of people around the world, this is a
season of hope. This is the time of year that brings out
the idealist in many of us. We are reminded that we
are all — every one of us — flawed and fallen human
beings. But we see a light in the darkness, and we hope
that our best instincts can triumph over our worst.
It is difficult to imagine more convincing proof of
humankind’s worst instincts than the pictures coming
out of Yemen today. They show innocent children
and babies slowly starving to death and succumbing
to disease. I will be honest. This may be the season
of hope, but hope alone does not make us feel better
when we see the pictures of suffering in Yemen. The
world’s worst humanitarian crisis demands more than
hope from the Security Council that peace will come
to Yemen. It demands that we take action to hold all
the warring parties accountable. It demands that we

18-438339/23

S/PV.8424

The situation in the Middle East

address the Iranian aggression at the root of the crisis.
It demands that life-saving assistance reach the Yemeni
women and children who are suffering the most from
the conflict.
Special Envoy Griffiths has brought us encouraging
news. We congratulate him on convening the parties in
the Yemen conflict and bringing them together, face to
face, for negotiations for the first time since 2016. Those
talks have produced concrete outcomes, including an
agreement for a prisoner exchange. The progress made
in Sweden should build on the political will that is
necessary for more progress in the future. We welcome
the willingness of all parties, including Saudi Arabia,
to participate in those confidence-building measures.
Most hopeful of all is the news of the ceasefire around
the port city of Al-Hudaydah. The success of that
ceasefire is critical to addressing the acute, immediate
need for humanitarian assistance in Yemen. All parties,
including the coalition, must exercise restraint in line
with the ceasefire. It is critical that the ceasefire hold
in order to allow the space for continued conversations.
We expect that in the coming days, the parties will begin
withdrawing forces, in accordance with the agreement.
The ceasefire agreement calls for weekly reports
to the Security Council. Those reports must show
continued political progress and the commitment of
all parties. The members of the Security Council will
be monitoring that situation very closely. We must
be ready to act if one or more of the parties fails to
follow through. The next step is to expand the ceasefire
to include the entire city of Al-Hudaydah. We call on
all the parties to take that step and to show the world
they are serious about achieving peace in Yemen.
Ultimately, the success of the ceasefire must lead to an
agreement on the Special Envoy’s framework for a final
political settlement. That is the outcome towards which
all the confidence-building measures and negotiations
are directed — a realistic political framework for peace
in Yemen. And the Security Council should not stop
focusing on this conflict until that is delivered.
In this season of hope, the international community
does not have to be satisfied just with hope for the
people of Yemen. We have the ability to change their
reality. Human beings created this crisis; human beings
can end it. Life and death are on the line, and we are
not powerless. We call on all of our colleagues in the
Security Council to take the next step to build on what
has begun and define the basic political will to save
10/23

14/12/2018

lives — the lives of millions — and bring about peace
in Yemen.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for today’s updates. I would also like to
welcome the new Permanent Representative of Yemen.
It must be rewarding for him to participate in his first
Security Council meeting on a day of hope.
Yesterday marked an important day. The agreements
reached in Stockholm can be the breakthrough that is
needed for peace and to end the humanitarian crisis
in Yemen. As others have said, our efforts must now
turn to immediate implementation and maintaining
momentum in the political process. Let me express our
very deep appreciation for the extraordinary efforts
of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths in that endeavour.
We also truly commend the personal engagement of
the Secretary-General himself — an illustration of the
strong international commitment to the crisis in Yemen
and of the urgent need to find political solutions. We
also thank those who played a crucial role in making the
agreements happen, including Saudi Arabia, the United
Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Oman and the Ambassadors
accredited to Yemen, including those of the permanent
members of the Council. Without intense preparations
and active international support, the consultations in
Stockholm would never have been possible.
But most of all, we would like to extend our sincere
gratitude to the Yemeni delegations. Their decision to
come together for the first time in more than two years
was a significant step towards ending the conflict. As
we have just heard, crucial agreements were reached on
several issues. Most important was the agreement on a
ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah, with a mutual redeployment
of forces and a neutral management of the port. Its
implementation is now urgent, not least to address the
desperate humanitarian situation in Al-Hudaydah and
in other parts of the country.
The understanding reached to ease the tensions in
Taiz, including with a view to allow for humanitarian
corridors and demining, was also important. We fully
support the efforts to find an agreement to open Sana’a’s
airport and to enable the exchange of prisoners, which
would constitute important humanitarian measures
and build further confidence. Reaching an agreement
to continue the dialogue on economic issues is another
18-43833

14/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

essential element. And finally, the commitment to
continuing to engage on a negotiating framework will
be critical to the important process ahead.
The atmospherics at the talks in Stockholm bode
well for moving forward, but as we have just heard,
today the situation in Yemen is still the world’s
worst humanitarian crisis. As the United Nations-led
consultations have progressed, fighting, which has
included civilian casualties, has continued in many
parts of Yemen and the humanitarian situation continues
to deteriorate, with an increased risk of widespread
famine, as outlined by Mr. Lowcock today.
The Stockholm agreement must therefore be
urgently translated into concrete action. The Council
should come together to support and fully back its
implementation. Very much in line with what the
representative of the United Kingdom has just outlined,
we would like to see a draft resolution swiftly prepared
in support of the agreement that includes the United
Nations monitoring of the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah.
We must also continue to fully support — in
practical and political terms — the “asks” made by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to
alleviate the suffering and prevent widespread famine.
The upcoming high-level pledging conference early next
year provides a key opportunity for the international
community to demonstrate its commitment to the
Yemeni people.
The constructive engagement with United Nations
efforts by all sides must also continue in order to
make progress on the issues that are still pending. We
welcome that the parties plan to meet again by the end
of January, and we hope to see further progress even
before then on the issues left open, as indicated by
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths this morning, including
on the economy and the Sana’a airport.
We encourage the parties to continue discussions in
the same spirit of dialogue and compromise demonstrated
during the meeting in Stockholm earlier this week. We
appreciate the Special Envoy’s efforts to increase the
representation of women in the political process, and
we commend the Yemeni Women’s Technical Advisory
Group for their important contribution. In future
rounds of talks, however, further efforts are needed to
ensure the full and effective participation of women in
this process.

S/PV. 8424

In conclusion, we are honoured to have hosted of
the United Nations-led consultations in Stockholm.
We truly hope that this will mark the turning point for
peace in Yemen. We will continue to play an active
role in support of sustained United Nations efforts
in Yemen. The people of Yemen must now see the
concrete benefits of the agreements. It cannot be that
we celebrate a diplomatic breakthrough on paper and
people continue to suffer.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings,
which provide us with a comprehensive update after the
Stockholm discussions.
I would like to start by joining my voice to those of
the other members of the Security Council to commend
the outstanding efforts and commitment of Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths, who convinced the parties to
gather around the negotiating table and successfully
complete the Stockholm discussions in a truly
constructive spirit. Let me also enthusiastically thank
the Secretary-General for his personal commitment,
which really made the difference, as Mr. Griffiths said.
France welcomes the commitment of the parties,
which has made it possible to achieve these initial
positive results. We warmly thank the Swedish
Government for hosting these talks, and all regional and
international partners that supported the discussions.
The holding of these talks is in itself an important
first step. Decisive progress has been made on three
fronts: the exchange of 4,000 prisoners, a withdrawal of
the armed forces from the port and city of Al-Hudaydah
in the coming days — and a ceasefire throughout
the province — and, finally, the establishment of a
mechanism for de-escalation at Taiz. The agreement
on Al-Hudaydah, in particular, is essential to progress
on the path towards a comprehensive cessation of
hostilities. Its implementation must have a positive
impact on the whole country, by facilitating the
humanitarian response that Mark Lowcock has just
stressed as absolutely necessary.
The significant progress achieved in Stockholm is
potentially a breakthrough that can mark the turning
point towards the end of the Yemeni conflict. The
Stockholm talks show that peace is possible in Yemen.
Their full implementation requires the firm commitment

18-4383311/23

S/PV.8424

The situation in the Middle East

of all and the unity of the Security Council in support
of Martin Griffiths.
This progress should not obscure the fact that
the Yemeni people are still facing an emergency
humanitarian situation, which is my second point.
And I would like to thank Mark Lowcock and his
teams for their exemplary work and for their absolutely
clear message. While Yemen is experiencing, as Mark
Lowcock just pointed out, the worst humanitarian crisis
in the world, with more than 22 million people dependent
on humanitarian assistance, or nearly 75 per cent of the
population, and a still very high risk of famine, the
positive momentum at work in Stockholm must now be
translated into reality. We call on all parties to respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law,
in particular with regard to the protection of civilians.
We also call on them to respect human rights. France
will be both active and vigilant on this subject.
The discussions also allowed progress to be made
on other crucial issues, such as the reopening of Sana’a
airport and the implementation of economic measures
to restore the country’s economy. We hope that these
discussions can continue very soon on these points,
which must converge to create the momentum we
are looking for. It is essential that the progress made
in Stockholm quickly has a beneficial impact on the
ground for the populations in order to create and
maintain this impetus towards peace. We call on all
States in a position to do so to continue to use their
influence to help ensure that all parties comply with the
guidelines that have been defined.
In this context, and this is my last point, it is more
essential than ever to respond to the requests made by
Mark Lowcock and Martin Griffiths. Only a political
solution will be able to ensure lasting peace and put an
end to the ongoing humanitarian disaster in Yemen. We
therefore call for further political discussions to be held
as soon as possible in order to build on the momentum
generated in Stockholm without delay. In this context,
we believe it is important for the Security Council to
put all its weight in the balance. Our meeting today
demonstrates the strong unity of the Security Council.
Let us use it without delay as a lever for action in
support of the ongoing efforts.
That is why we are ready to work now with the
United Kingdom as penholder on an updated draft
resolution, to express our support for the efforts of
Martin Griffiths and the important results achieved
12/23

14/12/2018

in Stockholm, but also to respond to the humanitarian
emergency by endorsing Mark Lowcock’s requests. I
would like to echo what my British colleague has just
said on this point. This draft resolution will mark the
unity of the Council and the international community
in support of United Nations humanitarian and
political action. We are ready to move very quickly
on the subject because, as my British colleague said,
we have no time to lose. Be assured, Mr. President, of
France’s full mobilization in this regard, in support of
United Nations mediation and in conjunction with all
interlocutors in the region.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the President for convening today’s meeting and
Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their
very important briefings.
We would like to express our appreciation for
the efforts they are making in their respective and
complementary fields of action, bringing all parties
closer to an inclusive political solution to the conflict
in Yemen and addressing the worst humanitarian crisis
in the world today. We believe that their work should
receive the strongest and most unanimous support
of the international community, including that of the
Security Council.
We would like to welcome the recent understandings
reached, such as the valuable support and commitment
to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. We
would also like to stress the need to maintain the
momentum generated at the meeting held in Stockholm.
We join others in highlighting the role played by the
host country, Sweden, and the important participation
of Secretary-General António Guterres. We would
especially like to pay special tribute to the Yemeni
parties for the specific commitments they have made
and emphasize the urgency of implementing them and
giving priority to the attention required by more than
14 million Yemenis exposed to imminent famine.
It is critical to strictly comply with the ceasefire
agreed at the ports of Saleef, Ras Issa and especially
Al-Hudaydah, which Mr. Griffiths has called the
“centre of gravity” of the conflict. We also emphasize
the understanding reached in relation to Taiz — another
urban centre severely affected by the conflict.
In view of the continuation of the talks in January,
we encourage the parties to continue to build trust.
We believe that the exchange of prisoners should be
followed by other actions, such as the full opening of
18-43833

14/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Sana’a airport. We welcome the transparency shown
in Sweden, which should allow the international
community, and the Council in particular, to monitor
and to support the implementation of the agreements
reached and promote greater confidence among all
parties in the peace process.
The withdrawal of forces from Al-Hudaydah and
the leading oversight role that the United Nations will
play in those efforts require the prompt adoption of
a Council resolution. We would like to express our
appreciation to the delegation of the United Kingdom
for its diligence in dealing with that matter and to
underline the importance of keeping the Council united
around the priority that should be given to the protection
of the civilian population.
We consider it vital that the international community,
in particular the neighbouring countries, increase their
contributions towards stabilizing and revitalizing the
local economy, since factors such as inflation and the
devaluation of the currency significantly increase the
risk of famine.
We emphasize that achieving sustainable peace will
require broad consensus around a shared vision for the
future. In that regard, it is essential that the process be
inclusive and that all sectors of the Yemeni population
be represented. We particularly encourage a greater
participation of women and young people.
In conclusion, I emphasize that today, we have
reason to be optimistic. However, we must also exercise
caution because, while a turning point that allows
us to glimpse a better future has been reached, the
reality today is that there is much to be done to end the
suffering of millions of Yemenis, as we heard in today’s
briefings. Peru will continue to support the efforts to
achieve a political solution in Yemen that puts an end to
the serious humanitarian crisis.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): First of all, I would like
to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock
for their informative briefings. Our special thanks go to
the Special Envoy for his tireless efforts to resume the
political dialogue between the parties to the conflict.
He has our full support in all his endeavours.
(spoke in Arabic)
Allow me to welcome the Permanent Representative
of Yemen and to wish him every success.

S/PV. 8424

(spoke in English)
During our last briefing on the situation in Yemen
in November (see S/PV.8404), we all agreed that a
window of opportunity to relaunch a credible political
process had presented itself and that it was vital to
take full advantage of it in order to restore peace and
stability in Yemen. We are encouraged by the positive
developments that followed that meeting, especially
the first round of consultations between the parties
in Rimbo. We thank the Government of Sweden and
all other countries that contributed to making that
conference happen. We commend the agreement
on the exchange of prisoners and the statement of
understanding on Taiz. Most importantly, we welcome
with enthusiasm the agreement on the cessation of
hostilities across Al-Hudaydah governorate and in the
ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa. We consider
that arrangement to be a major achievement, as it has
the potential to lead to the much-needed reopening of
the humanitarian corridors.
Poland strongly believes that the outcomes of
consultations in Rimbo are the first significant step
towards a peaceful settlement of the conflict. It is vital
that the parties now deliver on the commitments made
in Sweden. We encourage them to take advantage of
that progress to continue to build trust, as well as to
carry on their engagement with the Special Envoy, in
order to pave the way for the resumption of formal
peace negotiations. We look forward to the next round
of consultations in January. In that vein, we would like
to underscore the need to include underrepresented
groups, including women and young people, in the
political process.
We strongly believe that the support of the
international community, and especially the Security
Council, is also essential to increase the prospect of
peace in Yemen. We therefore stand ready to engage
with our partners in the Council on the draft resolution
that is to be presented by the United Kingdom.
Although we greatly welcome the progress on the
political track, there are still major challenges that need
to be addressed in the weeks to come, including the
reopening of Sana’a airport and measures to improve
the economic situation. We must also remember that
the humanitarian situation still requires urgent action,
including by implementing the five asks presented by
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock. The grave
risk of a widespread famine in Yemen will not be

18-4383313/23

S/PV.8424

The situation in the Middle East

14/12/2018

reduced until unhindered and sustainable deliveries of
humanitarian assistance are guaranteed. That is why
the swift and full implementation of the cessation of
hostilities in Al-Hudaydah is of paramount importance.

lack of women in the delegations in Sweden is deeply
regrettable, particularly after the clear calls made by
the international community to address that ahead of
the consultations.

To conclude, the consultations in Sweden have
proved that despite significant differences, a political
dialogue between the parties is possible. There is
hope for Yemen. There is hope for improvement of the
security situation in the country and for a peaceful
resolution of the conflict. The window of opportunity
is still open.

The parties now need to capitalize on what they
have achieved, put their words into action and create a
conducive environment for talks to resume in January.
More work needs to be done with regard to the reopening
of Sana’a airport, measures to address the economy and,
above all else, a framework for a sustainable, peaceful
political solution with the involvement of women.

Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me first
welcome the new Permanent Representative of Yemen
to the Security Council and to wish him success in
his new function. We thank Martin Griffiths and
Mark Lowcock for their informative briefings. They
presented us with a message of hope but also one of
continued extreme human suffering on the ground.
That human suffering should strengthen our resolve to
take action in the Council.

That brings me to my second point — the persistent
threat of famine in Yemen. Regardless of the positive
developments in Sweden, the humanitarian crisis
remains as alarming as it was two weeks ago. The five
asks of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) to the parties and the international
community remain as pertinent as ever. Already, tens of
thousands of innocent Yemenis have died of completely
avoidable causes, and those staggering numbers will
increase exponentially if the cessation of hostilities in
Al-Hudaydah does not hold. We have reached a point
at which any delay is inexcusable. We need concrete
follow-up by the international community.

The agreement between the parties, particularly
on a cessation of hostilities across Al-Hudaydah
governorate, is an important spark of hope for the
people of Yemen. Yet the threat of famine in Yemen
remains unchanged, as Mr. Lowcock just mentioned.
That means that the need for urgent action from all of
us persists in order not only to support what has been
achieved in Sweden but also to address urgent concerns
on the ground. In that context, I will focus on three
issues: first, the consultations between the parties;
secondly, the threat of famine; and, thirdly, the urgent
need for the Council to follow up.

First of all, we support the further involvement of
the United Nations system in the implementation of
the agreements. We commend the tasking of Patrick
Cammaert with monitoring the implementation of the
agreement, as Mr. Martin Griffiths just mentioned, and
we express our full confidence in him. He is the right
person for the job.

On my first point, we welcome the constructive
participation of the parties involved in the consultations
in Sweden. Like other speakers, we commend the
efforts of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths in bringing
that about, as well as the unwavering support and
involvement of the Secretary-General. We thank
our Swedish colleagues for successfully hosting and
facilitating those consultations, as well as the many
other countries that contributed to making those talks
happen, particularly Yemen.

The Security Council should also take action. We
therefore welcome and strongly support the United
Kingdom’s initiative to back up what has been achieved
in Sweden with a draft resolution, which should back
up the agreement on a cessation of hostilities across
Al-Hudaydah governorate, put humanitarian access
front and centre and include OCHA’s five asks. Let us
adopt a draft resolution as soon as possible next week.
As Mark Lowcock said, humanitarian funding is crucial,
so we thank Switzerland and Sweden for organizing a
pledging conference to be held in February 2019.

The
cessation
of
hostilities
throughout
Al-Hudaydah governorate is a much-needed concrete
result. Once implemented, that will greatly benefit
the ongoing humanitarian efforts. We also welcome
the progress regarding the exchange of prisoners and
the humanitarian corridors into Taiz. However, the

In conclusion, despite those positive developments,
we remain extremely concerned about the millions
of Yemeni people on the brink of starvation. It is the
responsibility of the Council to support the Special
Envoy’s efforts, as well as to urgently address
the humanitarian crisis. The Council has a huge

14/23

18-43833

14/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

responsibility to help end the suffering of the people
of Yemen as soon as possible. Let me end my statement
by quoting Mark Lowcock: “This war has to stop now”.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I join others in
thanking Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock for their clear and comprehensive
updates, and commend them both for their efforts to
bring about a political and humanitarian solution in
Yemen. They can rest assured of our full support in all
their undertakings. My delegation is closely following
the recent developments, and I would like to make two
points today.
First, Kazakhstan welcomes the political consultations
in Sweden and urges all parties to continue to engage
in good faith and without preconditions in the political
process led by the Special Envoy. We are encouraged by
the fact that the consultations took place successfully
and by the confidence-building measures announced,
including the exchange of prisoners, and we hope
that this will move Yemen a step closer to peace. We
believe that the Stockholm declaration — in particular
with regard to the agreement on the city and port of
Al-Hudaydah and the ports of Saleef and Ras Isa; the
joint committee for initiating an agreement on the
exchange of prisoners; and the mutual understanding
concerning Taiz — will have a huge impact on both
the security and humanitarian situation in Yemen. The
implementation of the agreement is crucial because
Al-Hudaydah is the centre of gravity of the war in
Yemen. The ceasefire and withdrawal of all forces from
the port and then from the city will allow for the opening
of the humanitarian corridors to the city of Taiz, which
are important to the survival of those people in Yemen
who are in need of humanitarian aid.
Secondly, we emphasize that all obligations under
international humanitarian law must be respected by
all parties, who must take responsibility to mitigate the
humanitarian situation by fully cooperating with the
United Nations and the relevant humanitarian agencies.
Kazakhstan joins others in urging all to refrain from
damaging critical civilian infrastructure, violence
and indiscriminate bombings that could inflict mass
casualties on innocent civilians. It is also necessary
to address inflation-related issues. The cessation of
hostilities will provide an opportunity to revive the
economy, resolve the humanitarian crisis and restore
basic public services to the population of Yemen. That
is the best way to give those and future consultations a
chance to succeed.

S/PV. 8424

Finally, Kazakhstan expresses its unconditional
support for the Special Envoy’s efforts to achieve
a negotiated political settlement through inclusive
intra-Yemeni dialogue, with the involvement of the
international community, especially the countries of
the region.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Let me first welcome the
new Permanent Representative of Yemen. We wish him
every success in his endeavours.
We thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for
requesting this meeting, and we are most grateful for
the briefings by Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock.
For the first time in more than two years, the
Yemeni parties have made some real, albeit limited,
progress towards peace and stability in the consultations
in Stockholm, facilitated by the United Nations. We
can certainly welcome the agreements reached on
Al-Hudaydah, the establishment, a governorate-wide
ceasefire, the humanitarian corridor for Taiz and the
agreement on the exchange of prisoners. We welcome
the agreement of the parties to discuss a negotiating
framework at their next meeting. Those are certainly all
concrete developments. They offer a real sense of hope,
for almost the first time, for the millions of Yemenis
who continue to suffer from the consequences of the
conflict. Encouragingly, what has been achieved in
Stockholm demonstrates what can be done when there
is a genuine political commitment.
Those consultations are the result of the prolonged
and concerted efforts of many actors. We appreciate
the Yemeni parties, which have engaged seriously and
positively in the talks. We are profoundly grateful for
the tireless diplomatic efforts of the Secretary-General
and his Special Envoy, Martin Griffiths, and thankful
to Sweden for hosting the meeting, the countries of
the region and all others who have contributed. We
commend all their contributions. It is, at last, a start.
The next stage — the implementation of the
agreements reached in Stockholm — is obviously
critical. It will require the parties to continue to work
together and, equally important, to refrain from any
action that could undermine progress. This is a situation
that provides the opportunity for the international
community to demonstrate its support for the parties
to honour their agreements and to insist absolutely
that they do just that. The Council must speak with

18-4383315/23

S/PV.8424

The situation in the Middle East

one voice. The parties must sustain their constructive
engagement with the Special Envoy.
The revitalization of the political process is certainly
a very positive development and most welcome, but
the humanitarian crisis remains, which is of the very
deepest concern. Millions are on the verge of famine.
The economy of Yemen is collapsing. It requires the
total rebuilding of key State institutions and facilities,
as well as urgent and continued stabilization measures.
The scaling up of financial support for a humanitarian
response is now a total necessity, as Mr. Lowcock
underlined after visit his two weeks ago. The only
way to avert a humanitarian catastrophe of almost
unimaginable proportions is urgent and concerted
international effort. There are no alternatives left. It
is essential that we support the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners fully and completely. The
measure of progress must be seen in action on the
ground. It is imperative that life-saving supplies reach
the millions of people in desperate need and that safe
passage be provided for distribution. That will be the
real measure of success in Yemen.
Stockholm has been a very important step forward,
but now we must maintain the momentum and ensure
that the parties engage in the next round of consultations,
both to sustain the political process and to address the
humanitarian crisis. As my Prime Minister recently
underlined in a letter addressed to the Yemeni parties,
it is only the language of dialogue that can end the
unspeakable suffering of the people of Yemen. That is
what the people of Yemen expect and deserve, and we
must provide it for them. In the past, there have been
a number of ceasefires and agreements. We must now
throw the whole weight of the international community
behind persuading the warring sides to de-escalate
the fighting.
In conclusion, the continued diplomatic efforts of
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths have our full support,
as do the United Nations and its humanitarian partners,
in their work to deliver aid for all Yemenis in need. We
call on the Council to show its full support for both
the political process and the humanitarian work of the
United Nations in order to demonstrate its own unity of
purpose to bring an end to the suffering of the people
of Yemen.
Mr. Elé Ela (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish):
I welcome the presence among us of Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
16/23

14/12/2018

Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, and thank them for the informative,
clear and comprehensive briefings that they have just
delivered on the most recent developments and hopes
for peace in the Yemeni conflict.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea wishes to
express its satisfaction at the initial success of the
meeting held in the Swedish city of Rimbo between
6 and 13 of this month, and thanks the Government of
Sweden, through its representative, for having hosted
that important meeting. We also wish to thank the
delegation of Yemen for having attended that meeting,
as well as the United Nations and other international
stakeholders that either directly or indirectly made it
possible to convene that important meeting.
Three months after the Geneva meeting, which
failed to gather all of the relevant parties to the conflict,
and just a few weeks before the end of the year, we
have finally received information that gives hope to
the victims in Yemen and the international community
regarding the future of the country. We believe that this
has been an important step in allowing real progress
to be made towards future talks to put an end to
the conflict.
However, our experience of international politics
and this very Council urges caution and vigilance.
It is now vital that all parties directly or indirectly
involved in the conflict come together to work towards
implementing the minimum agreed terms of this initial
phase of peace talks, including a ceasefire in the entire
western province of Al-Hudaydah, a prisoner exchange
agreement and the withdrawal of troops from the said
disputed port city, among other measures. From the
outset of our meetings on the matter, we have all called
for the cessation of hostilities in Al-Hudaydah and its
surrounding area, owing to the strategic importance of
its port for humanitarian operations. Now that that has
been granted by the consensus of all national parties,
we hope that it will be meticulously respected by all
parties involved in the Yemeni conflict.
We hope that the session of consultations that
concluded yesterday in Sweden will be the beginning
of an irreversible solution to the differences that divide
the parties in Yemen today, in order to save its people of
Yemen a conflict that has denied them of their human
dignity and means of subsistence, such as water, food,
electricity, infrastructure and other services, in addition
18-43833

14/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

to an already destroyed economy that has brought
the country to its knees and left it rudderless. In that
regard, it is important that this new process and any
possible actions of the Council take into account the
five proposals made by Mr. Mark Lowcock to alleviate
the desperate humanitarian situation.
Finally, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea wishes
to express its full support for the efforts of the United
Nations in Yemen, especially the mediation of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Martin Griffiths, given that his initiative to launch
the dialogue process is crucial to our common goal of
bringing peace to “the forgotten conflict in Yemen”,
to paraphrase his earlier remarks, in the hope that the
next session of consultations, scheduled for the end of
January, will see progressive progress towards reaching
the light at the end of the tunnel. We encourage the
parties to the conflict to respect this new process.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I wish to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths
and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their
comprehensive briefings. Their efforts to restore peace
and stability in Yemen and improve the humanitarian
situation in the country are highly appreciated.
China welcomes the important progress achieved in
the intra-Yemeni talks in Sweden. The United Nations
and Special Envoy Griffiths overcame all manner
of difficulties and worked with the Yemeni parties
with great perseverance. Secretary-General Guterres
went to Sweden in person to lend his support to the
consultations and push for breakthroughs in the Yemeni
issue, which China applauds. The Kingdom of Sweden
hosted the consultations and members of the group of
19 attended the event, making important contributions
to the overall success of the consultations. The Yemeni
parties made important decisions in the interest of
their country’s future and the well-being of the Yemeni
people, thereby ending the impasse, which we welcome.
We are pleased to note the important outcomes of
the consultations in Sweden, namely, the agreement on
a ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah, a mutual understanding on
Taiz and an executive mechanism on activating a prisoner
exchange agreement. More significantly, the Yemeni
parties agreed to host the next round of consultations,
scheduled for the end of January, to discuss a framework
document to facilitate further political negotiations in
Yemen. The Swedish consultations therefore mark a
good start and their significance is threefold.

S/PV. 8424

First, the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah governorate
was achieved ahead of schedule, which will help
to prevent any further deterioration of the Yemeni
economy or humanitarian situation. Secondly, the
event has the potential to become a key turning point
in the situation in Yemen, as well as the starting point
for a new political process that will help the parties in
Yemen to build mutual trust. Thirdly, it brings hope to
the people of Yemen and the international community
as a whole. It is inspiring and boosts morale.
Having said all of that, the challenges now
confronting the political efforts to resolve the Yemeni
issue are also threefold, to say the least.
First, Yemen’s national security and economic woes
have been snowballing for many years. The problems
are chronic and deep-rooted and defy an easy fix,
while the broader context remains fragile. Secondly,
a ceasefire has yet to be achieved across the whole of
Yemen. We cannot afford to underestimate the risk of
further military friction or conflict escalation. Thirdly,
major differences remain between the intra-Yemeni
parties and the foundations of confidence are still shaky.
It is particularly important to avoid misunderstandings
and accidents.
As the situation currently stands, we believe that
the international community should rise to action on
three fronts.
First, we must ensure the implementation in good
faith of the consultations in Sweden. Efforts should
be made to push the Yemeni parties to implement an
immediate ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah governorate within
the agreed time frame, complete the redeployment
of the respective forces as scheduled, implement the
prisoner exchange agreement and seek solutions to
the Taiz issue. By fully exercising the United Nations
oversight function in the port of Al-Hudaydah and
taking advantage of the favourable external conditions,
including the ceasefire agreement and redeployment of
troops, the United Nations should work to ensure safe,
swift and unhindered access to Yemen for commercial
and humanitarian supplies to be delivered as soon as
possible to the Yemeni population, effectively reduce
the risk of famine and provide the injured and sick with
much-needed treatment.
Secondly, we must build on the Sweden
consultations and facilitate a sustainable and effective
dialogue in the negotiations process. The Yemeni
parties should continue their consultations on the

18-4383317/23

S/PV.8424

The situation in the Middle East

opening of Sana’a airport to commercial flights and the
payment of salaries to Yemen’s public-sector staff. The
parties should agree at a practicable agreement as soon
as possible and build greater mutual trust. We look
forward to the parties in Yemen reaching an agreement
on a framework document for political negotiations
at the end of January to implement a ceasefire across
the whole of Yemen and establish a comprehensive
package, including political and security arrangements.
Thirdly, the United Nations must continue to play
a leading role in mediation and good offices. The
Council should continue to lend political support to the
intra-Yemeni peace talks and urge regional countries
to continue to provide constructive assistance to that
end. The international community should increase its
humanitarian assistance and provide targeted support,
including food, medical and financial assistance. Yemen
should receive support in improving its economic
situation, stabilizing prices and ensuring the safe,
timely and unhindered humanitarian access to meet the
basic needs of the Yemeni population.
There is no alternative to the political track in
striving to resolve the Yemeni issue. There is no military
solution that can secure lasting peace. The international
community should maintain Yemen’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity, while
supporting efforts to achieve an inclusive solution,
through dialogue and negotiation, based on resolution
2216 (2015), including the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its implementation mechanism and the
outcomes of Yemen’s National Dialogue Conference.
China has been consistently committed to advancing
the political settlement process in Yemen. The Chinese
Ambassador to Yemen was present throughout the entire
process of the consultations held in Sweden. China,
along with the rest of the international community, will
continue to support the United Nations in advancing
the Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned political settlement
process, with a view to reaching an early solution
leading to a comprehensive, lasting and effective
settlement of the Yemeni issue.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation is grateful
for the briefing provided by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths.
We take this opportunity to express to him our utmost
support and our gratitude for his tireless ongoing
efforts to achieve a negotiated solution to the conflict in
18/23

14/12/2018

Yemen. We are grateful also for the briefing delivered
by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, Mr. Mark Lowcock.
My delegation welcomes and commends the active
and constructive participation of the parties to the
Yemeni conflict in the United Nations-led conference
hosted by the Government of Sweden. The outcome of
the conference provides a glimmer of hope that must
continue to shine ever brighter until we can achieve a
peaceful, negotiated solution to the delicate situation
prevailing in Yemen.
We take this opportunity to convey to the
Government and the people of Sweden our sincere
gratitude and appreciation for their contribution to
ensuring the holding of this important event. We also
express our utmost gratitude to the Special Envoy for
all the consultations and negotiations held and the
measures taken to ensure that the necessary forum for
constructive dialogue was in place, as was seen during
the conference.
We also commend the role played by various
Member States, including Oman, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia,
the United Arab Emirates and the permanent members
of the Council. We wish to highlight also the leadership
of the Secretary-General, António Guterres, in this
important undertaking.
There can be no doubt that one of the most
important achievements of the conference was the
signing of the agreement on a ceasefire in the port
and city of Al-Hudaydah and on the withdrawal of all
armed groups from the ports of Saleef and Ras Isa.
The implementation and oversight of the agreement
will be entrusted to a committee comprising the
United Nations and the parties to the conflict. We
would also underscore the commitment undertaken by
parties to grant an active role to the United Nations in
supporting the Yemen Red Sea Ports Corporation in
the administration of the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa. The agreement provides for the income
generated at those ports to be directly transferred to the
Central Bank of Yemen for the benefit of the population
at large.
We also take note of the progress made towards
continued talks between the parties in order to agree upon
the future reopening of Sana’a airport, and we highlight
the measures taken to initiate a dialogue on the situation
in Taiz and on the implementation of the prisoner
exchange agreement as a confidence-building measure.
18-43833

14/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

It is important to bear in mind that after four years
of clashes and violence, it is the civilian population that
has been the most acutely affected by the scourge of
war, as has been eloquently stated by Mr. Lowcock.
We must recall also that more than 10,000 people have
died and more than 2 million have been internally
displaced. Food insecurity afflicts approximately two
thirds of the population, 8 million of whom are on the
brink of famine. This grave situation represents a threat
that must be contained and mitigated through effective
measures, which will be possible only if all parties
commit to facilitating the safe and unhindered entry
of humanitarian assistance, food and basic consumer
goods, which are crucial to the survival of the
population in general and especially for the more than
400,000 children suffering from acute malnutrition,
who require urgent assistance.
In that respect, we call on the parties to maintain
the spirit of commitment and dialogue that prevailed
at the conference and to fully implement and adhere to
the agreements reached, as well as to continue to work
unconditionally with the Special Envoy to continue the
dialogue in January next year, in order to ultimately
achieve an agreement that benefits the Yemeni people
and promotes their well-being.
We also appeal to the members of the Council
to maintain the unity that is necessary to effectively
support the aforementioned efforts.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Martin Griffiths, for his
detailed briefing on the recent round of intra-Yemeni
consultations held in Sweden, as well as to UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock for his overview of
the humanitarian situation in the Republic of Yemen.
We thank the Government of Sweden for its assistance
in preparing and holding these extremely important
negotiations, and we welcome the new Permanent
Representative of Yemen to the United Nations.
Like many other members of the Security Council,
we would like to believe that in the light of the agreements
arrived at in Stockholm, we are entering a new stage in
the conflict in Yemen. We hope that through further
concerted efforts we can establish a ceasefire throughout
the country and help the millions of Yemeni civilians in
dire need of one kind or another of aid and who are
starving and have no access to the necessary medical
treatment and medicines. Mr. Lowcock’s briefing gives

S/PV. 8424

a clear picture of the scale of the humanitarian crisis in
Yemen, now the worst in the world. The Rubicon that
we have reached as a result of the process launched
in Sweden must now be crossed. That will hinge on
implementing the agreements reached during the first
round of the intra-Yemeni consultations. We must all
give the Special Envoy our collective support.
We believe that the first task is facilitating the
implementation of the ceasefire agreement and the
withdrawal of troops from Al-Hudaydah port and city.
Success in that area is important not only to advancing
the de-escalation process throughout the country but
also to ensuring the sustained delivery of humanitarian
and commercial cargo to Yemen’s northern regions,
where the majority of the country’s population is living.
We must also assist as much as we possibly can, with
United Nations participation, in establishing a bilateral
coordination committee to monitor the disengagement
of forces in Al-Hudaydah. We believe this part of the
agreement package is critical to Mr. Griffiths’ further
mediation efforts including in the context of the holding
of a new round of talks early next year.
We welcome the other important mutual
understandings that will help to bring the parties to the
conflict to a new level of dialogue and trust, achieved
with Mr. Griffiths’ active coordination. This applies
to the agreements on the exchange of thousands of
prisoners of war, which will be implemented before
the end of January 2019 under the oversight of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, and on the
modalities for resuming oil and gas exports.
We would like to highlight the Special envoy’s
enormous professionalism and the Secretary-General’s
personal contribution to the successful completion of
the Stockholm talks. Russia has also contributed to
facilitating progress in the intra-Yemeni negotiation
process in its national capacity, as a permanent member
of the Security Council and as a member of the Group
of 19. In our view, the support to Mr. Griffiths’
efforts in Sweden provided by representatives of the
international community was virtually ideal. We felt
that the cohesive efforts of the five permanent members
of the Security Council were particularly helpful to the
Special Envoy at critical moments, and we think this
effective assistance format should be made permanent.
Some equally important issues remain unresolved,
however, specifically regarding the economic front and
the airport in Sana’a, and which the Yemenis will have

18-4383319/23

S/PV.8424

The situation in the Middle East

to agree on in subsequent negotiation rounds. Needless
to say, the prospects for their resolution depend a great
deal on maintaining the political will of the conflicting
parties to implement the agreements that have already
been reached. Our shared goal is to keep the political
process afloat so that it is the political dialogue that
sets the tone for the developments on the ground rather
than the other way around. That is the only way to
make progress in ending this bloody war, which has
done colossal damage to Yemen’s economy and people.
We have the power to remedy the situation. We must
act collectively. We call for further joint efforts in
support of United Nations efforts in Yemen. There can
be no military solution to the conflict there, and the
sole priority must be focusing on the Yemeni people’s
interests.
Russia is open to cooperation in settling the
conflict in Yemen as well as in advancing peace and
stability throughout the Middle East. We consider
Russia’s concept for security and cooperation in the
Persian Gulf — and, ultimately, the entire Middle
East — very relevant. We will continue our efforts to
implement it in consultation with all interested parties.
We firmly believe that it will enable us to exchange the
atmosphere of threat and confrontation in the region for
one of dialogue and cooperation.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
I would like to begin by welcoming the presence
among us of the new Permanent Representative of
Yemen and wishing him every success in his duties.
I would also like to thank the countries of the Gulf
region, especially Kuwait, Oman and Saudi Arabia,
for making it possible to foster hope at the meeting
in Stockholm. I also thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their
briefings, which underscored the need for the Security
Council to remain united and engaged in the quest for
durable solutions to the serious social, political and
humanitarian crisis that has gripped Yemen for the past
four years.
My delegation welcomes this briefing following
the consultations that have been being held since
6 December in Stockholm between representatives of
the Yemeni Government and the Houthi rebels. That
20/23

14/12/2018

is a testament to what humankind is capable of when
will and good faith are in abundance. Let us recall that
the purpose of those consultations was to establish a
framework conducive to constructive exchanges on
thorny issues between the protagonists, as well as to
build confidence in order to facilitate the settlement of
the political and humanitarian crisis in Yemen.
My country thanks the Swedish authorities for
hosting those important consultations to give peace
a chance in Yemen. We were satisfied to note the
personal commitment of Secretary-General António
Guterres, which led to the success of the negotiations
in Stockholm. My delegation welcomes the fact that, in
a context of heightened tensions, the consultations led
to an agreement that, among other things, focuses on an
immediate ceasefire in the port city of Al-Hudaydah,
a strategic city through which more than 75 per cent
of humanitarian aid passes, the redeployment of
forces outside the city within a maximum of 21 days
starting from the entry into force of the ceasefire, the
establishment of a joint committee, overseen by the
United Nations, to oversee redeployment and mine
clearance, and the cessation of hostilities in the besieged
city of Taiz, which should be accessible again thanks to
the opening of humanitarian corridors.
My delegation welcomes the relative calm observed
over the past few days in the Yemeni theatre of conflict,
as well as the signing of the agreement reached
prior to the beginning of the talks. That includes the
exchange of more than 15,000 prisoners, thanks to the
mediation of Special Envoy Griffiths. The inter-Yemeni
consultations that just concluded in Stockholm generate
new hope for peace and could also serve as a prelude to
the end of the suffering endured by the Yemeni people
since the outbreak of hostilities — which have plunged
this country into one of the most worst humanitarian
crises, according to the United Nations. In that regard,
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the strong and encouraging
gesture of the symbolic handshake between the Yemeni
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the representative of
the Houthi rebels, in the presence of the SecretaryGeneral.
Despite the hope kindled by the talks for an end
to the crisis in Yemen, several points of contention
remain. I refer to the reopening of Sana’a airport to
international civilian traffic and its oversight and,
ultimately, political arrangements between the parties
to the conflict for the final settlement of this crisis. My
delegation remains concerned about the development of
18-43833

14/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

those troublesome issues and calls on the belligerents
to remain willing to continue discussions, without
preconditions, in accordance with the commitments
made at the end of the Stockholm consultations, with
a view to holding upcoming negotiations scheduled
for January.
My country commends and encourages the organs
and agencies of the United Nations system for their
efforts to restore peace in Yemen. We also congratulate
the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for their
involvement in the peace process in the region. My
delegation hopes that all efforts undertaken by the
international community will lead to lasting solutions
for the well-being of the Yemeni people, as well as for
security and stability on the Arabian peninsula.
Finally, Côte d’Ivoire calls for a peaceful and
definitive settlement of the crisis, with respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Yemen, in the
interest of its people. We also urge all stakeholders
to strengthen the negotiating framework to render
it more inclusive, in line with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
presiding over the Security Council this month. I wish
you and the friendly delegation of Côte d’Ivoire all the
best. I would also like to thank you for giving us this
opportunity to address the Council.
I wish to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark
Lowcock for their valuable briefings and efforts. On
behalf of the Government and the people of Yemen, I
would like to express my thanks and appreciation to
the Government and the people of Sweden for hosting
the round of consultations on Yemen held from 6 to
13 December. I would also like to express my sincere
thanks and appreciation to Secretary-General António
Guterres for his personal commitment to, and interest
in, supporting the efforts at bringing peace to Yemen, as
well as for attending the final consultations in Sweden.
We have come to this meeting today filled with
great hope and optimism thanks to what was achieved in
the consultations that concluded yesterday in Sweden,
which focused on confidence-building measures.
Although we had greater hopes to bring to an end to

S/PV. 8424

everything causing the suffering of the Yemeni people,
we remain cautious due to our previous experiences,
especially as the Houthi militias have not only shown
a lack of commitment to previous agreements but have
in fact turned against them every time. We have signed
more than 75 agreements with those militias since the
start of their aggression, which has been sponsored by
Iran for four years. They did not implement their side
of the agreements.
We look forward to the United Nations shouldering
its responsibility for implementing the agreements.
What was recently agreed upon with the Houthis will
remain a dead letter until implemented on the ground.
That would then reflect their sincere intentions and pave
the way towards further positive steps on other matters.
In that regard, we highly appreciate the efforts made
by Special Envoy Griffiths and his team, as well as the
countries sponsoring the political process in Yemen,
particularly our brothers in the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, the State of Kuwait
and the Sultanate of Oman. Their efforts facilitated
the holding and success of that round of consultations,
as well as reaching an agreement to put an end to the
suffering of hostages, prisoners, detainees and those
who have been missing and forcefully disappeared or
abducted. The return of those people will ensure smiles
on the faces of their mothers, children and parents. In
addition, the efforts made have led to an agreement on
the withdrawal from the port city of Al-Hudaydah and
the declaration of understanding on Taiz.
The Government of Yemen has made many
concessions to end the suffering, which continues to
burden the living conscience of everyone. We have
said time and again that we stand ready to go all the
way to bring peace to Yemen, because we are the ones
most keen to end the suffering of our people. We will
seize any serious opportunity to bring about real,
just, comprehensive and sustainable peace, based on
the three terms of reference agreed upon, namely, the
Gulf Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the
outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015).
The Government of Yemen reaffirms that it will
continue its sincere efforts to reach peaceful solutions
that put an end to the coup d’état, restore the legitimate
State institutions and resume the political process from
where it was stopped before the coup. His Excellency
President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi of the Republic of

18-4383321/23

S/PV.8424

The situation in the Middle East

Yemen emphasized that the Yemeni Government is
ready to participate anywhere and anytime in any future
peace consultations, on the condition that the Houthi
militias actually implement what was in Sweden.
We had also hoped to reach agreement on the
remaining issues, such as taking confidence-building
measures concerning the opening of Sana’a airport,
ending the siege on the city of Taiz and reaching an
economic agreement. However, the intransigence of
the Houthis, backed by Iran, and their insistence on
continuing the suffering of the Yemeni people have
squandered our hope.
We recently heard members of the Security Council
and the international community in this Chamber
express their deep concern for the continued Iranian
support to the Houthi militias, including supplying
them with missiles and weapons, in clear violation of
international resolutions, especially resolutions 2216
(2015) and 2231 (2015). Iran continues to destabilize
the region through its Houthi proxies and Hizbullah
in Lebanon and other countries of the region. The
Iranian regime will not succeed with that policy, and
Yemenis will not accept such a policy of destabilizing
security and stability. Iran must end its malice and stop
interfering in the internal affairs of my country. The
international community must bring further pressure to
bear on the Iranian regime so as to alleviate the suffering
of the Iranian people and harness its resources for the
prosperity of its people, instead of leveraging support
for terrorist groups and its proxies in the region.
The Government of Yemen undertook a number
of measures to face the economic breakdown and
deterioration of its currency, as well as to restore the
Yemeni economy from the black market to the formal
banking system. It also undertook measures to manage
and regulate the demand on foreign currency. The most
important results from the package of decisions and
measures undertaken by the Government are as follows.
First, we succeeded in halting the economic
breakdown and bringing about relative stability to the
local currency, by promoting its value against foreign
currencies. The exchange rate of the Yemeni Rial
against the dollar moved from 840 rials to the dollar to
approximately 450 rials recently.
Second, we restored a large part of cash and
commercial transactions from the black market to
the formal banking sector, which is committed to
the international requirements and standards of
22/23

14/12/2018

transparency and combating the financing of terrorism
and money laundering, especially after the Houthi
militias used such money during the previous period
in the black market in order to finance their activities
after they took control of the Central Bank in Sana’a
in 2015.
Third, we have provided financial and banking
services and the necessary foreign currency to import
basic foodstuffs to all Yemeni governorates at adequate
prices, which are lower than the prices on the black
market. That led to the availability of commodities
in all governorates at reduced prices by all traders, as
a result of the efforts of the legitimate Government
to promote food security and restore its normalcy
throughout the governorates.
Fourth, we have curbed the use of petroleum
products and derivatives to finance armed groups and
undertake money laundering, while reactivating the
monitoring and regulating mechanisms to help achieve
peace, enhance State institutions and promote our
national economy.
Fifth, we have restored and regularized the payment
of pensions in all governorates by the legitimate
Government, despite the fact that the coup militias have
confiscated the balances of different pension funds and
institutions from the Central Bank in Sana’a.
Sixth, we have established an integrated system
of procedures and execution plans on promoting State
resources and rationalizing expenses to ensure the
sustained and organized payment of salaries for civil
servants all over the country.
Seventh, we are coordinating intensively with our
brothers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to implement
reconstruction and development programmes in
Yemen. Works have started on the ground through the
Saudi programme for reconstruction and development
in some governorates in Yemen, especially by
providing the necessary oil derivatives for generating
electricity at a monthly cost of $60 million. That will
enhance the ability of the Government to shoulder
its responsibilities, particularly to pay salaries and
improve the humanitarian situation.
The Government cannot undertake its economic
and humanitarian responsibilities throughout Yemen
without the support of the international community in
all areas, or do so without compelling the coup militias
to cease their activities and measures that lead only to
18-43833

14/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

further humanitarian and economic deterioration in
Yemen. Hence, the following should be implemented.
First, the relevant State institutions must be
allowed to undertake their independent national duties
and shoulder their responsibilities to safeguard the
humanitarian and economic situations, especially the
Yemeni Central Bank, the Ministry of Finance and all
other affiliated institutions.
Secondly, coup militias must be stopped from
carrying out practices that terrorize traders, banks and
bankers. The aim is to benefit from the services and
opportunities provided by the legitimate Government
based in the interim capital, Aden.
Thirdly, all sovereign State revenues must be
deposited in the Central Bank, under the supervision
of the Ministry of Finance and the Yemeni legitimate
Government, and the imposition of illegal fees and
levies on the citizens must be halted.
Fourthly, freedom of trade and the movement must
be allowed for commodities and money transfers among
various governorates and bank branches and traders.
Fifthly, exports of oil derivatives must resume,
including ensuring their safe passage from areas that
are under the control of the coup militias.
Sixthly, coup militias must be stopped from
interfering in the trade in oil derivatives and stop
promoting the black market, especially when those
militias sell at 150 per cent more than the regular prices,
which worsens the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation and the suffering of the citizens and could
lead to the collapse of the local currency.
Seventhly, all international organizations working
in Yemen or supporting it must make all their financial
transactions through the Central Bank of Yemen.

S/PV. 8424

Based on our national responsibilities towards
our citizens, the Government of Yemen has attached
great importance and priority to the humanitarian
issue over the past four years, including launching its
decentralization relief and humanitarian programme.
Thanks to that programme, we have designated land
and sea corridors in Yemen that will ensure the flow of
humanitarian and relief assistance to the most-affected
people and regions. The Government remains focused
on alleviating the suffering of the Yemeni people
and ensuring the delivery of humanitarian assistance
throughout Yemen. In that regard, we highly commend
the generous aid provided by the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, the State of Kuwait
and all other sisterly and friendly countries.
The Government of Yemen welcomes the pledging
conference to be held on 26 February 2019 under the
auspices of the Secretary-General and the Governments
of Sweden and Switzerland. We call upon friendly
donor countries to support the humanitarian response
plan and make their pledges in order to fill the financial
gap and address the deteriorating economic situation
in Yemen.
In conclusion, the outcome of the consultations
held in Sweden is a serious step towards building trust.
It bodes well for achieving peace, which is awaited by
the great people of Yemen. The Government of Yemen
continues to offer concessions, regardless of how
difficult they are, to achieve sustainable peace based
on the agreed upon terms of reference, because we
believe that war is launched by fools and peace is made
by the courageous.
We call on the Council to work on implementing
its resolutions on the situation in Yemen, especially
resolution 2216 (2015), in order to put an end to the
conflict. We do not need more resolutions.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

18-4383323/23
