IV.

15. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Department of Public Information continues to develop ac­
tive links with a broad spectrum of international and regional
news organizations to encourage more media coverage of
United Nations activities;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Department of Public Information continues and further
strengthens its co-operation with the non-aligned countries
in the field of information, particularly with the Pool of
l'r m-Aligned News Agencies as well as with the regional
.icWs agencies of developing countries, and in this regard
requests that the Department should be adequately equipped
to supply the Pool of Non-Aligned News Agencies, as well
as the regional news agencies of the developing countries,
with information on the activities of the United Nations
system which they are redisseminating;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to consider the pos­
sibility that the Department of Public Information should
receive the daily dispatches of the Pool of Non-Aligned
News Agencies and the regional news agencies of devel­
oping countries in the interest of more balance in the sources
of information used by the Department;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Department of Public Information extends and strengthens
its co-operation with the national news agencies of devel­
oping countries;
19. Notes the important role of the United Nations in­
formation centres and their unique position to co-operate
directly with national media and disseminators of infor­
mation in their areas;
20. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To take appropriate steps to strengthen the capacity
of the information centres where needed;
(b) To present, on the basis of consultations between
the Department of Public Information and other United
Nations bodies concerned, drawing on the findings of the
Joint Inspection Unit in its report, 39 the Secretary-General's
comments thereon40 and the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit on co-ordination in the field of public information
activities,41 a study on ways and means to enhance the role
of the information centres, along policy guidelines set by
the General Assembly, focusing on measures to increase
the functional flexibility of the centres, enable them to adjust
their work to the needs and wishes of the countries con­
cerned, enhance the effectiveness of their work and improve
the co-ordination of their activities as the decentralized part
of the structure of the Department of Public Information;
21. Reaffirms the importance of the role played by De­
velopment Forum and its decision that the continued pub­
lication of that periodical as an interagency project is
essential and requests the Secretary-General to conclude his
review of its financial status, to continue to seek to ensure
long-term financial support for that publication from the
organizations of the United Nations system and to report
on this subject to the Committee on Information at its next
session;
22. Stresses the importance of the presentation in
United Nations publications of various points of view and
experiences, in particular information about the efforts of
the developing countries towards their economic, social and
cultural progress;
23. Requests the Secretary-General as far as possible
within existing resources to implement fully the recom­
mendations of the Committee on Information as well as to
A/341379.
A/341379/Add. I.
41
A/36/218.
39

40

9S

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

continue implementation of the recommendations set out in
section III of General Assembly resolution 35/20 I and of
the recommendations of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the
Committee on Information42 as approved by the Assembly
in its resolution 35/201;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the
progress made in implementing the recommendations men­
tioned in paragraph 23 above to the Committee on Infor­
mation at its next substantive session;
25. Requests the Committee on Information to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the im­
plementation of the present resolution to the General As­
sembly at its thirty-seventh session;
27. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of the
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Questions relating
to information".

100th plenary meeting
16 December 1981

36/150.

Israel's decision to build a canal linking the
Mediterranean Sea to the Dead Sea

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Geneva Convention relative to the Protec­

tion of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949, 43
Reaffirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention
to all Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, in­
cluding Jerusalem,
Taking into account that the Israeli project to build a canal
linking the Mediterranean Sea and the Dead Sea is in vio­
lation of the rules of international law, in particular those
relating to the fundamental rights and duties of States,
Also taking into account that this project. if completed,
will cause direct and irreparable damage to the rights and
the legitimate vital interests of Jordan and of the Palestinian
people,
Expressing concern that the proposed canal. to be con­
structed partly through the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967, will violate the principles of international law.
1. Demands that Israel cease forthwith the implemen­
tation of its project of a canal linking the Mediterranean Sea
and the Dead Sea;
2. Requests the Security Council to consider initiating
measures to halt the execution of this project;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and submit
to the General Assembly and the Security Council, by 30
June 1982, a study on the Israeli canal and its effects on
Jordan and the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967;
4. Calls upon all States not to assist, either directly or
indirectly, in the preparation for and the execution of this
project and to urge the compliance of national and inter­
national corporations to this effect;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Israel's decision
to build a canal linking the Mediterranean Sea to the Dead
Sea".

100th plenary meeting
16 December 1981

42
Official Records of the General Assembl_v. Thirrv-fi.fth Session. Sup­
plement No. 21 (A/35/21). annex, sect V.
41
United Nations. Treatv Series. vol. 75. No. 97J, p. 287.
