S/PRST/2001/30

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 October 2001
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4401st meeting of the Security Council, held on 31 October 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council, having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 11 October 2001 (S/2001/963) and having held a public meeting on
19 October 2001 (S/PV.4392 and S/PV.4392 resumption 1), reaffirms its
commitment to a comprehensive and lasting settlement of the situation in
Somalia, consistent with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
and bearing in mind its respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and unity of Somalia.
“The Security Council reiterates its support for the outcome of the Arta
peace conference, the establishment of the Transitional National Assembly and
the Transitional National Government. It encourages the Transitional National
Government to continue, in the spirit of constructive dialogue, the process of
engaging all groups in the country, including in the north-eastern and northwestern areas, with the view to preparing for the installation of permanent
governance arrangements through the democratic process.
“The Security Council believes that the Arta peace process continues to
be the most viable basis for peace and national reconciliation in Somalia. It
urges the Transitional National Government, political and traditional leaders
and factions in Somalia to make every effort to complete, without
preconditions, the peace and reconciliation process through dialogue and
involvement of all parties in a spirit of mutual accommodation and tolerance.
It calls on all parties to refrain from actions that undermine the Arta peace
process. The Council emphasizes that while the search for a national solution
continues, unwavering attention must be paid to achieving local political
settlements as well.
“The Security Council expresses its support for the Transitional National
Government’s ongoing efforts to enhance security in the Mogadishu area and
to make operational the National Commission for Reconciliation and Property
Settlement, which should be independent, as foreseen in the Transitional
National Charter. The Council emphasizes the necessity for efforts against
international terrorism in accordance with resolution 1373 (2001) of 28
September 2001 and welcomes the stated intention of the Transitional National
01-61219 (E) 311001

*0161219*

S/PRST/2001/30

Government to take steps in this regard. The Council urges the international
community, including through the Counterterrorism Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), to provide assistance to Somalia for the
implementation of the aforementioned resolution.
“The Security Council calls on the concerned States in the Horn of Africa
to contribute constructively to the peace efforts in Somalia. It emphasizes that
the situation in Somalia and the objective of long-term regional stability can
most effectively be addressed if neighbouring States play a positive role,
including in the process of rebuilding national institutions in Somalia.
“The Security Council acknowledges Djibouti’s major contribution to the
Arta peace process and welcomes its continued role in this regard. It
encourages the Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD), the
Organization of African Unity/African Union and the League of Arab States to
enhance their efforts to promote peace in Somalia.
“The Security Council calls on all States and other actors to comply
scrupulously with the arms embargo established by resolution 733 (1992) of 23
January 1992. The Council insists that all States, in particular those of the
region, should not interfere in the internal affairs of Somalia. Such interference
could jeopardize the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence
and unity of Somalia.
“The Security Council insists that the territory of Somalia should not be
used to undermine stability in the subregion.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the attack on 13 October 2001
on a police station in Mogadishu, in which a number of officers and civilians
were killed. It reiterates its condemnation of the attack on 27 March 2001 on
the compound of Medicins sans Frontieres in Mogadishu and the subsequent
abduction of international personnel, and demands that those responsible must
be brought to justice. The Council notes that these attacks were launched at the
same time as the consideration of a possible United Nations peace-building
mission for Somalia.
“The Council emphasizes that no measure of violence can alleviate the
plight of the Somali people nor bring stability, peace or security to their
country. It calls for an immediate end to all acts of violence in Somalia.
Deliberate acts of violence should not be allowed to prevent the rehabilitation
of Somalia’s governing structures and the restoration of the rule of law
throughout the country. In this context, the Council condemns the leaders of
those armed factions who remain outside the peace process and continue to be
obstacles to peace and stability in Somalia.
“The Security Council expresses concern about the humanitarian
situation in Somalia, in particular in southern areas, and in the Bay, Bakool,
Gedo and Hiran regions due to the expected food insecurity and lack of rainfall
in the October-December period. It draws attention to the urgent need for
international assistance, inter alia, in covering food and water shortfalls,
thereby also combating potentially further destabilizing stress migration and
prevalence of disease. Noting that problems in livestock exports have also
been a major influence in worsening the economic and humanitarian situation,

2

S/PRST/2001/30

the Council calls on all States and on all authorities within Somalia to
cooperate in efforts to allow the resumption of such exports.
“The Security Council notes with satisfaction that the United Nations, the
Red Cross movement and non-governmental organizations continue to provide
humanitarian and development assistance to all areas of Somalia. The Council
calls upon all parties in Somalia to respect fully the security and safety of
personnel of the United Nations, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and non-governmental organizations, and to guarantee their complete freedom
of movement and access throughout Somalia. The Council calls on Member
States to respond urgently and generously to the United Nations Consolidated
Inter-Agency Appeal for 2001, for which only 16 per cent of the identified
needs have been financially provided thus far.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to take the
following steps in support of the peace process in Somalia:
(i) Dispatch a headquarters-led inter-agency mission to carry out a
comprehensive assessment, based on the existing general United Nations
standards, of the security situation in Somalia, including in Mogadishu;
(ii) Prepare proposals for how the United Nations may further assist in
the demobilization of militia members, and the training of police
personnel from the Transitional National Government;
(iii) Invite donors to make contributions to the trust fund for peacebuilding in Somalia, to be put in place as proposed in the 19 December
2000 report of the Secretary-General (S/2000/1211), with a view to
facilitate targeted activities in line with proposals developed pursuant to
paragraph (ii) above;
(iv) Consider the scope for adjustments, as appropriate, to the mandate
for the United Nations Political Office for Somalia;
(v) Consult all concerned on finding practical and constructive ways of
achieving the following objectives:
(a)

promoting coherency of policy approaches towards Somalia
and consolidating support for peace and reconciliation in the
country;

(b)

facilitating exchange of information; and

(c)

finding ways and means of drawing attention to Somalia’s
needs related to national reconciliation and development.

The effort to achieve the objectives stated in subparagraphs (a), (b) and
(c) above should have a focus in the region and include close interaction
with IGAD and its Partners Forum (IPF), the Organization of African
Unity/African Union, the League of Arab States and the Security
Council;
(vi) Intensify, through urgent contacts with donor countries and relevant
non-governmental organizations, the efforts for humanitarian and
development assistance in Somalia; and

3

S/PRST/2001/30

(vii) Submit reports, at least every four months, on the situation in
Somalia and the efforts to promote the peace process, including updates
on the scope and contingency planning for launching a peace-building
mission for Somalia. The next report, due on 31 January 2002, should
provide an update on the activities undertaken pursuant to paragraphs (i)
to (vi) above.
“The Security Council remains seized of the matter.”

4
