SECURITY COUNCIL ’
OFFICIAL

REC0RD.S

THIRTIETH

YEAR

1863rd

MEETING:

13 DECEMBER

1975uN

~j~p&~y

JUN 15 1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

.,

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1863) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.....*...

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/11900 and Add.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..: . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.1863

.

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplrtnet~ts of the O&%~‘crlW~WYI~of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted’ in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions cud
Decv’siot~s qf the Setwity
Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1863rd MEETING
Held in New York on Saturday, 13 December 1975, at 2 p.m.
Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

President:

Present:
The remesentatives
of the followinn
States: Byelorussian-Soviet
Socialist Republic, China,
Costa Rida, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.

Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

that the Council agrees and I shall, at the appropriate
time, invite him to come to the Council table to make a
statement.

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw particular
attention to the re’port of Secretary-General
[s//1900
and Add./].

4. Members of the Council have before them the
text of ‘a draft resolution [s/f/9fOJ
that has been
prepared in the course of prior consultations among the
members of the Council. I now put the draft resolution to the vote.

agenda (SJAgendal1863)

of the agenda

The situation in Cyprus:
Report by the Se&etary-General
on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/l 1900 and Add. 1)
The meeting

wus cullrd

Adoption

to order

ut 2.30 p-m.

of the. agenda

One

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/l1900 and Add.1)
1. The PRESIDENT:
The representatives of Cyprus,
Greece and Turkey have addressed letters to the
President of the Security Council requesting to be
invited, in accordance with rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to participate in the djscussion
of the question before the Council.
Accordingly
I propose to invite the three representatives
just
mentioned, in conformity with the usual practice and
with the consent of the Council, to participate in the
debate without the right to vote.
At the invitution
of the President,
Mr.
(Cyprus),
Mr. Pupoulius
(Greece)
und Mr.
(Turkey)
took places ut the Council
tuhlP.

The Cruft
none. 1

Rossides
Tiirkmen

2. The PRESIDENT:
I have also received a letter
dated 9 December 1975 from the representative
of
Turkey requesting that Mr. Vedat Celik be invited to
participate in this meeting of the Council. I therefore propose that, in accordance with its previous
practice, the Council extend an invitation
under
rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to
Mr. Celik. I shall take it, if I hear no objection,

resolution

member

(Chinu)

WNS udopted

did

not

by

purticipute

14 votes

to

in

the

5. The PRESIDENT:
A number of representatives
have inscribed their names of the list to speak
following the vote. Before I call on those representatives, however, the Secretary-General
has asked to
speak, and I now invite him to address’the Council.
6. The S’ECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have taken
careful note of the resolution which the Council .has
just adopted. I wish to assure the Council that, for my
part, I shall do my utmost to-give effect to its decisions.
As far as the United Nations Peace-Keeping
Force
in Cyprus (UNFICYP)
is concerned, the necessary
instructions will be given for the continuation
of its
functioning for the next six months.
7. The Council has .also requested me to continue
the mission of good offices with which it entrusted
me March 1975 in its resolution 367 (1975). I shall,
of course, be in cbntact with the parties with a view
to a resumption of those talks at the earliest possible
time. I hope very much that, with the co-operation
and goodwill of ail concerned, we may be able to
make progress on this complex and difficult problem
for the good of all the people of Cyprus as well as
for the strengthening of peace in the eastern Mediterranean. I shall not fail to keep the Council informed
of developments in this regard.

8. In conclusion,
Mr. President, I should like to
express’my appreciation to you personally and to all the
members of the Council for their efforts during the
past week and for their help and support in this very
important matter.

15. On the specific question of the renewal of the
mandate of UNFICYP,
the Council has been able.
fortunately, to agree on an extension as a result of
the last-minute concurrence of the parties concerned.
That such concurrence was obtained at all is due
perhaps as much to the patience,
tenacity and
diplomatic skill of the Secretary-General as to anything
else. His is a key role in this matter, and my delegation would urge him to continue it unhesitatingly.
We believe he can count on the full support of the
Council in this regard. The offtcers and men of
UNFICYP
and the Secretary-General’s
representatives in Cyprus,
Mr. Weckmann-Muiioz
until
15 October 1975, and latterly Mr. Perez de Cuellar,
are also to be commended
for the particular contribution they are making to the preservation of peace.

9. The PRESIDENT:
On behalf of the Council,
I thank the Secretary-General
for the statement that
he has made.
10. Mr. STOBY (Guyana): This Security Council
discussion on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
comes hard on the heels of the General Assembly’s
own extensive debate on the question of Cyprus.
This proximity
of consideration
is a not unhelpful
accident since it serves to allow the Council to view
the issue within a context already defined by the
Organization’s
most,democratic
institution.

16. The Council will next meet on the question of
the mandate of UNFICYP
some time in June 1976.
Before that time, however, we shall be receiving
from the Secretary-General
the report asked for in
resolution 3395 (XXX), which request the Council
has endorsed in paragraph 6 of the draft resolution
just adopted.

11. In its resolution 3395 (XXX), which was adopted
by an overwhelming majority in the Assembly, Member States expressed quite unequivocally
their concern at the lack of any real progress in implementing
resolution 3212 (XXIX),
which resolution, it will be
recalled, established
the broad parameters within
which a solution to the Cyprus problem should be
pursued.

17. Let me take this opportunity to express what I
trust is not a faint and fragile hope, and that is that
in March of 1976 the Council will not be faced
and have to deal with the kind of bleak and confused outlook that we are shown today. For the
prospects to improve, however, it must be recognized
that much will depend on the goodwill of all the parties
concerned, especially the dominant party, when the
talks are resumed, as we trust they soon will be.
The Council is entitled to expect in March a report
from the Secretary-General
indicating
an effective
manifestation of that goodwill.

12. The concern of the Assembly at the nonimplementation
of resolution 3212 (XXIX) is confirmed
and reflected by the Secretary-General
in his current
report. He tells us, for example, that tension remains
high. He reminds us that the situation of confrontation
resulting from the events of 1974 has persisted. He
informs us that violations
of the cease-fire have
increased disturbingly
during the past six months.
And in reporting on the four rounds of talks which
have taken place, he states in paragraph 66 that, in
spite of the agreement reached on certain problems
during the third round:

18. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (infermetution
from French): A few weeks after the important debate
which the General Assembly devoted to the question
of Cyprus, it does not seem to me to be necessary to present again here the position of my delegation on the general aspects of this painful affair.
Regrettably the situation has no, more changed for the
better in the course of this brief period than it had
previously.
The principles which, according to us,
should guide us in seeking a settlement also remain
unchanged.
They were recalled explicitly
at the
rostrum of the Assembly by the representative
of
Italy, who spoke on behalf of the nine States members. of the European Economic Community.2
It is
well known that they are extremely interested, both
collectively
and individually,
in a situation which
causes conflict between States with which they
maintain
traditionally
close and friendly relations
and to which they are joined by ties of association.

“unfortunately,
‘some important
provisions
contained in that agreement have not been fully
implemented,
including in particular the free and
normal access of UNFICYP
to Greek Cypriot
habitations
in the north to ensure the security
and well-being of the Greek Cypriots remaining
there.”
l3. My delegation strongly regrets the absence of any
significant progress toward a settlement of this problem
and, in that connexion, the demonstrated ‘unwillingness of some of the parties to abide by .decisions
of the United Nations, even when they-,originally
indicated they subscribed to them.
.
14. It is also a matter of disappointment
to my delegation that agreements which were freely(arrived
at
between the parties are not being kept: The way
forward on this matter surely depends on’s genuine
desire on the part of the parties concerned to find a
solution, and their good faith in abiding by interim
agreements paving the way to a final settlement.
.

19. I would add that the very recent talks which
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France had with
his colleagues from Cyprus, Greece and Turkey
enabled them to know exactly where we stand in
2

the hope that the parties will show understanding
and moderation,
in particular in pursuing and developing over-a!! negotiations, and that they will refrain
from any initiative
likely
to jeopardize
those
negotiations.

regard to the problem of Cyprus and the search for
a settlement, and given them proof of the interest
with which we are following their efforts.
20. In such a painful situation, since it remains
one of great suffering for displaced persons, the
usefulness of the presence of the United Nations
Force cannot be challenged by anyone. It discharges
with great merit multiple and often de!icate tasks
which circumstances have compelled it to assume.
In this respect it should benefit from the full authority
which the support and ‘confidence of the Council
confer on it. My delegation wishes to pay a tribute
to its Commander,
Genera! Prem Chand, and. the
contingents which constitute it. We associate ourselves with the gratitude expressed to the countries
which provide the contingents for the very valuable
contribution
they are thus making to the cause of the
restoration and maintenance of peace.

25. Mr. SAITO (Japan): My delegation
voted in
favour of the draft resoltition just adopted. I wish
to take this opportunity
to express the profound
gratitude of my delegation. to you, Mr. President,
and the Secretary-Genera!
for your tireless efforts to
obtain the concurrence
of the parties concerned
in the extension of the mandate of UNFICYP.
I
also wish to thank the parties concerned for their
co-operation.
We fully agree withy the SecretaryGeneral’s ‘view that in the present circumstances
the continued presence of UNFICYP
is essential,
not only to maintain the cease-fire called for by the
Security Council, but also to facilitate the continued
search for a peaceful settlement.
Indeed, although
the situation in Cyprus seems to be relatively quiet at
the moment,
it wi!I become more unstable and
dangerous if the basic political
problem
is not
resolved soon. The longer the. present situation of
confrontation
persists, the more difficult it will be
to achieve a negotiated
solution.
My delegation
sincerely hopes that the time provided by the extension of the mandate of UNFICYP
today will not be
wasted.

21. On studying the very,comp!ete
report submitted
by the Secretaiy-Genera!
my delegation noted with
concern the very marked rise in the number of
violations of the cease-fire by displacement of positions fixed in the course of the cease-fire. These
regrettable events emphasize the importance of the
presence of the Force, since in most cases it succeeded in restoring the stmts qao.
22. However, we noted with satisfaction that closer
relations have been established between the parties
and the Force. We therefore fail to understand why
restrictions,
particularly
in regard to freedom of
movement, have been imposed on it in the exerciseof its functions. It is essential and in accordance with
the very spirit of the mission which it is discharging
that it be able to act in similar conditions in the
north and the south of the island, so as to be able
to guarantee the same protection to the two communities. In this case that is a humanitarian
requirement
which none can avoid.

26. In this connexion, my delegation wishes to pay
a sincere tribute to the Secretary-Genera!
for his
good offices and assistance in holding the third
-round of talks berween the representatives of the two
communities
at Vienna from 3 1 July to 2 August,
and the fourth round in New York from 8 to 10 September- 1975. The fifth round of talks is; -as- the --. -..
Secretary-General’s
report indicates, not yet agreed
upon.
27. My delegation urgently appeals to a!! the parties
to take active steps for the immediate
resumption
of the intercommunal
talks under the auspices of the
Secretary-Genera!,
taking
into account
Genera!
Assembly resolution 3395 (XXX) and the resolution
adopted by the Council today, .We make this appeal
because we are convinced that resumption of the talks
offers the best prospect for a settlement. We would
add the word of caution offered by the SecretaryGenera! in’ paragraph 68 of his report, that the talks
can be fruitful if Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktas “are
ready and authorized
to engage *in meaningful
negotiations on a!! essential aspects of a settlement of
the Cyprus problem”.
Once the principal negotiators
are prepared to follow this course, the extra ingredient
for success’ must be provided by their willingness to
make rediproca!
concessions,
as the SecretaryGenera! has keminded us.

23. My delegation
read attentively
the passages
of the report in which the Secretary-Genera!
described his mission of good offlces. We can but
regret the lack of application
of the very important
provisions of the agreements concluded during the
third intercommunal
negotiation phase. Here again,
it is a matter of commitments
of a humanitarian
order. We therefore appeal to a!! those concerned
to make it their duty to relieve the hardships inflicted
on the inhabitants of Cyprus.
24. I should like to emphasize that my delegation
associates itself fully with the remarks mad& by the
Secretary-Genera!
at the end of his report. He and his
Special Representative,
whose presence here we are
pleased to welcome, strive with a merit and patience
which deserve our appreciation
to establish and
maintain
a. dialogue.
But the final result, as we
recalled in June 1975 [I#Oth
meeting],
does not
depend on them. Accordingly,
we once again express

28. In c&!usion,
I wish to pay a tribute to the
Secretary-Genera!
and his staff for their effective
administratibn
of UNFICYP.
Working
in close
3

co-operation
with the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, Co-ordinator
for United
Nations Humanitarian
Assistance on the island, and
with the International
Committee of the Red Cross,
UNFICYP
has not only been responsible
for
maintaining
the cease-fire but has proved. of the
greatest value in relieving the hardships of the people
of Cyprus. We wish to pay a tribute once again
to the officers and men of the Force and to the Governments which have contributed contingents.

33. In conclusion, my delegation wishes to convey
to the Force Commander and to the men and officers
of UNFICYP
my Government’s
deep appreciation of
their outstanding services in their very difficult task.
34. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretdon
from
Russian):
The Security
Council is once again discussing the question of
extending the mandate of the United Nations Force
in Cyprus. However, this question cannot be viewed
in isolation from the whole complex of issues in the
Cyprus problem. The situation in and around Cyprus
remains complicated
and tense. For the sake of
interests alien to the Cyprus people, the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Cyprus continue to be flouted. Foreign troops still
remain in a considerable portion of the territory of the
island. Two hundred thousand Cypriots have become
displaced persons, refugees in their own country.
Habitations
and industrial
enterprises
have been
destroyed. The island is divided in two by a strip
of no-man’s land, by zones of minefields and military
fortifications.
The total economic damage done to
Cyprus as a result of foreign intervention
amounts
to almost half a billion Cyprus pounds. That is
more than the revenue shown in the Republic’s
budget over the past 11 years.

29. Mr. RYDBECK
(Sweden): The Swedish delegation wants to give expression to the great satisfaction
of our Government
with the decision’just
taken by
the Council, through which the continued presence
and activities of the United Nations Force in Cyprus
have been guaranteed for another period of six months.
The prolongation
of the mandate of UNFICYP
provides the needed additional time for further efforts
to solve the Cyprus problem, and it thus imposes
on the parties an obligation
to utilize this time
constructively for a determined effort to reach a solution through negotiations.
We subscribe fully to the
views of the Secretary-General
when, in paragraph 67
of his report, he states that:
“The delay in reaching a satisfactory solution in
Cyprus is a matter of increasing concern in many
respects, both local and international.
The longer
the present situation of confrontation
persists the
more difficult will be the attainment of a negotiated
solution.”

35. The maintenance
of the present abnormal
situation threatens the fundamental interests of both
the Greek Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots. It is an
obstacle to the restoration
of the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus.

Sweden appeals to the parties to consider the heavy
responsibility which now rests with them.

36. In paragraphs 66 and 67 of his report to the
Security Council, the Secretary-General
makes an
official statement to the effect that:

30. The present strife and tension in Cyprus prevents
the two communities
from fully realizing the great
potentials
of their country.
Serious humanitarian
problems persist, owing to the lack of an agreed
solution. Thousands of families are uprooted and live
under extremely insecure conditions. This is a situation
which cannot be allowed to persist.

.I . . . the situation in Cyprus will remain unstable
and potentially
dangerous until the basic political
problem is resolved...
“The delay in reaching a satisfactory solution
in Cyprus is a matter of increasing concern in many
respects, both local and international.
The longer
the present situation of confrontation
persists, the
more difficult will be the attainment of a negotiated
solution. Moreover, pending such a solution the risk
of renewed and large-scale conflict remains, as does
the plight of the displaced persons.”

3 1. Our best hope-yes, perhaps our only hope-now
is that under the auspices of the Secretary-General
it will be possible to resume negotiations which will
open the door to an ‘agreed solution. We also hope
that the discussions that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General
will undertake in regard to
the stationing,
deployment
and functioning
in the
northern area of UNFICYP
contingents will result
in acceptable atid effective operational conditions for
UNFICYP.
As a country contributing
troops to
UNFICYP,
this is of particular concern to us.

37. The intercommunal
talks which were begun a few
months ago with the participation
of the SecretaryGeneral in accordance with Security Council resolution 367 (1975) led to no perceptible
progress
in the settlement of the fundamental aspects of the
Cyprus problem.

32. My delegation
wants to express *its sincere
gratitude to the Secretary-General
and to his staff
for their untiring and devoted work towards finding
soIutions on the delicate problems facing us. Their
great capability and ski11 will be badly needed in the
months to come.

38. Serious and well-justified
concern has been
aroused by the trend towards the creation of an
isolatedso-called
separate Turkish Cypriot State in the
territory
of the. Republic
of Cyprus. It is quite
4

integrity of the .&public
of Cyprus, for the withdrawal of all foreign troops from the island, and
for the settlement of the internal matters of their
State by the two communities,
Greek and Turkish,
themselves. In other words, we are for the implementation of the well-known United Nations decisions on Cyprus. It is only on such a basis that a
just
settlement
of the Cyprus problem and the
elimination
of this hotbed of tension will be possible.“”

obvious that such one-sided actions, in violation, of
Security Council and General Assembly decisions,
are fundamentally
against the genuine interests of
the Cypriot people, both Greek Cypriots and Turkish
Cypriots. They are advantageous only to those who
are aiming at the division of Cyprus and its conversion
into a tributary simulacrum of a State.
39. The fact that there has so far been no real
progress towards the attainment
of a just political
settlement
of the Cyprus problem
represents a
serious threat to the cause of peace ‘and security
in the eastern Mediterranean.
To this very day,
because of the actions of the opponents of a free
and independent Cyprus, the decisions of the Council and the Assembly remain unfulfilled.
I refer first
to the demand of the United Nations, which expresses
the will of the overwhelming
majority
of States
Members of the Organization,
for respect for the
sovereignty,
independence
and territorial
integrity
of Cyprus, withdrawal from that island of all foreign
troops and the return of the refugees to their homes.

The Soviet Union continues consistently to .favour
the consideration
of and the taking of decisions on
the Cyprus problem in a broad international
forum,
within the framework of the United Nations.
43. The information
in the Secretary-General’s
report serves only to confirm the relevance and
justifiability
of another Soviet proposal,
that of
sending a Security Council mission to Cyprus.
44. The Soviet delegation believes also that it must
once again draw the attention of members of the
Council to those Soviet proposals, believing them to be
specific, important ways and means of promoting a
genuine solution of the Cyprus problem, in the interests
of the people of Cyprus and in the interests of peace
and security in the eastern Mediterranean.

40. A genuine settlement of the problem of Cyprus
on the basis of the relevant decisions of the Council
and the Assembly is still being blocked by certain
circles of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), which were actually responsible for creating
the Cyprus crisis and, at the cost of the elimination
of the independence,
sovereignty
and territorial
integrity of Cyprus and the division of that nonaligned State Member of the United Nations, seek to
strengthen their military
strategic positions in the
eastern Mediterranean.
Those circles stubbornly
pursue their policy of attempting to reach a private
solution of the problem of Cyprus which is in no way
in accordance with the interests of the Cypriot
people, within the tight circle of their own bloc and
behind the backs of the Cypriot people.

45. The Soviet delegation is in favour of the idea
that it is necessary immediately
to comply with the
decisions of the Security Council and the resolutions
of the General Assembly regarding the settlement
of the Cyprus problem. As the Council is aware,
the General Assembly at its current session has
once again expressed serious concern at the continuing
crisis in Cyprus.
By an overwhelming
majority-l
17 votes in favour-it
adopted resolution
3395 (XXX)
on the question of Cyprus; of the
15 States members of the Council, 13 voted in favour
of the resolution in the General Assembly and none
voted again&it.

41. Recently certain religious winds have begun
to blow in directions favourable to NATO. It is easy
to see that such a privately taken decision, with the
help of those favourable winds, has nothing whatsoever in common with the genuine national interests
of the people of Cyprus, the Greek Cypriots or the
Turkish Cypriots. It is designed to consolidate the
bloc’s interest in Cyprus and in the eastern Mediterranean as a whole and to put an end to the foreign
policy of non-alignment
pursued by the Republic of
Cyprus.
42. The consistent position of principle of the Soviet
Union in the matter of Cyprus has been set out
with exhaustive clarity in statements of the Soviet
Government,
of Soviet leaders and of the Soviet
delegation in the Council and the Assembly. In his
statement in the General Assembly on 23 September,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union,
Comrade Gromyko, stated:

46. In that resolution the General Assembly reaffirmed the urgent need for continuing efforts to ensure
the effective implementation
of all the provisions of its
resolution 3212 (XXIX) and once again called upon
all States to respect the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and non-alignment
of the Republic
of Cyprus and to refrain from all acts and interventions
directed against it. It called for the withdrawal without further delay of all foreign armed forces and
foreign military
presence and personnel from the
Republic of Cyprus’ and for the cessation of all
foreign interference
in its affairs. The resolution
contains an urgent appeal to all parties to refrain
from unilateral actions in contravention
of resolution
3212 (XXIX),
including any changes in the demographic structure of Cyprus.

“The Soviet Union has consistently come out
in defence of the independence and the territorial

47. Neither the Security Council nor the SecretaryGeneral, in the course of the performance
of the
5

mission entrusted to him on Cyprus, can fail to take
into account that important resolution of the General
Assembly at its thirtieth session. which lays down
ways, means and principles for bringing about a settlement of the Cyprus crisis, particularly since that resolution reproduces the fundamental
provisions
of
resolution 3212 (XXIX), in favour of which all parties
affected by and interested in the Cyprus question
voted. We should be guided also by the fundamental
resolutions of the Security Council on the Cyprus
problem.

nature of the extended efforts which the SecretaryGeneral has repeatedly made to further understanding
and negotiations among the parties. Speaking from
our own experience, I should like to say once again
that the United States deeply appreciates the skilful and painstaking
thought and action which the
Secretary-General
has given to this issue. He has our
full support for the further actions which he has
informed the Council he intends to take. In this
connexion, I wish also to reaffirm the respect and
admiration
which my Government
feels for the
dedication and gallantry of the Commander and men
of UNFICYP.
As the Secretary-General’s
report
makes unmistakably clear, the operations of the Force
in all parts of Cyprus have again done honour to the
high tradition and standing of United Nations peacekeeping.

48. With regard to the question of extending the
mandate of UNFICYP
for a further period of six
months, since the Government
of the Republic of
Cyprus has agreed to that, the delegation of the Soviet
Union has no objection to such an extension, with
the well-known proviso, however, that the system of
voluntary financing of those troops be preserved.

53. We leave this debate with a renewed sense
that the unstinted response that so many in the United
Nations
have made to the requirements
.of the
problem of Cyprus now places a compelling obligation on Members,
and most especially upon the
immediate
parties, to progress rapidly towards its
solution. On this matter, the Organization
has done
everything that could reasonably be asked of it-and
more. Those who have so benefited by its work can
now fairly be asked to repay its efforts with their own.

49. In conclusion, the delegation of the Soviet Union
considers it necessary to stress that this new extension
of the stationing of United Nations troops in Cyprus
in no way deals with the substance of the problem
of Cyprus. The Security Council must use every
opportunity
available to it to bring about as soon as
possible a just settlement of the Cyprus conflict, in
the interests of the whole Cypriot people and for the
purpose of preserving the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus.

54. Mr. LA1 Ya-Ii (China)(rrunslution
from Chinese):
When the Cyprus question was under consideration
at the current session of the General Assembly,
the Chinese delegation expounded the position of the
Chinese Government
on related matters in a cornprehensive way, and we are not going to repeat it
here. With regard to the question of UNFICYP,
we have always held our own position, which is well
known to all. In view of the fact that the content
of the draft resolution mainly concerns the extension
of the mandate of UNFICYP,
the Chinese delegation
did not participate in the voting on this draft resolution.

50. Mr. SHERER
(United States of America): In
the consultations which have preceded this meeting,
the United States has stressed two views. First,
we agree with the Secretary-General
that the renewal
of UNFICYP
is essential. UNFICYP
remains a vital
factor in the preservation of stability on the island.
Without stability the direct negotiations between the
parties which we consider indispensable
cannot be
expected to progress. Secondly, we recognize that the
agreement of the concerned parties to the resolution
by which UNFICYP
is renewed is important
both
to those negotiations and to the continuance of the
effectiveness of UNFICYP.

55. Mr. VINCI (Italy): By the draft resolution we
have just adopted, we have extended the mandate
of UNFICYP,
as proposed by the Secretary-General,
for a further period of six months, not only in order
to maintain the cease-fire but also to facilitate the
continued
search for a peaceful settlement.
The
Italian delegation fully shares the opinion of the
Secretary-General that, since the situation in the island
remains unstable and potentially dangerous, the continued presence of UNFICYP
is essential. Such being
the case, the renewal of the mandate has appeared
to us from the beginning of our .informal consultations as absolutely necessary and hence as the first
objective we should aim at. The consensus that
has emerged since, enabling us to take today’s
decision, shows that this was the general, if not the
unanimous, feeling of the Council.

51. ‘Accordingly we are particularly pleased that, in
the course of the long and skilful consultations conducted by the President of the Security Council and
the Secretary-General,
.the parties most directly concerned, whatever their difficulties, have accepted the
resolution we have just adopted. We urge that this
spirit be continued and that the parties not only
provide effective co-operation
with UNFICYP
in
Cyprus but also contribute to the speedy resumption
and progress of the intercommunal
negotiations.
52. We have had occasion to remark here before
that the question of Cyprus is one that has placed
particularly great demands upon the time and resources
of. the United Nations. The arduous consultations
which hive preceded this meeting have now given the
members of the Council a direct experience of the

56. I am particularly aware of the crucial role played
by the Secretary-General
in the achievement of the
6

present result and wish to pay him a welldeserved
tribute. I can also express the satisfaction of my
delegation at the fact that the parties concerned,
having signified their concurrence with the proposed
extension of the mandate, have at the same time
encouraged further hopes and expectations for future
more far-ranging agreements. They have indeed shown
on this occasion a high degree of understanding and
sense of responsibility,
which we duly appreciate.
This is a positive sign in an over-all situation which
has not ceased to be a source of special concern
to my country. Even if.1 am not disclosing anything
new, I wish to reiterate that my Government is particularly interested in the restoration of stability in that
area, both because of its importance
for Mediterranean countries, like mine, and because of Italy’s
friendly relations with all the parties involved. Even
the slightest improvement
in the state of affairs
existing at the present stage in the Republic of Cyprus
would be welcomed by my delegation. I would add in
this connexion that we are, as we were six months
ago, preoccupied
and saddened at the continuing
plight of the displaced persons, whose difficulties and
sufferings have not ceased.

59. I wish to -refer here to what I had occasion to
say before in the General Assembly during the debate
on Cypru~.~ I spoke there on behalf of the States
members of the European Economic
Community
and, as was recalled by my French colleague and
partner, Mr. de Guiringaud, I made clear in the General
Assembly the main lines which, in the opinion of the
nine members of the Community,
should provide the
basis for progress in the search for a solution. I wish
to recall and summarize now, on behalf of my delegation, those lines. First of all, we think that the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Republic
of Cyrpus should be reaffirmed.
Secondly, we believe that the agreement of the two
communities
which constitute that State is essential
to the search for a settlement.
Finally, we attach
particular importance to the distressing question of the
refugees, which concerns a sensitive sector of the
population of the island. Just as I did on behalf of
the nine members of the Community
on that occasion, I wish on behalf of my Government
today to
encourage the parties concerned to seek a lasting
and equitable solution on the basis of the United
Nations resolutions.

57. The report of the Secretary-General
is very
revealing indeed of the current situation in Cyprus,
with regard to both the humanitarian
aspect of
the crisis and the operations of UNFICYP.
With
regard to the first issue, let me say that we deeply
regret that UNFICYP
has been somehow prevented
once again from providing
much-needed
help to
Greek villages in the north. As for the operations
of UNFICYP,
here again we have to take note of
some obstructions which have regrettably been placed
in the way of its functioning
as envisaged by the
Secretariat. The report of the Secretary-General
tells
us also about the increase in violations of the ceasefire, in terms of shooting incidents,
uncontrolled
movements of the separation line and the laying of
minefields. All these events cannot but cause serious
concern, and it is the sincere hope of my delegation,
and I am sure of all the other delegations around
this table, that the next report of the Secretary-General
will provide us with a better record on all these matters.

60. I should like to express here my Government’s
deepest appreciation and praise for the action taken
by the Secretary-General.
We are more than aware
of all the difficulties
with which he is confronted
in the fulfilment
of the mission of good offices
entrusted to him by the Council. We owe him a great
debt for the untiring activity and unshaken faith
he has displayed.
61. -I should like to conclude this statement by once
again paying a well-deserved tribute to the countries
which have provided
contingents
to UNFICYP,
which, as appears very clearly from the report of the
Secretary-General,
has efficiently
and generously
carried out its duties, once more living up to all our
expectations.
62. Mr. OYONO (United Republic of Cameroon)
(irlterpretution
jiwm French): The delegation of the
United Republic of Cameroon was happy to vote in
favour of the draft resolution
which the Security
Council has just adopted with the near unanimity
of its members and which extends for another six
months the stationing
of UNFICYP.
This was a
necessary decision, both useful and practical, which
falls within the framework of strengthening peace and
preserving international
security in Cyprus, where the
Force constitutes a decisive factor for the pursuit of
negotiations between the representatives of the Greek
Cypriot community and those of the Turkish Cypriot
community.

58. As my predecessor, Mr. Plaja, had the opportunity to state in the Council six months ago, if I am
not mistaken,
Italy is firmly convinced that the
responsibility
for seeking reconciliation
lies mainly
with the parties directly concerned and in particular
with the leaders of the two communities.
This is the
only road which, in our view, can lead to a lasting
solution and can at the same time bring back tranquillity and prosperity to the whole people of the
island. That is why my Government advocates once
again a speedy resumption
of the intercommunal
talks under the auspices of the Secretary-General
and expects, on the basis of its own contacts, that
all parties will refrain from any action which could
prejudge the positive progress of such negotiations.

63. In fact, it is clear from the excellent report of
the Secretary-General
that, despite the glimmer of
hope that appeared in the round of talks in Vienna
and New York, the least we can say is that the
situation on the spot in Cyprus remains an anxious
7

one. Tension continues to rise in the zones of confrontations
between the Turkish
forces and the
National
Guard. There are frequent attempts to
violate the cease-fire and farmers and workers have
no security and require protection.
It is in this
unstable and potentially dangerous atmosphere, as the
Secretary-General
indicates, that regrettable incidents
have occurred, leading to loss of life which, like
him, we deplore. Hostility between the two communities remains active.
64. In these conditions,
as we have affirmed on
numerous occasions, the delegation of the United
Republic of Cameroon considers that there can be no
lasting solution to the problem of Cyprus unless a
mutually acceptable political settlement is reached,
based on the fundamental
and legitimate
rights of
both communities,
in accordance with the spirit and
letter of General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX),
which was endorsed
by the Security
Council.
Implementation
of that resolution,
reinforced
by
General Assembly resolution 3395 (XXX), obviously
implies the abandonment
of the policy of creating
faits accomplis
which change the demographic
structure of the island, and naturally calls for the
withdrawal of all foreign military forces and the return
of the refugees to their homes.
65. Finally, the problem of Cyprus must be solved
with respect for the territorial integrity of the island,
in an atmosphere
of detente and reconciliation,
and above all, in a constructive
spirit taking into
account the psychological
characteristics
and the
natural and just interests of the two communities.
It is on this basis and this basis alone that the Republic
of Cyprus will once again be able to enjoy an era of
peace and lasting prosperity.
66. That is why my delegation,
which is very
pleased with the decision which the Council has just
taken, appeals to Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktas to
abandon their unyielding positions and do everything
possible in the near future, under the aegis of the
Secretary-General,
to find a way out of the paralysis
that has affected their talks for months by at last
attacking the problem of substance seriously, on the
basis of resolution 3212 (XXIX),
to which I referred
earlier.
67. We should like to express our profound gratitude
to the Secretary-General
for his efforts to bring about
peace in Cyprus. We also express our gratitude to the
Governments
which areproviding
the contingents
of the Force and to the Spec 1 Representatives
I;a Mr. Weckmannof the Secretary-General
in Cyprus,
Mufioz and Mr. P&ez de .Cu’llar,
who are both
present. We congratulate the o 9ficers and soldiers of
the Force and the civilian staff for the praiseworthy
manner in which they have discharged their important
duties.

in the efforts to find a peaceful and satisfactory
solution in Cyprus. We fully share the pertinent
observations made by the Secretary-General
in paragraph 66 of his report that the situation in the island
will “remain unstable and potentially dangerous until
the basic political problem is resolved”.
69. We voted for the extension of the mandate of
UNFICYP
in the conviction
that the SecretaryGeneral’s observations in paragraph 70 of the report
are of unquestionable
validity. We believe that, given
the present circumstances, the continued presence of
UNFICYP
is indispensable in the pursuit of a peaceful solution to the problem. At the same time, however, we must stress our concern that the extension
of the mandate should not be a mere ritualistic
exercise. It would be most unfortunate if the presence
of UNFICYP
were utilized, not as a catalyst to
promote settlement, but as a routine affair permitting
the maintenance and even the consolidation
of the
srrrtrrs yuo. For to maintain the present situation in
Cyprus would be simply to perpetuate the tragedy
that has befallen that island nation. It would be
tantamount to acquiescing in a violation of the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and nonalignment of Cyprus. It would indeed be in contravention of the demand’ of the United Nations as
clearly reflected in General Assembly resolution
3212 (XXIX)
and endorsed in Security Council
resolution 365 (1974). It would indeed fly in the face
of the most recent decision of the international
community
as embodied
in General
Assembly
resolution 3395 (XXX), which enjoyed the support of
an overwhelming majority of the Assembly.
70. In requesting the Secretary-General
to continue
his mission of -good offices and to report to the
Council not later than 31 March, we believe that the
Security Council has done two things. First, we have
renewed the mandate of the Secretary-General,
whose
indefatigable
efforts to reach a settlement are well
known to us and command our respect and esteem.
Through his efforts, and through the genuine co-operation of the parties concerned, it is our hope that
some serious movement towards a settlement will be
achieved. There is no need to labour the obvious.
The intercommunal
talks so abruptly and unfortunately
interrupted
on 10 September
must be
resumed without delay. My delegation
was very
disappointed
by the breakdown of the talks. Our
regret was all the greater considering that a ray of
hope had emerged following the third round of talks,
held at Vienna from 31 July to 2 August 1975, as
evidenced by the first interim report of the SecretaryGeneral, of 5 August 1975 [.S/11789]. And while we
stress the urgency of the resumption
of intercommunal talks, we accord no less significance to the
full implementation
of those matters on which agreement was reached during the third round of talks.

71. The second thing which we believe the Council
68. Mr. SALIM
(United
Republic of Tanzania):
has done by adopting this resolution today is to
My dele 4 ation is very concerned at the lack of progress
/
8

emphasize the need for movement in the implementation of Security Council and Genera! Assembly resolutions on the matter. For by deciding to request the
Secretary-Genera!
to submit his report no later than
31 March, the Council has clearly considered the
substantive political problem of Cyprus to be a matter
which can brook no delay or procrastination.
It is the
hope of the delegation of the United Republic of Tanzania that significant progress will have been made before
then towards a peaceful settlement. More specifically,
we wish to reiterate our repeated position on the
question. An end must be put to foreign intervention
in Cyprus and a!! States should scrupu!ous!y respect
the sovereignty,
independence,
territorial
integrity
and non-alignment
of the Republic of Cyprus. There
must be a speedy withdrawal of a!! foreign armed
forces and foreign military presence and personnel and
the refugees should be allowed to return to their
homeland. Every effort must be made to promote harmony and concord between the two communities.
In
a nutshell, we wish most emphatically
to call for the
speedy implementation
of resolution 3212 (XXIX).

giving priority to dialogue and by avoiding confrontation, will, we are convinced, make it possible for the
parties to reach a solution which will safeguard the
higher interests of the people of Cyprus.
75. We should like to express the hope that a solution
will very soon be found which will respect the independence, territorial
integrity
and non-alignment
of
Cyprus. In paying a tribute once again to the parties to
the dispute for their wisdom, I should also like, at a
time when a new positive stage has just been reached
by the Council, to express the gratitude of my delegation for the efforts undertaken by you, Mr. President,
and by the Secretary-General,
which have made it
possible for the Council to adopt the positive decision
which I have just mentioned.
76. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation from RusCm): The Security Council has just extended the
mandate of UNFICYP
for a new period of six months.
The Byelorussian delegation supported the resolution
of the Council on this question since the Government
of the Republic of Cyprus had already given its agreement to it. Our conviction in this regard is based on
the fact that the financing of the Force will be continued on the same basis as previously.

72. Since my delegation will have ample opportunity
to address itself to the substance of the problem when
the Secretary-Genera!
submits his report by the timelimit provided for in paragraph 6 of the Council resolution which we have just adopted, I shall conclude my
brief statement by once again paying homage to the
selfless and relentless efforts of the Secretary-Genera!
in promoting a just and peaceful settlement in Cyprus.
We also commend the work of his Special Representative, Mr. Perez de Cuellar and of LieutenantGenera! Prem Chand and the men and officers of
UNFICYP
under his command. Naturally,
we also
fully associate ourselves with the expressions of
appreciation and gratitude to the countries providing
the United Nations contingents. Their contribution
to
the cause of peace is unquestionable.

77. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR believes
it necessary to point out that the stationing of the
Force in Cyprus of itself does not resolve and cannot
possibly resolve the substance of the Cyprus problem.
At the same time-and
this should be stressed-the
stationing of these troops should not serve as a pretext
for the perpetuation of the existing abnormal situation
on the island, but should be used to attain a just settlement of the Cyprus problem in the interests of the
whole Cypriot people and for the purpose of preserving
the Republic of Cyprus as a sovereign, independent
and territorially
integral State.

73. Mr. KANE
(Mauritania)
(interpretation from
French): After several days of intensive consultations,

78. The situation in Cyprus remains tense. Outside
intervention
in the affairs of Cyprus is still going on.
Foreign troops remain in a considerable portion of
the territory of the island and attempts are continuing
to solve the Cyprus problem within the narrow circle
of NATO Powers, in disregard of the United Nations
and to the detriment of the interests of the people of
Cyprus. Furthermore,
illegal one-sided actions are
being undertaken, aimed at splitting the country.

the Security Council has just adopted a draft resolution
extending the mandate of UNFICYP.
In spite of the difficulties encountered by the Security Council, which
are inherent in any question of this kind and importance, we have never lost hope of reaching a solution.
The measured optimism
which we have never
abandoned is justified by the determination
expressed
by the parties to the conflict to do everything
in
their power to bring about a satisfactory solution of the
current tragedy of the Cypriot people. We can only
pay a tribute to the parties for their contribution,
which has once again enabled UNFICYP
to maintain
peace. The usefulness of that Force on the island
requires no further justification.

79. As has already been indicated by a number of
other representatives, our delegation would also like to
point out that many decisions of the Security Council,
particularly
resolution
365 (1974), which endorses
General Assembiy resolution 3212,(Xx1X)
and Security Council resolutions 367 (1975) and 370 (1975),
also concerning the settlement of the Cyprus problem,
still remain uncomplied
with. Compliance with those
decisions is being blocked by certain circles which,
above all, are concerned with defending their military
and strategic interests.

74. The resolution just adopted by the Council,
while extending the mandate of UNFICYP,
will also
permit the parties to the dispute to resume negotiations on an equal footing under the auspices of the
United Nations. The resumption of negotiations,
by
9

80. As,members know, the Security Council in resolution 370 (1975), in extending
the mandate of
UNFICYP
for a period of six months, stressed the
need for urgent compliance with that resolution, and
urgently called upon the interested parties to continue
and accelerate determined
co-operative
efforts to
achieve the objectives laid down in the resolutions.

Assemblv resolution 3212 (XXIX). which was subsequently endorsed by the Council in its resolution 365
(1974).

The Byelorussian delegation has adopted a position of principle consistent with General Assembly
resolution 3395 (XXX). We voted in favour of it in the
Assembly and we are ready to support the endorsement of that important resolution here in the Security
Council, particularly because that General Assembly
resolution embodies genuinely important issues of principle. That resolution calls upon all States to respect
the sovereignty,
independence,
territorial
integrity and non-alignment
of the Republic of Cyprus; it
calls on States to refrain from all acts and interventions
directed against the Republic of Cyprus; and, as is
well known, it calls for the withdrawal without further
delay of all foreign armed forces and foreign military
personnel from the Republic of Cyprus, and the cessation of all foreign intervention in its affairs. In addition, the resolution contains an important provision
regarding the problem of a settlement of the refugee
question and the inadmissibility
of unilateral actions
designed to change. the demographic
structure of
Cyprus, and includes, inter ulia, provisions concerning
new efforts which are necessary in the talks between
the representatives of the two communities,
under the
aegis of the Secretary-General.

86.

81. Unfortunately,
during the time that has elapsed
no appreciable progress has been made in the talks
on the subject. At the same time, in and around
Cyprus’ a process is going on, a course of events is
occurring which is doing nothing at all to bring closer
a settlement of the Cyprus problem. In the island illegal
attempts are still being made to create unilaterally a
separate Turkish Cypriot State and the political and
economic life of the country is paralysed; all that is,
of course, a.consequence of the continuing intervention from outside in the affairs of the Republic of
Cyprus.
82. The Secretary-General points out the seriousness
of the situation in Cyprus in his report. He quite
rightly points out that the situation in Cyprus will
remain unstable and potentially dangerous in view of
the possibility of a new extended conflict until progress is made in the settlement of the problem of
Cyprus. That concern of the Secretary-General
is
shared by the representatives of a number of members of the Council also, who have spoken before me
and have stressed the need for adopting decisive
measures to bring about a speedy solution to the situation in Cyprus.

87. One cannot help but understand the whole
significance of these provisions for the achievement
of progress in a just and lasting settlement of the
Cyprus problem in the light of the interests of both
communities,
Greek and Turkish. Therefore, our delegation believes it to be its duty to remind representatives of this resolution and to stress its significance.

83. Along with other delegations, we should like to
pay a tribute to the efforts of the Secretary-General
to overcome the difficulties so as to attain a settlement
of the Cyprus problem on the basis of compliance
with the relevant decisions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council on the question of Cyprus.

88. The Byelorussian delegation also beheves that
the implementation
of the USSR proposal for the convening of an international
conference on Cyprus
within the framework of the United Nations and the
dispatch to Cyprus of a special mission of the Security
Council would promote an early solution of the Cyprus
problem. The course of events in recent times has
once again confirmed the correctness of that approach
to a solution of the Cyprus problem.

84. The Byelorussian SSR continues to believe that it
is inadmissible to divide Cyprus. We are in favour of
the strict observance of its sovereignty, independence,
territorial
integrity and its policy of non-alignment.
Our delegation continues to be in favour of the withdrawal of all foreign troops from its territory and the
cessation of all foreign intervention
in its internal
affairs, and we should also like to see the Greek
Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots guaranteed the
opportunity to solve their own internal problems, as
provided for in the relevant decisions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council. In this regard,
we should like to place particular
stress on the
importance
of the provisions contained in General
Assembly resolution 3395 (XXX).

89. In conclusion, the Byelorussian delegation would
like to express its solidarity with the people of Cyprus.
We have always tried and continue to try to give the
Cypriot people support and assistance in its search for
a peaceful and just settlement of the Cyprus problem,
in the interests of both the Turkish Cypriot and the
Greek Cypriot communities
and in the interests of the
consolidation
of peace and security in that part of the
world.
90.

Mr. SALAiAR
(Costa Rica) (interpretation
from
My delegation wishes to place on record its
satisfaction at having been able to contribute with our
vote to the decision to extend the mandate of
UNFICYP.
We agree with the statement of the
Secretary-General
in paragraph 70 of his report that

85. Our delegation is’compelled to point out that the
draft resolution just adopted by the Security Council
notes only one aspect of resolution 3395 (XXX), that is,
its reaffirmation of the urgent need for continued efforts
for the effective implementation
in all its parts of

Spanish):

10

c-

“the continued
presence of UNFICYP
to” be
essential, not only to maintain the cease-fire... but
also to facilitate the continued search for a peaceful
settlement.”

99. In conch&n~~I~
wish to extend to the Special
Representative
of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Perez
de CuelIar, our sincere best wishes for the success of
his mission.

91. While the presence of the Force does not in itself
bring about a substantive political solution, which is
pending, it is nevertheless essential to prevent a new
outbreak of hostilities, which would make a solution
of the problem far more distant.

100. The PRESIDENT:
I should now like to make a
brief statement in my capacity as representative of the
UNITED
KINGDOM.
101. Like other delegations before it, mv delegation
congratulates the Secretary-General
on his report on
the United Nations operation in Cyprus, which indeed
gives us a clear picture of the present situation. It
shows the constant and the continuing
difficulties
under which UNFICYP
operates. It shows, too, the
patience, the resource and the fine judgement which
that Force exercises not only in maintaining the ceasefire in the island, but also in the humanitarian
field,
where the very livelihood of far too large a number
of Cypriots depends upon its activities.

92. It is necessary for all parties to give their full
support to the Secretary-General in the mission of good
offices entrusted to him by the Security Council. A new
impetus must be given to the rounds of talks which
the Secretary-General
has held with representatives
of the two communities
in the island so as to arrive at
a solution to the basic political problem.
93. My delegation wishes to emphasize our support,
expressed several times in the Council, for a solution
that will maintain the territorial integrity of Cyprus and
its right to exist as an independent
and sovereign
State.

102. To the Secretary-General,
to his Special Representative in Cyprus and to all those, both military
and civiIian, who have worked under his direction in
this peace-keeping enterprise, I wish to express my
Government’s
admiration and gratitude. In particular,
I should like to take this occasion to thank Mr. Weckmann-Munoz,
who has in the current mandate period
completed his tour of duty as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General
and who has now returned
to his country’s diplomatic service. He, I think, would
be the first to admit that during his time as Special
Representative
progress towards a solution of the
Cyprus problem was slow. But that, regrettably, was
also the lot of his many distinguished
predecessors,
like whom he displayed patience and skill in the conduct of a difficult role.

94. Finally, my delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his tenacious
endeavours to arrive at a solution of the problem of
Cyprus. We also wish to express our appreciation to
his Special Representative
in Cyprus, Mr. Perez de
Cuellar, for the excellent work he has been doing.
95. Mr. AL-SHAIKHLY
(Iraq): My delegation
wishes to express its satisfaction at the extension of
the mandate of UNFICYP
for another period of six
months, as has just been decided by the Council. We
are speaking today primarily to convey to the Secretary-General our deep appreciation of his outstanding
and untiring efforts in facilitating the extension of the
mandate and in encouraging the parties concerned to
renew their efforts to achieve a negotiated settlement.

103. 1 should also like to welcome Mr. Perez de
CuPlIar on his first appearance at a Council meeting in
his new capacity as Special Representative
of the
Secretary-General
in Cyprus rather than in his more
familiar role as the representative of Peru. All those
present here today who worked with him in his latter
capacity are confident that the Secretary-General’s
mission in Cyprus is in capable hands. We wish him
every success and he can count on our co-operation.,

96. The situation in Cyprus itself unfortunately
has
not moved towards a solution. There has been little
progress since last year. There is unanimous agreement on the necessity for the resumption of negotiations between the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot
communities
aimed at maintaining’ the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and non-alignment
of the Republic
of Cyprus for the benefit of the Cypriot community.

104. In his report, the Secretary-General
observes
that the continued presence of UNFICYP
is, in his
view, essential not only to maintain the cease-fire
called for by the Security Council, but also to facilitate
the continued search for a peaceful’ settlement. My
delegation agrees with him that there is a real need
for UNFICYP
to continue to perform its task and we
support his view that the mandate of the Force
should be extended for a further six months. The
United Kingdom therefore voted for the resolution we
have just adopted.

97. It would appear that there can be no mutual
movement
on both fronts, internally
and internationally, unless and until there is a political settlement
through negotiations between all the parties concerned.
98. The other alternative would be the continuation
of a highly explosive situation which might easily
deteriorate into a hopeless confrontation
that could
only further jeopardize the existence of Cyprus as an
independent, sovereign and non-aligned State.

105. As the report makes clear, the United Kingdom
has provided the largest single contingent in the Force.
11

assumption of the office of President. We feel certain
that, as we have witnessed on many occasions
previously, your high qualifications,
your diplomatic
skill and experience and your well-proven qualities of
heart and mind will serve the Council well in the
conduct of its deliberations.

We have also maintained logistic support for the entire
Force. I am glad to be able to say that the United
Kingdom hopes to maintain the British contingent at
its present strength for the coming mandate period.
106. Like previous
speakers, however, we are
seriously concerned by the financial
situation of
UNFICYP
and in particular by the growing financial
burden carried by the contributing countries. I think
that the statement in paragraph 71 of the SecretaryGeneral’s report-namely,
that if no remedial measures
can be achieved UNFICYP
may well one day find
itself unable to continue functioning
for lack of
funds-should
be underlined. I hope it will serve to
emphasize how serious the situation is to those Members of the United Nations whose contribution
to
this exercise of the United Nations most essential
function, namely, to keep the peace, is less than we
might expect of them. As I said in the recent General
Assembly debate on the question of Cyprus, we take
the view that those who vote for peace should also be
prepared to play their part in paying for it.
’

112. It is also my pleasant duty to express once
again, on behalf of my Government, our deep appreciation and feelings of gratitude to the Secretary-General
and his collaborators,
both here in New York and in
Cyprus, for their tireless and highly commendable
efforts in promoting
the objectives of the United
Nations in Cyprus and the cause of peace.
113. We are indebted particularly
to Mr. Perez de
Cdllar, who is so well known in the Security Council
and in the United Nations for the objectivity
of his
approach to problems, his diplomatic skill and, more
important,
his dedication to the principles and the
Charter of the United Nations. We hope, and we are
confident, that he will discharge with equal dedication
his delicate and onerous duties as the Secretary:
General’s Special Representative in Cyprus.

107. Finally,
although
we have welcomed
the
Secretary-General’s
report,
I believe
that the
Secretary-General
himself would be the first to agree
that it is disappointing that it contains so little evidence
of progress towards a solution of the problem of
Cyprus. This is the twenty-eighth occasion on which
the UNFICYP
mandate has been renewed. We have
said too many times in the past that we hoped that
the Blue Berets of the Force would not come to be
regarded as a permanent part of the Cyprus landscape.
I will not repeat at length my remarks during the
recent General Assembly debate on the main aspects
of the Cyprus question. I would only say this. Both
parties have frequently affirmed their commitment
to
the negotiating process. It seems to us that at present
there is a ~real possibility
that the intercommunal
talks can be resumed. Let them therefore be resumed,
and let them be conducted with goodwill, so that
when we next consider the renewal of the UNFICYP
mandate there may be a real possibility
that the
apparently unending United Nations commitment
in
Cyprus may before too long be concluded.

114. On this occasion we should like to say that we
are also grateful to Mr.. Weckmann-Muiioz
for his
discharge of his functions during the time he was in
Cyprus. I should be remiss if I did not mention General
Prem Chand, who has been devoting so much effort,
particularly during the last year and a half, to dealing
with an impossible-actually
impossible-situation,
as will be seen later. Our thanks are also due to the
officers and men working under him in the interests of
peace in Cyprus, at a time when the whole cause of
peace is in such danger in this part of the Middle
East. It is important for all people who are interested
in peace to see to it that a just approach is adopted
to developments in Cyprus, uninfluenced by degrees
of power. In this respect we wish to extend our thanks
also to the Assistant Secretary-General,
Mr. Guyer,
and to the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Urquhart,
for their continued efforts in respect of Cyprus,
115. Our gratitude also goes particularly
to the
Governments which make the United Nations operation in Cyprus possible through their contributions
in men and money, thus demonstrating
a praiseworthy dedication to the concept of peace-keeping
through the United Nations. That is a function which
I believe should be developed in the direction of the
creation of a permanent force that would not only
keep the peace but could also be interposed in situations of threatened war in each case where the problem
arose.

108. The good news in yesterday’s Brussels communique issued after the meeting between Mr. Bitsios
and Mr. Caglayangil perhaps gives us good ground
for thinking that those words this time may be more
than the mere expression of a pious hope.
109. Now, in my capacity as PRESIDENT,
on the representative of Cyprus.

I call

1 IO. I&. ROSSIDES
(Cyprus): I wish in the first
place, Mr. President, to thank. you and the members
of the Security Council for inviting me to participate
once again on behalf of my Government in the discussion on the present item.
111. May I also take this opportunity
to you our sincere congratulations

116. We have before us the report of the SecretaryGeneral, a very carefully studied document presenting,
I would say, a glimpse of the situation regarding the
continuing
tension and confrontation,
as was mentioned by other members, the violations of the ceasefire and the four rounds of talks which have failed.

to express
upon your
12

All this appears in the report, but of course the
report is couched in such tactful terms that it does not
show the cause of the confrontations and the tensions,
or from which side they may ‘come. But sufficient
is there to give an idea. Therefore we are grateful to
the Secretary-General
for issuing this report.

inhabitants, the’majority population, from the occupied
area in a systematic day-by-day process, and the
parallel and uninterrupted
importation
of massive
populations from Turkey and their implantation
in the
usurped homes and lands of the expelled population.
This is a reality of immense importance to the world
of the United Nations, which is passively watching
this process that is continuing not at a very rapid pace,
as it was last July and August, but still uninterrupted
and unrestrained. It gives food for thought that what
is happening now has not happened for many years in
the past, at this rate and to this degree, unless we go
back to the period before the Second World War.

117. On the question of Cyprus, as with other
problems, we have, no matter how unpleasant it may
be, to look at the main issues involved. If we were to
remain on the periphery, on the surface of things,
evading the basic problem, we should be diverging
from the proper course and would hardly contribute
towards any sound solution. In the present case,
the basic issue that has led to 11 resolutions of the
Security Council since July 1974, as well as two
General Assembly resolutions, 3212 (XXIX) and 3395
(XXX), is the violation of the Charter in its most
cardinal provisions regarding the maintenance of international peace and security, which is the primary
responsibility
of the United Nations and is, indeed,
its very ruisoir &Are.

121. I will give some details about what is happening
in Cyprus now. In disregard of General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions, and in breach of specific
commitments
undertaken by the Turkish side in the
presence of the Secretary-General
during the intercommunal
talks, expulsions of the Greek Cypriot
inhabitants,
for no other reason than their ethnic
origin, continue unabated. I have sent a number of
letters to the Secretary-General
recently,
giving
details, but I shall not take up the Council’s time with
them now.

118. The main concern of the Security Council and of
those resolutions of the Council and of the General
Assembly centres on the demand for the speedy withdrawal of foreign troops from the‘Repubiic
of Cyprus
and an urgent call for the return of the refugees to
their homes in safety, which are to be followed by
intercommunal
talks and negotiations with a view to the
political solution of the problem. However, the United
Nations calls have been and continue to be ignored,
while the process of aggression is left to continue and is
even intensified by further violations, so that the unanimous resolutions of the Assembly and mandatory decisions of the Council are practically trampled underfoot.

122. Greek Cypriots have not been allowed to join
their families in the north despite specific agreement
and commitment
to that effect in the i,ntercommunal
talks in the presence of the Secretary-General.
Furthermore, in breach of the said specific agreements, no
physicians are allowed to go to the north to attend
the sick or dying there, despite commitme,nts.to
that
effect in the intercommunal
talks; I krefer’,to the
Secretary-General’s
report, where a glimpse of this
can be seen in paragraph 53.
123. No Greek schools are permitted to function,
even in an elementary way; some function partially,
but there is almost no functioning’in
the occupied
areas, despite agreement in this connexion in the intercommunal talks.

119. We realize that we are in a period in the history
of mankind ,when, probably for various converging
reasons not entirely unrelated to the degree to which
the United Nations has performed its function for the
maintenance of international security and peace-how
far it has followed the Charter or how far it has strayed
away from the Charter, all this is a very important
aspect of peace-as a result of all the developments
over the past 30 years step by step ‘we have come to
the point where it is not at all unusual to treat
aggression lightly and even, in effect, to allow its
unrestrained continuance as a way of appeasement,
since that is thought to be the best way to deal with
the situation. I am sorry that I cannot refrain from
saying that such a tendency is wholly inconsistent
with the very purposes of the United Nations and is,
indeed, sadly reminiscent of the tendencies towards a
policy of appeasement
in a similar period which
preceded and led to the Second World War, as
though that lesson had been completely forgotten.

124. Now we come to the freedom of movement’of
UNFICYP.
Freedom of movement in the occupied
area is so limited, despite agreement to.the contrary,
that in reality it is non-existent. I wonder what effect
agreements have in regard to matters in Cyprus when
Turkey is the other party. Instead of the promised
freedom of movement,
the Greek Cypriots in the
occupied north-despite
the promises and commitments in the third round of talks-are
confined to
their villages, living under conditions
of virtual
imprisonment,
depr;ivation and terror. Of this, ample
details have been given and can be given. It is there,
an open book for everyone to see-that is, of course,
if anyone is interested in seeing it.
125. When General Assembly resolution 3212(Xx1X)
was unanimously
adopted on 1 November
1974,
Turkey, which also voted for it, let it be understood
that it would comply with that resolution through
relevant negotiations. The sense of the resolution was

120. If we take the trouble to look at what has been
happening in Cyprus during the 18 months from July
1974, we find a series of continuing inhuman expulsions, the uprooting of the indigenous Greek Cypriot
13

not that negotiations would take &ace ‘with regard to
the response to the calls, which were peremptory, for
Turkey to comply with the resolution, but my Govern-’
ment decided, .in order to facilitate matters, to give
way and start negotiations
even before implementation’of the vital provisions, in the hope that there
would be at least some response to the explicit
statement that implementation
would be simultaneous
with the negotiations. Yet, during four rounds of intercommunal talks and negotiations from April to September 1975, not a single little move towards such implementation was made by Ankara, nor was any relevant
proposal in this respect permitted by Turkey in the
talks. And this in spite of repeated promises and
commitments
by the-Turkish Cypriot negotiator at the
time to produce such proposals next time. His explanation for such failure and the negative stand in the talks
was that matters of implementation
of resolution 3212
(XXTX) were beyond his compete’nce as a dependant
of Ankara’s military rulers. But that was the position
taken by ‘the Turkish representative jn the General
Assembly in 1974: that implementation
would proceed
through the negotiations. And negotiations between the
Turkish Cypriots and the Greek Cypriots were sought
by Turkey, whereas the problem was not a problem
between the two communities,
but a problem between
Cyprus and Turkey.

128. Turkey, it appears, intended the talks to be
centred on constitutional
issues, leaving aside and
untouched the main and vital
. issues
_
_ regarding the
termination
of the aggression by the progressive
withdrawal of the foreign forces of occupation, the
consequent liberation of the relevant territory and the
return of the refugees to their homes.
129. My Government
has made it abundantly clear
that it desires the resumption of the talks, but provided
such talks and negotiations are conducted freely, as
required by the said resolutions
of the General
Assembly, and not under the oppressive heel of
Turkey’s
military
force, continuing
occupation
of
Cypriot territory, and, worse still, coupled as until now
with the arbitrary practice of unilateral actions and
repeated threats of force and blackmail in an attempt
to obtain the capitulation of the other side.
130. This unacceptable situation, demonstrated
by
the aggressive occupation of Cypriot territory, cannot
be allowed to continue without remedy. It would imply
the collapse of any shred of international
security
through the United Nations and of any sense of legal
order in our world, with inescapable and ominous
consequences.
131. A look at the sad situation and the developments
in Cyprus as a result of such an unrestrained use of
force by Turkey for 18 months-unrestrained
because
nothing has been done beyond the adoption of resolutions, which remain unimplemented-demonstrates
what I have just said.

126.’ In this way the talks remained, as could be
expected, devoid of any substance, for indeed constitutional issues could not be meaningfully
discussed
without the prerequisite of the settlement of the territorial element: the progressive military withdrawal,
the return of refugees and relevant proposals, and
also the ‘situation of the refugees. Meanwhile,
the
months passed during those so-called negotiations, and
were wasted. But they were not wasted for Turkey.
For Ankara deliberately
continued ,and intensified
its process of expelling and otherwise getting rid ‘of
Greek Cypriot indigenous people from the occupied
area in the north and, more rapidly, and parallel
with this, transporting’ massive numbers of people
from Turkeyto be placed in the usurped homes and land
of the expelled Greek Cypriots. -Apart from other
aspects, this created a problem for the Turkish Cypriots
too. They had been transferred from the south to the
north, many of them against their will, and they
found themselves in much worse conditions than they
had ever encountered because of the preference given
to fhe peop!e imported from, Turkey.

132. One need only look at The New York Times of
yesterday, 12 December, to see what is being done
with regard to the United Nations Force .in Cyprus.
It says:
“Turkish authorities have severaly restricted the
operations of United Nations troops in northern
Cyprus, even though the Turks agreed four months
ago to increase the freedom [of movement] of those
forces.
“Rauf Denktas, the Turkish Cypriot leader, has
threatened to expel the United Nations forces from
the Turkish sector unless the United Nations signs
a separat.e agreement with the Turkish Cypriots.”
Agreement? What agreement has been kept so far?
And by what right should they claim an agreement,
since they have not had any such agreement before?
What has made them so arrogant now? The fact is,
they are acting as agents of the aggressor and invader
of Cyprus, and the situation has changed in that
respect.

127. With such circumstances in CypruS and in the
oppressive atmosphere, is it any wonder that the talks
and negotiations conducted so far have been so fruitless, and indeed in some respects counterproductive
in the cause of peace? This, of course, is mainly due
to the fact that the negotiations were not freely condueted, as provided for in the General Assembly
resolutions, but took. place in conditions of foreign
military occupation of more than one third of the
Republic’s territory.

133.

The newspaper report continues:

$6. . . But the effectiveness of the peace-keeping
troops has already been undermined in the northern
14

part of this eastern Mediterraneai
9.000 Greek Cypriots are trapped
lines.

‘island,. whei%
behind Turkish

and, thirdly, t,he -&s$nption
of talks. But it is noi
merely a resumption
of talks. In order for’ those
talks to be meaningful there should be at 1east.a con-‘
current and progressive implementation
of the other
provisions, coming prior in order, of the resolution
I have just referred to. Only in that way can’ the
negotiations
be resumed hopefully and conducted
freely in a constructive manner as required by resO-’
lutions 3212 (XXIX) and 3395 (XXX).

“The mandate ‘for the 3.100-member
United
Nations force, stationed here since March of 1964,
runs out on Monday. The Security Council debate
over its renewal is expected to begin in the next
day or two.
. ..

137. I should like to take this opportunity
to make
an appeal to the Security CounciI to see to it that at
some time, if not immediately,
resolution
3212
(XXIX),
endorsed by the Security Council and reaffirmed by Genera1 Assembly resolution 3395 (XXX)
is after all implemented.
That is important and vital
if Cyprus is to survive. The international
community
must consider questions such as this of importance,
irrespective
of the size of the country concerned,
and must have due regard for their implications
and
wider repercussidns,
in the sense that they either
encourage or discourage aggression and prove that
the naked use of force does not win; ,otherwise there
will be more and more invasions, ‘more and more
aggression-and
we h,ave noticed a significant increase
recently.

“ . . . after all the ethnic Turks moved to the north,
the Turkish side refused to allow any more observation posts to be set up. Troops at the four that had
been established were prohibited
from patrolling
the area or contacting ethnic Greeks without being
accompanied by an ethnic Turk.”
134. If the United Nations troops want to apprdacli
any of those almost imprisoned Greek Cypriots in the
north, who are being treated in the most inhuman way
in order to make them go away, they are not allowed
to do so unless there is an ethnic Turk present to
hear what is being said. The flow of Greek Cypriots’
back to the north has been virtually halted.‘In
this
connexion, there was an agreement made, a commitment, in the third round of talks.

138. My Government has agreed and consented, as
the only party entitled and required to agree and consent in accordance with the relevant resolution,
resolution 186 (1964) under which the peace-keeping
force in Cyprus was established, to the renewal of
the mandate of that Force. There is no other party,
under that resolution, the original resolution, whose
consent or agreement is required for the extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Force in Cyprus,
and any efforts made towards obtaining the agreement
of other parties are irrelevant to the renewal, of-the
mandate.

135. I am sorry that on a Saturday afternoon the
members of the Security Council should have to listen
to these unpleasant things instead of being in the
country after a week of so much hard work. It is
unpleasant to listen to such things, but I considered it
my duty to recall that a serious situation exists in
Cyprus and it is not merely the renewal of the
mandate that is of importance or the expression of
wishes, in an almost clichC-like way, that the resumed
talks will be successful. Much is needed to tiake the
resumed talks successful and’ two of the important
elements of the success are a proper, constructive,
approach and freedom of negotiation.

139. The PRESIDENT:
tive of Greece.

140. Mr. PAPOULIAS
(Greece): Mr. President, I
take great pleasure in extending to you the warmest
congratulations
of my delegation on your assumption.
of the presidency of the Security CounCil for this
month. Your authority, your well-known conipetence,
your high qualifications
and your vast experience
in regard to the qdestion on our agenda are a
guarantee that our debate will be successfully concluded. I also wish to thank you and the other
members of the Council for having allowed me to
speak.

136. A look at the sad situation and the developments in Cyprus shows that something must be done.
The General Assembly has by an overwhelming majority of 117 to 1 the one being thi: vote of the violator
of the United Nations resolutions itself-given
expression to the determination
of the international
community,
as globally
represented
by the General
Assembly, that such a situation should not be passively
allowed to continue. General Assembly resolution
3395 (XXX), recently adopted, in paragraph l-its
main one-reaffirm’s
the urgent need for effective
implementation
of General Assembly resolution 3212
(XXIX) as endorsed by Security Council resolution
365 (1974). The meaning of the implementation
of
resolution 3212 (XXIX)
“in all its parts” as reaffirmed and strengthened by resolution 3395 (XXX),
is, first, the speedy withdrawal, without delay, of all
foreign armed forces from the territory of Cyprus;
secondly, the return of the refugees to their homes;

141. The Security Council has, on the proposal of the
Secretary-General,
just decided to renew the mandate
of UNFICYP
for a further period of six months.
This draft resolution, with which the Government of
Cyprus has agreed, is supported by my Government.
‘142.’ 1 avail mysklf of this opportunity
to express
the profound appreciation of the Greek Government
15

5

1 call now on the representa-

to’ the Member States that ‘have placed their contingents at the service of the United Nations, as well
as to the Governments
that are making voluntary
contributions
for the maintenance of the Force. We
also express our gratitude to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in Cyprus, Mr. Perez
de Cutllar,,as
well as to his distinguished
predecessor, Mr. Weckmann-Muiioz,
to the Commander of the
Force, General Prem Chand, and to his officers and
men, who are carrying out their peaceful and humanitarian task under difficult conditions which are, unfortunately, not always without personal danger.
143. We fully agree with the statement contained in
paragraph 70 of the Secretary-General’s
report that the
continued presence of UNFICYP
is essential, not only
in order to maintain the cease-fire called for by the
Security Council but also in order to facilitate the
continued search for a peaceful settlement.
144. I should like to comment briefly on parts of the
report. We find it very disturbing that in the northern
part of the Republic of Cyprus which continues to
be under foreign military occupation-namely,
40 per
cent of the total territory-restrictions
are still imposed
on the freedom of movement of UNFICYP
and that
the provisions of the agreement reached at the third
round of the Vienna talks regarding free and normal
access by UNFICYP
to the Greek Cypriot villages and
habitations in the north have not been respected. We
find distressing the statement in paragraph 11 that
it has only been possible for UNFICYP
to carry out
humanitarian
work on a limited basis.

untiring efforts ‘in seeking a peaceful solution in
Cyprus. We extend to him and to his distinguished
collaborators,
the Assistant
Secretary-General,
Mr.
Guyer,
and the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Urquhart, as well as to their staff, our deepest
thanks.
148. Section V is worrying on two counts. The first
is that, ‘as recorded in that section, although provii
sion 1 of the Vienna communique
[S///789. annex]
regarding the transfer to the north of 8.033 Turkish
Cypriots was implemented,
none of the other provisions regarding respect for the basic humanitarian
requirements
of the Greek Cypriots living in the
north, either in Karpasia or in Kyrenia, have been
respected. These concern freedom of movement, unification of families, the return to their homes of those
unjustly expelled, educational and medical facilities
and even religious worship. I am sure you will agree
that this is a most unfair and unbalanced situation and
I hope that the Security Council will urge the most
prompt compliance with all the clauses of the Vienna
agreement. The second reason why section V is
worrying is the dismal outcome of the four rounds of
intercommunal
talks, as can be seen from the
Secretary-General’s
third interim report, of 13 September 1975 [S/11789/Add.2]..
149. I realize that this is perhaps not the appropriate
occasion to go into the substance of the Cyprus
question as it was only a few days ago fully debated
in the General Assembly, which adopted, by the overwhelming majority of 117 votes to 1, resolution 3395
(XXX), calling for the urgent implementation
of resolution 3212 (XXIX).
The provisions and principles
embodied in those resolutions establish the framework for a negotiated settlement in accordance with
the-principles of the Charter.-They are:-respect for the
sovereignty,
independence,
territorial
integrity and
non-alignment
of the Republic of Cyprus, abstention
from all acts and interventions
directed against it,
withdrawal without further delay of all foreign armed
forces and foreign military presence and personnel
from the Republic of Cyprus, the cessation of all
foreign interference in its affairs, the. return of all
refugees to their homes in safety and action to settle
all other aspects of the refugee problem, the immediate resumption
of meaningful
and constructive
negotiations between the representatives
of the two
communities
under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral, and abstention from unilateral actions in
contravention
of resolution 3212 (XXIX),
including
changes in the demographic struct,ure of Cyprus.

145. Equally disturbing to us are the cease-fire violations, Further, it is a matter of great disappointment
to us and, I believe, to all the members of the Council
that not only has the question of the Greek Cypriot
refugees-refugees
intheir own country-not
-shown
any progress, but;-& stated in paragraph 35, their
total number has risen to 183.000, which reflects an
increase of .I .OOOpersons since the Secretary-General’s
previous report, mainly owing to the continuing
transfer of Greek Cypriots from the occupied areas
in the north to the south. It is disheartening also to
note that, of the total number of refugees in the south,
138.000 are needy and are still being fully supported
by the Cyprus Government.
146. I should like here to express again my Government’s deep appreciation
of the task accomplished
by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees in his capacity as Co-ordinator
of the United
Nations humanitarian assistance for Cyprus, and of the
action of those Governments and benevolent organizations that have provided funds and donations.

150., We also have in mind Security Council resolutions 365 (1974), 367 (1975) and 370 (1975) and, not
least ,-paragraph 6 of the draft resolution adopted today,
in which the Council asks the Secretary-General
to continue the mission of good offices entrusted
to him by paragraph 6 of resolution 367 (1975). to
keep the Council informed of the progress made and to
submit a report not later than 31 March 1976.

147. Section V of the Secretary-General’s
report,
on his good offices in pursuance of paragraph 6 of
Security Council resolution 370 (1975), causes us grave
concern. Let. me say immediately
how much my
Government
appreciates
the efforts made by the
Secretary-General
and how grateful we are for his
16

151, The Greek Government,
which has since the
beginning of the Cyprus crisis shown the greatest
restraint and goodwill and a spirit of conciliation, in its
desire to see the problem solved peacefully, and has
rendered every assitance in this respect, will continue
to do so and to do all in its power to assist the
Secretary-General
in his mission. We hope that all the
parties concerned will show equal readiness, good faith
and goodwill so that a peaceful, just and durable
-settlement in Cyprus may be obtained without further
delay.
152. The PRESIDENT:
tative of Turkey.

resolution 3395 (XXX). As all the members of the
Council know, we voted against that resolution in the
General Assembly. The Turkish community
has also
indicated in no uncertain terms that it rejects it. We
should like, therefore, to repeat that so far as Turkey
is concerned,
General Assembly
resolution
3395
(XXX) has no operative value.
158. Paragraph 2 of the resolution just adopted reaffirms Council resolution 365 (1974), which endorsed
Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX).
We consider that
the terms of resolution 3212 (XXIX) no longer apply
to the present situation, particularly
in view of the
consequences of the four rounds of intercommunal
talks held since the adoption of that resolution. However, the views of my delegation on Council resolution
367 (1975) are on record.

I now call on the represen-

153. Mr& TURKMEN
(Turkey): This is the first time,
Mr. President, that I have taken part in a Security
Council meeting and it is a privilege to do so under
your enlightened and able guidance.

159. We agree with the extension of UNFICYP
for
a further period of six months. We take note of the
fact that the Turkish community
has been consulted
and that it has given its consent. We take note also
of the fact that a pro&s-verbal
was signed between
the Force Commander
and Vice-President
Denktas
on questions pertaining to the stationing, functioning
and redeployment
of the Force in the Turkish area.
We hope sincerely that the discussions which will
take place in this connexion will result in concrete
agreements in the very near future. We should like on
this occasion to pay a tribute to the officers and men
of UNFICYP
and to all the countries contributing
to it.

154: My Government
has, of course, studied the
report of the- Secretary-General
very carefully. There
are some points in the report with which we cannot
fully agree. This is, I think, unavoidable.in
view of
the complex situation existing in the island. But I
should like here, on behalf of my Government,
to
offer our deep gratitude to the Secretary-General
and to his dedicated staff for their untiring efforts in
connexion
with the United
Nations activities
in
Cyprus and express the hope that the difficulties to
which he has referred can be overcome by mutual
understanding and agreement.
,
155. We should like to express our appreciation
also for the efforts of .the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General
in Cyprus, Mr. Perez de
CuCllar, and of the Force Commander, General Prem
Chand. We wish Mr. Perez de CuCllar success in his
new and dillicult assignment.

160. I should like also to indicate our position concerning the paragraph on the intercommunal
negotiations. My Government
has in the past consistently
supported the principle of intercommunal
talks under
the auspices of the Secretary-General.
We have also
on several occasions expressed our gratitude and
appreciation for the dedicated efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his immense contribution
in this field.
Our view has been that, although there was no
possibility of reaching agreement on all aspects of the
problem until now, the intercommunal
negotiations
nevertheless have produced considerable and encouraging results. But during the debate on the Cyprus
question in the General Assembly a different view
was put forward and the ‘results achieved so far were
repudiated.
In addition to that, General Assembly
resolution 3395 (XXX) incorporated in its provisions
the process of’intercommunal
talks as established by
Security Council resolution 367 (1975). The Turkish
Government,
being opposed to resolution 3395 (XXX)
cannot, therefore, support the continuation
of the
process of intercommunal
talks in the framework
in which they have been placed. But that stand does
not mean that Turkey
is in any way against
negotiations.
On the contrary, we strongly support
the principle of negotiations for the solution of the
Cyprus problem. We continue to consider that the
two communities
are the main parties and that the
Secretary-General
should play an important role.

156. I should like to explain now the views of my
Government concerning the resolution which has been
adopted by the Council. I think that the Council is
already familiar with our basic position of dissociating
ourselves from any.document
containing a reference
to the so-called “Government
of Cyprus”.
It is
our view that there is at present no Government which
can represent Cyprus; there are merely two communities; That situation will continue so long as the Turkish
and Greek communities
cannot agree on an arrangement, provisional
or permanent, which will enable
them to speak with one voice in external matters.
For the moment Cyprus speaks with two distinct
voices. The reference to a “Government
of Cyprus”
is, therefore, in our view irrelevant. For this reason,
irrespective of our views on the substance of the resolution, we cannot accept it in toto. We can, however,
consider some of the provisions on their own merits
and indicate to what extent they are acceptable to us.
l57. One provision which we cannot accept in the
present resolution is the last paragraph of the preamble, which contains a reference to General Assembly
17

161. We cannot say at this stage, however, what
specific procedure should be evolved ‘for future
negotiations.
We are looking for ways of promoting
negotiations on a basis which will be acceptable to
all the parties. We are also hoping sincerely that the
Secretary-General
will continue to lend his assistance
to all the parties in the search for a peaceful solution.
There is no doubt that we shall keep him informed
of all our‘ initiatives and of developments in this field
and that we shall avail ourselves of his wise counsels
and call upon him to assist the parties in furthering
negotiations and settlement.

Commander,
General Prem Chand, on behalf of the
Secretary-General,
to the effect that discussions will
be held between the Turkish Cypriot community
and the Special Representative
of the SecretaryGeneral
to discuss matters “pertaining
to the
stationing, deployment and functioning of UNFICYP
in the area under Turkish control with a view to
arriving at a mutually acceptable arrangement which
will be recorded through an exchange of letters”,
I should like to put on record that the Turkish
Cypriot side has given its consent to the extension
of the mandate of the Force.

162. The unfounded allegations of Mr. Rossides,
expressed as usual in superlative terms, certainly
call for an answer. However, I am deeply grateful
to you, Mr. President, and to all members of the
Council for having agreed to meet on a Saturday
afternoon. The best way I can express that gratitude
is to’refrain from replying. We recently had a long
substantive debate on the Cyprus question in the
General Assembly and all the points raised by
Mr. Rossides have been dealt with there.

168. Why did the Turkish Cypriot side insist on a
separate agreement
with UNFICYP?
A separate
agreement was essential politically as well as legally.
It was essential politically
in order to establish the
equal status of the Turkish Cypriot community vis-avis the Greek Cypriot community. We do not recognize
the Makarios administration
and therefore the agreement which was signed by the Greek Cypriot
administration
regarding the status of the Force in
Cyprus cannot be considered as valid in the north.
For legal reasons also, a paper agreement with the
Turkish Cypriot authorities is essential in order to
give the Force a legal basis and status in the north
of Cyprus. I hope that negotiations will resume soon
and will lead to a mutually agreed concrete result
for the effective functioning of the Force in the north.

163. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the
decision already taken by the Council, I now invite
Mr. Celik to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
164. Mr. CELIK:
I should like to thank you,
Mr.,President,
and through you each and every member of the Council for having allowed me to speak
today, granting me the opportunity
to present the
views of the Turkish Cypriot side on the political
problem of Cyprus and on the extension of the
mandate of UNFICYP
which the Council has just
approved.

169. Mav I take ‘this oonortunitv
to extend the
gratitude and deep appreciation of the Turkish Cypriot
side to the Secretary-General,
to the members of the
Secretariat, to his Special Representative,
Mr. Perez
de CuCllar and his predecessor, Mr. WeckmannMunoz, to the Force Commander, the officers and men
of the Force, and to the Governments of contributing
countries for their invaluable contribution to the cause
of peace in Cyprus.

165. The Cyprus question was debated at full length
in the General Assembly only a month ago and, therefore, I shall not make a lengthy statement. Suffice
it to put on record the views and reactions of the
Turkish Cypriot side to the present resolution and to
General Assembly resolution 3395 (XXX), which was
adopted in our absence and about which we were
not given the opportunity
to express our views in
the plenary meeting. I shall also have to reply, as
briefly as possible, to some of the allegations raised
by Mr. Rossides this afternoon.

170. Why do we object to the term “Government”?
We are a part of Turkey in Cyprus and the ‘Greek
Cypriots are a part of Greece in Cyprus. That is
what the Archbishop had been telling us, at least until
the events of last year. He said:,“The Cyprus Republic is a new State but not a new nation; and it is not
the ‘intention of the Cyprus Government to create a
national feeling”. That was the Archbishop’s
statement in the Frankfkrter Runclschalr of May 1974.
171. There are therefore two nations in Cyprus.
Those two nations came together in a partnership
and formed a bi-national
State under contractual
agreement,
that contractual
agreement
being the
Zurich-London
agreement and the Constitution
of
1960. According to that agreement, the head of one
nation became the head of the bi-national State of
Cyprus and the head of the second nation became
the deputy head of the bi-national State.

166. The draft resolution just adopted makes refer‘ence to the term “Government
of Cyprus”, which
we do not recognize. It makes a reference to resolution
3395 (XXX), which is not acceptable to us and, therefore, it is unacceptable to us in toto. Our views
regarding Council resolutions 365 (1974) and 367 (1975)
are already on record with the Council.
167. In view of the fact that we have been consulted by the Secretary-General
on the extension of
the mandate and that a pro&s-verbal
has been signed
at Nicosia today between Mr. Denktas and the Force

172. Archbishop
Makarios,
having abrogated the
agreements and the Constitution
in an attempt to
18

should be saved.’ To these and other similar allegations, false accusations and unfounded lies we were
not given the opportunity
to reply. As Mike Randall,
an impartial foreign correspondent of world renown,
said in The Sunday Times of 12 October 1975:
“Turkish
Cypriots have long‘ been a suppressed
minority [under the Greek Cypriot administration].
Their blood has been spilled, their rights denied and
their paths to prosperity barred’.. That situation is
therefore what Turkey has remedied, not what it has
caused, as alleged by Mr. Christofides.

destroy the independence of the bi-national State and
to unite with a foreign country, has also destroyed
and nullified the contractual
bond which brought
the two nations together and made him the head of
the bi-national State. The head of one nation, therefore, cannot any longer pretend to be the head of the
bi-national
State or of both nations. That is what
Makarios
wants. The Archbishop
says, “I have
destroyed all the agreements except that which makes
me the head of both communities
in Cyprus”. That
is unacceptable, and, the Cyprus problem lies at the
root of this philosophy and this approach by Archbishop Makarios.

177. During the same debate, in which we were not
allowed to participate, another Greek representative
argued that Mr. Denktas was the Deputy Head of
the Executive of Cyprus, and therefore could not be
heard without credentials from the President. Which
President? A President who has not spoken with his
Turkish
Vice-President
for the last 12 years? .A
President who has been trying to destroy the independence of his country in order to unite with a
foreign country? A President who is still the biggest
stumbling block to a peaceful settlement in Cyprus?
A President who ,always considered the Turkish
Cypriots
as a ,natural enemy which, should be
exterminated?
‘,T
178. I should like to .quote Archbishop Makarios.
He ‘said: “Unless
this small Turkish
community
forming a partof the Turkish race, which has been
the terrible enemy of Hellenism, is expelled, the duty of
the heroes of EOKA can never be considered as
terminated”.
He made that speech at Panayia village
on 4 September 1962. He had then been our President
for two years.

173. The Greek Cypriots cannot run away with the
concept that they are the Government
and that we
are and shall continue, to be stateless. We respect
United Nations principles, but we cannot ignore the
basic reality.
174. Why did the Turkish Cypriot side not find it
possible to accept Assembly resolution 3395 (XXX)?
We found the resolution
unacceptable
primarily
because it was unrealistic. It did not reflect the reality
in the island. It reaffirmed resolution 3212 (XXIX)
without taking into consideration
developments that
have taken place since the adoption of that resolution
a year ago. It disregarded agreements reached at
Vienna and physically implemented
in Cyprus. It
called, for example, for the return of all refugees to
their homes, without taking into account the fact that
the voluntary exchange of populations
has taken
place in pursuance of an agreement in principle
reached at Vienna on a bi-zonal federation.
It
demanded the withdrawal of Turkish troops from
the island before a final settlement, despite the fact
that Makarios
has been sabotaging the intercommunal talks and openly advocating “a long struggle”.
It overlooked the fact that the justified and legitimate
intervention
of Turkey in Cyprus was carried out
under the international agreements in order to save the
Turkish Cypriot community
from complete annihilation’ and to safeguard the independence
of the
island-that
independence which Archbishop Makarios has been trying to destroy from the last 12
years.

179. This is the President whose credentials, we are
told, Mr. Denktas must- have in order to be able to.
come to the United Nations and’& the Vic&President
and leader of the Turkish Cypriot community
inform
the world body of the sufferings and injustice inflicted
on his community,
an injustice which comes from
the President himself.
180. This mockery must cease. It is high time that
the United Nations and the world started differentiating
between the guilty and the innocent, between the
accused and the sufferers.

175. We could not accept the resolution because it
was adopted in a forum where the Turkish Cypriot
community
was not represented and was not heard.
We rejected it in order to put on record that Archbishop Makarios
could not be accepted as the
representative of the whole of Cyprus and should not
be projected as a hero and defender of independence,
an independence which he never wanted.

181. Because of the position that Archbishop Makarios still continues to enjoy as the so-called Government of Cyprus and as a Member of the United
Nations,
all the resolutions
tend to compromise
the very crux of the Cyprus problem. So much is
said of this or that United Nations resolution:
so
much is said of the rules of procedure; so much is
said of United Nations principles.
Which resolutions and which principles?

176. It was during that debate in the General
Assembly when the Foreign Minister of the Greek
Cypriot administration,
Mr. Christofides,
not only
dared to speak for the Turkish Cypriot community,
but even went as far as to allege that Turkish Cypriots
were suffering at the hands of Turkey in Cyprus and

182. These are resolutions, pro,cedures and principles which present and recognize Makarios’to’be
what
he is not-a representative of the
whole
of
Cyprus.
;..
19
;’

These are rules which present the Archbishop as a
champion of independence and protect him and his
shadow Government against “outside intervention”.
Which interventions?
Turkey is implied here. The
Turkey
without whose timely intervention
there
would be no Turkish Cypriot community,
no Cyprus
independence and no Cyprus debate today.
183. Through resolution 3395 (XXX),
Archbishop
Makarios killed all goodwill contacts between the two
communities.
By denying that any agreement,
in
principle or otherwise, had been reached during the
talks, he encouraged the extremist
elements and
silenced one of the very few moderate Greek Cypriots
with whom we could have come to an agreement. That
was why we found it impossible
to accept that
resolution.

he was concerned, we did not exist. Ignoring the basic
reality that Cyprus is not his but ours, he wishes
and still strives to continue the old game of depriving
us of the protection of the State which he has been
playing for the last 12 years. But we cannot afford
to live without the State any longer.
188. Our attempt to remedy the situation,
even
partially, by the declaration of our federated State
has been against us. We have been judged and censured
in a number of international
forums for having
created a fait accompli, without even being given an
equal hearing. But no one censured Makarios for
denying one fourth of the population the basic services
and facilities of a State for 12 years. No one asked
him-and
for that matter no one asks him today-how
he intends to remedy the status of statelessness of
the Turkish Cypriot community.

184. Resolution
3212 (XXIX)
accorded highest
priority to the resumption and continuation
of intercommunal talks. Accordingly,
talks were held under
the auspices of the Secretary-General.
This afternoon
Mr. Rossides tried-to
blame the Turkish Cypriot
side for having caused the failure of the talks. Despite
wilful propaganda to the contrary, progress had been
achieved and further progress would have been made
had the Greek side not abandoned the talks and
resorted to the General Assembly for purely political
reasons.

189. That mistake started back in 1964 when Makarios was accepted by the Security Council as the legitimate Government
of Cyprus, and despite all our
protestations
the word “constitutional”
was not
inserted before the word “Government”
in Security
Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964. That
made Makarios
intransigent.
He continued
heedlessly to usurp all governmental authority after having
ousted all Turks from the governmental
machinery
by force of arms, and continued to act and behave
as the Greek head of a Greek State. Had we received
in 1964 and thereafter the interest and understanding
which we partially receive today, the Greek Cypriot
leadership would not have found it opportune for
themselves to prolong the Cyprus struggle as they
have done and seem intent on doing hereafter, and
the history of Cyprus would most probably have
followed a different course. The same mistake must
not be repeated.

185. For the sake of the record and the information
of members of the Council, I should like to state
once again that substantial progress had been achieved
at Vienna. The Greek side had abandoned its position
of a unitary State and had agreed in principle, and
subject to an over-all agreement on boundaries, that
the solution of the Cyprus problem would be based
on a bi-zonal federation, with a weak central government in which the two communities
would be equally
represented. In proof of that agreement an exchange
of population was accepted and implemented whereby
10.000 Turkish Cypriots who were in the south and
wanted to come north were allowed to do so and the
restriction imposed on the Greek Cypriots who lived in
the north and wanted to go south was also lifted by
the Greek Cypriot authorities.

190. Thus we see that, if the talks failed, it wasnot because of lack of progress, as alleged, nor was it
the absence of any prospect of an agreement that led
to the failure. It was Makarios’ wilful boycott. The
talks failed because the Archbishop,
committed
to
the policy of rnosis of the Greek Orthodox Church,
cannot accept permanent independence. That is why
he is against bi-zonal federation. That is why he is
not prepared to come to an agreement with us within
the framework of the present realities.

186. Therefore, had there been an agreement on the
territorial aspect as well, the framework of the overall settlement
would thus have been completed.
Having realized, however, that at Vienna the problem
was about to be settled on the basis of a bi-zonal
federation,
for which he was not prepared, the
Archbishop sabotaged the talks, taking full advantage
of the fact that in the United Nations he was treated
as the head of State of Cyprus.

191. That he did not want a solution during the
prolonged inter-communal
talks from 1968 to 1974
was obvious from his statement to Lawrence Stern of
The Wtrshington Post soon after the corrp of 1974:
“The fact that I never seem to come to an agreement
with the Turks may have been irritating...
but it
probably accounts for the prolongation
of my life
politically and the postponement of the coup”. That
statement was published in Fowigtz Policy, No. 19,
in the summer of 1975.

187. After Helsinki, he restarted his pre-c*orrp tactics
of rendering the Turkish Cypriot community stateless
‘and completely
disregarded even the existence of
the Turkish Cypriot community.
He was the head of
State and his country was under occupation. As far as

192. That he did not favour an agreement during
the Vienna talks either is confirmed by his most recent
20

“..

‘.

statement to Nerttsn~ek correspondent
Peter Melhs
which appeared in the Cyprm Mall of 7 November
1975, in which he publicly reiterated that any solution
within the framework of: the present realities on the
island would be worse thatn the continuation
of the
present de facto situation.
193. And why were the talks interrupted?
bishop Makarios’ own words, because

be. kept from the United Nations, if it is to be kept from
the world, if it is to be kept even from the Greek
Cypriots themselves, if it is not to be honoured and
implemented?
200. If, therefore, Archbishop Makarios- also wants
meaningful
negotiations
to be resumed he should
come forward with a public statement that he accepts
a settlement based on a bi-zonal federation and closed
to enosis; he should not bar us from being heard in
reply in all international
forums to which the Greek
Cypriot administration
resorts and he must agree to
an ud hoc administration
being set up in Cyprus to
treat the Turkish Cypriot community as equal citizens
and put an end to the condition of statelessness in
which the community finds itself today.

In Arch-

“If the talks continue... the mistaken impression
will be formed that the Cyprus problem is merely
a dispute between the two communities
and the
problem will shift from its present international
basis, shrinking to the dimensions of an internal
problem’of the island.”
That statement by Makarios was made through
Public Information
Office in May 1975.

his

201. Are we asking too much when we request
Archbishop Makarios to tell his people that we are
working for a bi-zonal federal system, completely
closed to enosis? We leave it to the world to judge.
If Archbishop.Makarios
has the goodwill and sincerity,
if he has a genuine desire for independence, permanent
independence, then, we say, he should not find it difficult to fulfil these conditions.

194. How could the talks possibly have survived?
How could we possibly have reached a peaceful settlement with a man so indifferent to realities? That he
never meant to come to an understanding with us is
evident from the policy he followed and his actions
during the intercommunal
talks.

202. But is Archbishop Makarios ready for a settlement? Here is a very recent appraisal of the situation
in the Greek press:

195. While we were negotiating at Vienna, he went
to the Commonwealth
Conference, to Helsinki,
to
Havana and to Lima, fighting to destroy the bi-national
image of Cyprus by preventing us from being heard in
reply, and trying to have resolutions adopted which
totally contradicted the principles agreed upon during
the intercommunal
talks.

“Everyone should understand and digest that the
struggle will continue until the end to complete
victory, without any concessions.. .
“We shall not retreat from the struggle no matter
how much sacrifice it requires, until our people...
re-enter Morphou; until they breathe again in the
castle of Kyrenia; until they hoist the flag of victory
in Famagusta again, and until they quench their
thirst with the holy water of Ayios Andreas...

196. Finally, he chose to break off the negotiations
completely
and proceeded to the Genera! Assembly
in order to get rid of the agreements which the two
sides had reached at Vienna. By misleading the world
and by misrepresenting
realities on the island, he
managed in having an unrealistic resolution adopted,
resolution 3395 (XXX), which helped no one, not even
his community.

“This is Makarios’ policy. This is our people’s
decision. We shall not retreat an inch...“.

197. The Turkish Cypriot community still considers
the intercommunal
talks as the best, in fact the only,
method for the solution of the Cyprus problem.
We are in favour of the talks, but it will be appreciated
that the resumption
of the negotiations
within the
framework of resolution 3395 (XXX) is not acceptable.
A new procedure has to be found; it has to be negotiated
between the parties concerned.

That

1975 issue of

203. And here is what Archbishop Makarios said just
before the cor~p: “The union of Cyprus with Greece
requires the extermination
of the Turkish
comThis he said in an interview
with
munity...“.
Mrs. Karin Kaamereit of the German weekly Buntcj
Illustrkr?e
of 19 April 1973.

198. The Turkish Cypriot community
will do its
utmost to facilitate the‘resumption
and- will co-operate effectively
for the success of the talks. We
appreciate the invaluable contribution ofthe SecretaryGenera! in this regard in the past and wil!,co-operate
with him to the full in the future.

204. Well, I am afraid that this appraisal and this
stateinent leave very little room for optimism. it is high
time that Makarios made up his mind. Are we or are we
not a part of Cyprus? Are we to become a part of the
Cypriot administrative
mechanism, and when? Will
he accept our proposal for a joint transitional federal
government?
How much longer are we to continue
in a condition of statelessness? How much longer is

199. We favour the talks. But what is the meaning
of negotiations if what we agreed upon at Vienna is to
\

is taken from the 4 December
a Greek newspaper.

Ancrypnnisis,

21

the Archbishop to shelter behind United Nations resolutions and play the game of government with us?
205. I think I should elaborate briefly on the question
of refugees, which has been raised by Mr. Rossides
and a few other representatives this afternoon. The
question of refugees, a humanitarian problem, has been
grossly exaggerated and harshly exploited by the Greek
Cypriot side. The number of displaced persons is
around 90.000. This has been determined from the
official census of population of the Greek Cypriot viiiages which have been evacuated. Even the Greek
Cypriot authorities, even their Attorney-Genera!,
Criton Tomaritis, in his official leaflet, Legal aspects
of the Cyprus refugee problem, argue that the number
could not possibly have been above 120.000. We have
65.000 Turkish refugees who came and settled in the
north. We have another 25.000 refugees who have been
displaced since 1963. So the number of displaced
persons on both sides is roughly the same, 90.000 to
95.000 people.

209. Unfortunately, here we see the Archbishop’s
“salami” poficy at work again, During the negotiation.s,
during the exercise of give and -take, he gets whatever
he can get, he pocketsit as ifit were his, but when-it
comes to giving something, there is nothing to give,
Here, there is either a package deal on the principles
that have been agreed upon as a whole at Vienna, or
there is no agreement at ail, I think it is high time
that our Greek Cypriot friends come to a decision asto
whether there is an agreement at Vienna or there is
none.
210. Regarding the humanitarian problem, I would
stress most emphatically and put on record that we
are trying our best to solve the humanitarian problems.
We are doing this on humanitarian grounds and not as
part of an agreement which the Greek side insists
categorically does not exist.
2 11. To sum up: if Archbishop Makarios refuses to
see the problem of Cyprus as a dispute ‘between the
two communities and insists that it is just a problem
of invasion by Turkey, if he does not regard the Turks
as part of Cyprus and leaves them in a condition. of
stateiessness,if he continues to reject the formation of a
transitional government while negotiations on a
bi-zonai federation continue, if he does not stop the
political offensive against us in international forums
for an agreed period of time and give a!! his attention
to peace talks, if he continues to advocate a long
struggle in order to throw the Turks out of Cyp.rusj
if he does not start to see Cyprus as a land of Turkish
Cypriots and Greek Cypriots who have to rearrange
their own houses in the light of his lZyear-old policy
of throwing us out of Cyprus, if he denies everything
that has been agreed upon in principle during the talks
and if he still considers a bi-zonal solution as a negation
of his own beliefs and personality because such an
agreement would bury for good his idea of enosis,
how can there be an agreement?

206. We have had an agreement on the mutual
exchange ‘of populations, which has been implemented.
Equal numbers of displaced persons have been settled
in the north and in the south, and the few thousands
that are still unsettled can be settled an rehabilitated
if there is goodwill and if this is so desired. Therefore
it would be unrealistic to expect at this stage that ail
those 180.000 people, including the Turks and the
Greeks, should be unsettled, uprooted again and sent
back to where they started, so that the tragic past would
repeat itself in the next few years. We should be more
realistic on this subject and the matter should not be
exaggerated.
207. Another allegation this afternoon is that there is
a massive immigrationof population from Turkey. This
is what we have been hearing for the past year from
the Greek side. This allegation is completely baseless.
It is unfounded. The people who are returning to
Cyprus are Turkish Cypriots who have been forced
to leave the island under the threat of EOKA
and under economic, political, scciai and military
pressure by the Greek Cypriot administration during
the past 20 years. These people are Turkish Cypriots
and it is their natural right to return to .Cyprus now
that relative security of life and property has been
restored in the north of the is!and.
.,I

212. As long as Archbishop Makarios is.a!lowed to
go about as.the head of “a small State overrun by a
powerful neighbouring country”, why should he sign
an agreement and solidify the aaturai result of his
enosis sins? why not press for more resolutions. in
ail and other international forums in the absence of
the Turkish Cypriot community and expect further
embargoes on Turkey, or other developments? Since
the Turks of Cyprus are not considered or accepted
as part of Cyprus, and are therefore left in a form of
stateiessness, why not continue this game of government for ever? As long as the Archbishop is accepted
as the representative of the whoIe of Cyprus, as long
as he is considered the champion and defender of
independence, as long as we are not granted equal
status,’there can be no solution.

208. It has been alleged again this afternoon that the
Vienna agreements have not been implemented by the
Turkish-Cypriot side. But I am afraid theGreek side is
contradicting itself here. There .is a paradox. The
Greeks are alleging that no agreement ’ whatsoever
was achieved at Vienna. They made,‘this public.
They made Mr. Clerides make the following statement:
“This allegation is totally unfounded. No agreement
has been reached on any point or issue either in principle or otherwise, regarding the solution of the Cyprus
problem’:. That statement made by Mij’Clerides has
been circulated as an official document,cf the Genera!
._._,
Assembiy.4

213. I do sincerely hope that, ultimately, goodwill
and common sense will prevail and that meaningful
and constructive negotiations will be resumed, leading
to a realistic, just and durable solution.
22

-

214. The PRESIDENT: I call on the- representative
of Greece.
215. Mr. PAPOULIAS (Greece): Mr. Celik, speaking
before the Security Council under rule 39 of the
provisianal rules of procedure, that is to say, as a
person whom the Council may invite “to supply...
information or to give other assistance”, has said
that an agreement was signed a Nicosia giving legal
status to a community in Cyprus on the occasion of the
renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP. That statement
is-an infringement of the competence of the Security
CT;ouncil,under whose sole jurisdiction come all United
Nations forces in Cyprus or inywhere else. There is
a claim here that the Secretary-General, on whose
authority a pro&s-verbal was signed, as we understand, at Nicosia in order to make practical arrangements for the functioning of UNFICYP, is guilty
of violation of Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter,
because this is an internal matter of a State Membei
of the United Nations. Such statements are totally
-unfounded. Therefore I wish- to have your guidance,
Mr. President, or that of the Secretary-General, as
this is a very serious matter which should be cleared
up forthwith.
216, The PRESIDENT: I do not think it is for me,
as President of the Council, to clear up the matter of a
document which has been signed on behalf of the
Secretary-General. But I think it would be helpful if
weasked the SecretaryGeneral to explain the position.
217. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: In answering
the question put to me by the representative ofGreece,
I wish to confirm what I reported to the Security
Council at its informal meeting this morning. On
13 December-that
is today, this morning-at
1I:40 GMT, the following pro&s-verbai was signed by
“His Excellency Mr. Rauf Denktaz” and “LieutenantGeneral Prem Chand, Acting Special Representative
of the Secretary-General”. I shall now- read out the
content of this document:
“During the process of consultation undertaken
‘_ by the Secretary-General regarding the extension of
‘I+ UNFICYP mandate and following an exchange
of’views on this question with the Turkish Cypriot
comniunity, the Secretary-General has indicated that
his Special Representative will discuss with the
representative of the Turkish Cypriot community
questions pertaining to the stationing, deployment
and functioning of U,NFICYP in the area under
Turkish control, with a view to arriving at mutually
acceptable arrangements, which will be recorded
through an exchange of letters.7
\
This document speaks for itself and i’m?ot accept
\_\~
any unilateral interpretation of it.
-...

2119. Mr. PAPOlJI$Q (Greece): We take it, then,
that Mr. olik gave. a miilateral interpretation of’this
statement which has just been read out by the
Secretary-General, and we wish to put on record that
the procts-verbal which was signed’has no legai,status
whatsoever under the Charter, and is dot an encroachment upon the internal affairs of any country, in
accordance with Article 2; paragraph 3, of the Charter.
It is our understanding that- it is devoid of any legal
status that would contravene such fundamental provisions of the Charter.
220. There is only one Government in Cyprus,
legally recognized by all the States Members of. the
United Nations, and that is it and nothing else.
221. The PRESIDENT: In so far as what the representative of Greece has just told us refers to questions
of fact, obviously everybody would agree with him.
In so far as it refers to interpretation, I really do not
think it is for the Security Council to interpret the
precise effect of a document: in an nd hoc way at a
meeting of this sort. I think the Secretary-General has
made hiS position extremely ctear. He has read the
document and he has said that he cannot accept any
unilateral interpretation of the document. It seems to
me that it must therefore be for Member States to
place their own interpretation upon the document,
in the light ‘of what the Secretary-General has said.
222. I call on the representative of Cyprus.
223. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I should like to s_ay
a few words with regard to the matter now under
discussion, that is, the document read out by the
Secretary-General; which clearly states that it referred
to practical arrangements locally made in respect of
matters connected with the local functioning of
UNFICYP in the areas which are under Turkey’s
occupation at present. Those arrangements were
necessary, but they have nothing to do with any
consent for the renewal of the mandate, whether by
the Turkish military or their agents-of whom we have
seen one appearing here-in the guise of a leader of
the Turkish Cypriots. They have nothing to do with the
renewal of the mandate, because the mandate was
always renewed by the consent of the Government of
Cyprus. The Turkish Cypriot community, although it
has been vocal in many things for many years, has
never sugge:ted that it would have to give its consent
to the rene.qval of the mandate, nor, indeed, was it
necessary to. have such consent from Turkey or from
anyone else; ,Therefore I would have taken no notice
of what was stated here by Mr. celik, because none
of the other:things he said had any substance or truth;
but this happkns to be a matter that touches the
Secretary-General and it has to be contradicted.
.!

_’

224. In fact,his whole statement is but a clichC that
has been repeated and that others have caused to be
218. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative ‘repeated in q$er to blur the issues. The representaof Greece.
<ive of Turke) finds some excuse to-avoid replying,
23 . \‘,
‘\
‘1

I

/

as he always does,. as to why his country continues
the aggressive occupation of Cyprus. He forgets the
200.000 refugees thrown out by force, expelled; and
then we hear either from him or from Mr. Celik
that there are now new realities in Cyprus. What realities? The realities of the population expelled by blood
and iron? Does that create a reality and give rights?
Can one simply create an international crime, and by
virtue of that crime say there is a new reality? One
calls it a new reality, and continues the expulsion
and importation of the Turkish population.

its meaning distorted, the sort of important thing with
which the Security Council must deal and not the invasions, not the destruction and the rape-because
it is
a rape-of Cyprus by Turkey? These are matters of-no
consequence. We must pass over them lightly in order
to make an interlude in the exchange of slanderous
words.
228. The representative of Turkey said that resolution
3212 (XXIX) has been superseded by realities. What
does he mean by this? Is he referring to the abnormal
situation created since 1974 by the uprooting
of
hundreds of thousands of people? Does that make him
think that the demographic composition of Cyprus has
changed? That is -what they have. been trying to do.
They have been hastening to change the demographic
composition of the island by crime.

225. Then Mr. Celik had the courage to. say that those
people who are arriving are not imported but are
Turkish Cypriots who, had left the island since 1964.
But we have already given accurate statistics in a letter to the Secretary-General,
indicating
that, if I
remember correctly, only 6.000 Turkish Cypriots left
the island in a period of 11 years; most of them went to
other parts and only LOO0 or less went to Turkey.
How have they so multiplied
in 10 years that,
according to accounts published in papers, even
moderate accounts, about 80.000 have arrived in
Cyprus PII ln~sse and hurriedly to fill up the space?
That is the situation.

229. As regards resolution 3395 (XXX), the representative of Turkey says it has no- “operative
value”.
Is it because it calls for respect for the territorial
integrity
and. independence
of Cyprus continually
violated by Turkey in its attempt to partition the island
and then to annex it? Is it because it calls for the
withdrawal of the occupation forces from Cyprus and
the return of the refugees to their homes in safety?
Because it does all that in reaffirmation of the previous
General Assembly resolution it is not operative! Why
is it not operative? Because the party guilty of these
actions does not accept it. That is a fine idea of the
meaning and .effectiveness of United Nations resolutions: that those guilty of aggression can in effect
veto them.

226. I would not-consider answering all the libellous
things poured out by an agent purposely brought
here to blur the issue of aggression by speaking of
unrelated matters, quoting out of context and repeating
things, as if those were the important matters with
which the United Nations and the Security Council
have been dealing. The issue is aggression, invasion,
expulsion,
the decimation
of the population
by
thousands; the issue is more than 2.000 missing
persons, many of whom have been seen in the hands
of the Turkish army. They are still searching for them.
In the Third Committee
a resolution was adopted
calling for a further search.

The meeting

rose at 5.40 p.m.

Notes
t See resolution
383 (1975).
2 SeeOJWd
Recwds clfthc Grnerd
Plmctry
Meetings.
2405th meeting.
x Ibid., 2357th meeting.
4 A/ 10365.

227. These criminal activities are as nothing; all that
matters is what the Archbishop said on some occasion
about Greece. Is that, taken out of context and with

24

Assmbiy,

Thirtieth

Session.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les libtairies
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adtiez-vous
des ventes, New York ou Genh.

et les agenees d@ositaires du
a : Nations Unies. Section

COMO

UNIDAS

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

J-as publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas es& en venta en lib&as
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones
Nuexa York o Ginebra.

L.itho in United

Nations,

UNIES

New York

00400

y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas.

82-61202-December

1983-2,200
