S/2005/395

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 June 2005
English
Original: French

Letter dated 15 June 2005 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the Accra III Agreement on Côte d’Ivoire,
adopted on 30 July 2004 at Accra, and to the statement by the President of the
Security Council of 5 August 2004 (S/PRST/2004/29), and also to my previous
letters to the President of the Security Council transmitting the reports of the
Tripartite Monitoring Group established under the Accra III Agreement.
Please find attached the thirteenth and fourteenth reports of the Tripartite
Monitoring Group, covering the periods from 1 March to 8 April and from 15 April
to 31 May 2005 respectively (see annexes).
I should be grateful if you would arrange for this letter and its annexes to be
brought to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

05-38941 (E) 200605 060705

*0538941*

S/2005/395

Annex I
[Original: English]

Implementation of the Accra III Agreement
Thirteenth report of the Tripartite Monitoring Group
Covering the period from 1 March to 8 April 2005

I.

Introduction

1.
The present report is prepared pursuant to the Accra III Agreement of 30 July
2004, which established the Tripartite Monitoring Group and requested it to submit
regular reports on the situation in Côte d’Ivoire and on the progress made towards the
implementation of the Accra III Agreement. This Thirteenth Report covers major
developments between 1 March and 8 April 2005. The coverage extends beyond the
normal two weeks to the period after the Pretoria negotiations initiated by the African
Union mediator, President Thabo Mbeki.

II.

Overview

2.
In spite of the relative calm following the attack on a Forces Nouvelles
checkpoint position in the western town of Logouale on 28 February 2005, the security
situation remains fragile, with occasional reports of activities of militias particularly in
the West of the country.
3.
The incident in Logouale has prompted the Forces Nouvelles to strengthen their
positions along the zone of confidence, and around their headquarters in Bouake.
Furthermore, in a letter addressed to UNOCI leadership and to President Mbeki, the
Forces Nouvelles leadership deplored the reaction of the international community who,
according to them, were slow in condemning the attack. They, therefore, requested an
international inquiry to determine responsibility in this new violation of the ceasefire.
Consequently, on 3 March 2005, a delegation of the Monitoring Committee traveled to
Logouale to assess the situation on the spot. The Committee expressed its deep concern
over the incursions by armed groups from the Government controlled zone trespassing
the zone of confidence under the control of the impartial forces. They strongly
condemned the attack. During a press conference held after the visit, UNOCI’s Force
Commander, General Fall, announced that ONUCI forces had handed 85 of the 87
2

S/2005/395

arrested assailants to the Police Commissioner in Guiglo for appropriate judicial
proceedings to be undertaken against them. The remaining two were minors who were
handed over to ICRC and UNICEF.
4.
On 8 March 2005, President Gbagbo made a one-day trip to Nigeria to visit
President Olusegun Obasanjo in order to discuss the situation in Côte d’Ivoire.
Discussions focused on the ongoing mediation mission of President Mbeki. President
Gbagbo also complained to President Obasanjo about the recent decisions taken by the
Forces Nouvelles which were, according to him, reinforcing the division of the country.
These related to the establishment of a Police Academy, a Customs school, banks and
an Insurance company in Bouake. A similar consultative visit was made to Abuja by
ex-President Henri Konan Bedie, from 21st to 23rd March, on President Obasanjo’s
invitation in furtherance of the mediation efforts of the African Union.
5.
Groups of “Young Patriots” launched a series of demonstrations in Guiglo,
Duekoue, San Pedro and other towns in the West to demand the departure of the French
Licorne forces. In order to avoid a resumption of hostilities in Abidjan, the Council of
Ministers, at its meeting of 10 March 2005, extended the current ban on public
demonstrations in Abidjan to June 2005. In response, the “Young Patriots” decided to
organise their demonstrations outside Abidjan.
6.
The European Union (EU) Commissioner for Co-operation and Development,
Mr. Louis Michel, arrived on 19 March 2005 for a brief two-day visit in Côte d’Ivoire.
During his visit, Mr. Michel had discussions with President Laurent Gbagbo, the
President of the National Assembly, Mamadou Koulibaly, the Prime Minister Seydou
Diarra, as well as the G7. The European Commissioner also met the leadership of the
Forces Nouvelles. He conveyed the message of the European Union to continue
suspending their aid as long as there was no progress reported over the peace process.

III. Developments in the peace process
Legislative reforms
7.
On 3 March 2005, a communiqué was issued by the Presidency to put an end to
the debate over the speculated “political vacuum” if elections did not take place in
October 2005. In the communiqué, President Gbagbo reaffirmed that “Disarmament –
Reunification – Free and Transparent Elections” was the only way to follow in order to

3

S/2005/395

maintain and respect the constitutional legality in consonance with the LinasMarcoussis Agreement. In the communiqué, it was also stated that the disarmament of
the Forces Nouvelles should be an immediate priority and remained the sole condition
for the restoration of peace in Côte d’Ivoire. Concerning the functioning of the
Independent Electoral Commission, the President recalled that the Law No 2004-624
promulgated on 14 December 2004 should be applied and that the holding of the
presidential elections in October 2005 should be considered as an urgent matter.
Referring to a possible vacuum if elections were not held in October 2005, President
Gbagbo made it clear that he would remain in office in accordance with the provisions
of Articles 38 and 39 of the Constitution until an elected successor emerged.
8.
A delegation of the Mouvance Parlementaire pour la Réconciliation et la Paix – a
cross-party caucus in the National Assembly - met on 10 March 2005 with the Acting
Special Representative of the UN Secretary-General to express its serious concerns on
the security situation, especially in the West of the country. They underscored threats
which they felt also weighed on the opposition leaders and asked for the protection of
UNOCI. They also insisted on the application of the sanctions envisaged under
Security Council Resolution 1572 against all who obstructed the peace process. They
also requested that UN be involved in the organization of the elections in October 2005
in order to ensure their credibility and acceptance. UNOCI took note of their
presentations and promised to convey them to New York. This same request had been
made by Prime Minister Seydou Diarra during his consultations with President Mbeki
in South Africa on 4 March 2005, as well as by Alassane Ouattara of RDR and
Alphonse Djédjé Mady on behalf of the G7 Coalition of opposition political parties.
9.
Following the request by the Monitoring Committee to revise all legislative texts
which were not in conformity with the letter and the spirit of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement, the Speaker of the National Assembly addressed his response to the
Monitoring Committee. He stated that all the legislative texts, which had been recently
promulgated, had been “adopted in strict conformity with the Constitution of Côte
d’Ivoire, which vests the National Assembly "only" with the capacity to vote laws and
the Deputies the right of amendment. He pointed that the rules of the Assembly require
any review of the legislation to be carried out within a time limit before the
promulgation, at the request of a requisite number of Deputies or the President of the
Republic. He, however, promised to lay the matter before the Deputies.

4

S/2005/395

Electoral process
10. In preparation for the forthcoming elections, the Government of National
Reconciliation has set up an Inter-ministerial Committee to study and propose feasible
conditions for identification and the establishment of electoral lists. This Committee
comprises four Ministers representing the major political forces, namely Finance and
Economy (FPI), Territorial Administration (FN), Justice (RDR) and Economic
Infrastructure (PDCI). Three other Ministers will serve as advisors to this Committee,
namely Security, Defence and Planning.
DDR
11. The events of 28 February 2005 have unfortunately adversely affected any
progress made since January 2005 through the efforts of the joint UNOCI - South
Africa mediation and the Prime Minister’s mission in Bouake. In February 2005,
officials of UNOCI and the CNDDR along with the South African mediation mission
negotiated access to DDR sites in the Forces Nouvelles controlled areas and also with
the aim of restoring dialogue with the Forces Nouvelles on the DDR process. A team
composed of South African senior military advisors, the Chairman of the CNDDR and
the Chief of the DDR division in UNOCI visited all DDR sites in Forces Nouvellescontrolled areas of Bouake, Korhogo, Man, Seguela and Bouna. In each zone, the
delegation visited the military cantonment, and disarmament and demobilisation
facilities. These visits also allowed the delegation to have discussions with FN Zone
Commanders and to assess their willingness to implement the DDR process.
Discussions mostly focused on security issues, rehabilitation work and relevant
political considerations. FN commanders stated that FN might be willing to regroup
their troops as soon as the two military protagonists reach a political compromise. They
also agreed with CNDDR that rehabilitation work should commence. However, their
main concern remained with the issue of security of the DDR sites and the zone of
confidence. Forces Nouvelles requested that impartial forces secure the demobilisation
sites during the DDR process for fear of possible attacks against them during the
demobilisation phase. During the discussions, it appeared clearly that there was
concurrence of views between the FN commanders and the political leadership.
Commanders insisted on the necessary concomitance between the start-up of DDR and
political and legislative reforms.

5

S/2005/395

The Mbeki Facilitation mission
12. In reviewing President Mbeki’s mediation mission, several matters of concern
were emerging: the persistent refusal of the Forces Nouvelles to begin disarmament;
the absence of agreement among political factions over the composition of the
Independent Electoral Commission; the non-functioning of the Government; the thorny
and controversial issue of the amendment to Article 35 of the Constitution. All these
unresolved issues constituted serious threats to the current peace process and the
mediation.
13. President Mbeki’s envoys arrived on Sunday 13 March 2005 to undertake
various levels of consultations. The delegation was led by the Minister of Defence Mr.
Lekota, accompanied by Ambassador Gwadiso, South African Ambassador to Cote
d’Ivoire, Advocate Mojanku Gumbi, Legal Advisor to the President, Mr. S.S. Sokupa,
Assistant Director General of the South African Presidency and two legal experts,
Judge Pascal Barandagiye, Judge of the Constitutional Court of Burundi, Mr. Idi
Tuzinde Gaparayi, Legal officer of the UN War Crimes Tribunal at the Hague. There
was a meeting with the Monitoring Committee to discuss the review of the legislative
texts undertaken by the two legal experts. A copy of the text of their report, submitted
to President Mbeki, was handed over to the Monitoring Committee. The Committee
found their recommendations for review generally in accord with their own. This report
was also handed over to the President, the Speaker of the National Assembly and the
Prime Minister.
14. On the mediation process, Minister Lekota stated that there had been a slowdown
due to several persisting grievances, complicated by the events of 28 February 2005.
There was clearly emerging a sense of disappointment at the lack of political
willingness on the part of the Ivorian political actors to move steadily in good faith
towards resolving the crisis. President Mbeki and his team were, nonetheless,
determined to persevere and exert the outmost influence on whomsoever to advance the
peace process. They had in mind those issues which ought to be addressed in the
process leading to the holding of the Presidential elections in October 2005.
15. The Mbeki mission recognised the difficulties in mobilising the Government of
National Reconciliation to its normal functioning. These hinged primarily on the return
of the Forces Nouvelles Ministers and on the proposals to provide close protection to
guarantee their security. On DDR, they recognised that the DDR, beyond the initial

6

S/2005/395

visits to the cantonment sites, needed the CNDDR’s drawing up an accelerated
programme of visits and other operational plans including the restructuring of the
Armed Forces to give assurances of a safety net for the ex-combatants who would
qualify to be reintegrated in a restructured National Armed Forces. Unfortunately, these
tentative understandings appeared to have been jeopardized by the events of 28
February. President Mbeki had been requested to submit a report on the status of his
current negotiations to assist the UN Security Council in its consultations over the
impending renewal of the mandate of UNOCI. The Council deliberated on this matter
on 28 March and 4 April 2005. The Council decided, in its resolution 1594 (2005), a
review of progress in the Mbeki mediation, to renew the mandate for one month, until 4
May 2005. Subsequently, he is to submit a monthly report to the Chairperson of the
African Union. These reports would invariably be shared with the UN SecretaryGeneral and the Chairperson of ECOWAS.
16. At the instance of President Mbeki, talks aimed at relaunching the peace process
in Côte d’Ivoire were held in Pretoria from 3 to 6 April. President Gbagbo (FPI), Prime
Minister Seydou Diarra, ex President Bedie (PDCI), ex Prime Minister Alassane
Ouattara (RDR) and Guillaume Soro (Forces Nouvelles) were invited, each with a
delegation of four persons.
17.
The formal letter of invitation was exhortatory. It summed up areas of agreement
among the protagonists and set out several of the core issues to be addressed at the
negotiations, namely Nationality; article 35, eligibility to the office of the President of
the Republic; elections of October 2005 – free, fair and open to all. Underlying any
progress, President Mbeki emphasized, was the factor of mutual confidence and trust,
the lack of which currently “bedevilled’ relations among the parties.
18. The 18-point Pretoria Agreement provided a wide canvass of broad political
understandings on which to delineate the details of commitment for implementing the
Mbeki Road Map of 6 December 2004. A symbolic and significant political declaration
of the end of the war was made. Broad measures were spelled out for addressing the
thorny issues of militias. DDR, return of the FN Ministers to the Government, the
reconstitution of the Independent Electoral Commission and the Constitutional Council,
the organization of the elections and the reconstitution of the management of the
Ivorian Radio and Television (RTI). However, the all important and controversial issue
of article 35 was not resolved in Pretoria. As reported, in the face of divergent
positions, President Mbeki was entrusted with a mandate to hold consultations with the

7

S/2005/395

Chairperson of the African Union and with the Secretary-General of the UN to come up
with a compromise proposal.
Humanitarian situation
19. On a different matter, the Chairman of the AU has appointed a Special Envoy on
the question of protecting civilian populations in situations of armed conflicts with the
mandate to formulate and conclude on behalf of the AU a draft agreement on the
protection of civilian populations in situations of armed conflicts. This agreement is to
be seen as a form of Code of Conduct which essentially relies for its enforcement on
moral sanctions and not on any formal structure of familiar political or economic
sanctions. It should address the persisting and increasing failure to protect civilian life
in times of conflict, especially the vulnerable populations such as women, children, the
aged and the handicapped. The essence of this AU initiative is to put in place a strategy
and process to ensure that such commitment is secured concretely by the signature and
the military or armed protagonists to the text of the Agreement or Protocol. This
Protocol was the subject of consultations by the Special Envoy, Mme Mame Madior
Boye during her visit to Côte d’Ivoire. She had discussions with all the major political
forces and the Monitoring Committee.
20. The Logouale incident and other ethnic tensions in the West have resulted in the
displacement of thousands of people. It has been reported that some 15,000 people
have fled their homes in the zone of confidence, on the axis of Bangolo-GueheblyFengolo towards Duekoue. There have also been reports of a series of clashes in the
villages of Fengolo, Toa, Zeo and Diahouin close to the town of Duekoue. Many of
these villages have been deserted after being attacked and burned down.
21. The death of 13 villagers who were allegedly tortured by forest guards during
their detention in a prison in Bouafle, north of Yamoussoukro, has been reported. These
villagers had been accused of trespassing and illegally occupying the Marahoue
National Park. UNOCI has sent a mission of inquiry to establish the circumstances that
led to these deaths. The mission has called on the government to investigate the death
of these villagers.
22. According to a report by NGO Human Rights Watch, the Government of Côte
d’Ivoire has recently recruited demobilised combatants in Liberia including children
under the age of 18 to fight alongside with pro-government militias which are based in

8

S/2005/395

the western towns of Guiglo, Blolequin and Toulepleu. According to this report,
Liberian ex-combatants had been recruited in October 2004 just prior to the Ivorian
government offensive against the rebel-held north of the country and recently in the
beginning of March 2005 in anticipation of future attacks on rebel-held positions. Some
of them are also said to have participated in the attack on a rebel position in Logouale
on 28 February 2005 along with MILOCI (a pro-government militia). Most of them
originate from the south-eastern counties of Grand Gedeh, River Gee and Maryland
which border government controlled areas of Côte d’Ivoire. These ex-combatants who
had been disarmed and demobilised in 2004 in Liberia, had subsequently signed up for
education and skills training programmes supervised by the Liberian DDR programme.
Unfortunately due to severe shortfalls in this programme, only a few training
programmes had opened up. As regards the demobilised child combatants who had not
been able to re-unite with their families or communities, some of them remained with
their former commanders and were subsequently recruited to join militias to fight in
Côte d’Ivoire. These threats to peace and security come from both sides, as there have
also been reports of recruitment of disarmed Liberian adults by the Forces Nouvelles
since August 2004.

IV. Conclusion
23. All Ivorian parties and international observers concerned agreed on the crucial
importance of the meeting in Pretoria which was seen as the last chance for the early
return of peace. The Pretoria Agreement of 6 April 2005 must be seen as a major
political effort to renew dialogue and give a fresh impetus to the peace process. For
several reasons, there are anxious expectations of the outcome of President Mbeki’s
consultations over article 35. The role of the UN (UNOCI) has to be fully clarified and
the feasibility of the increased tasks placed on UNOCI should be critically assessed and
authorized by the Security Council.
24. Notwithstanding the ray of hope emitted by the Pretoria Accord, it ought to be
noted that the elections of October 2005 are only six months away. Immense and
delicate tasks are yet to be accomplished. To this end, it is imperative that all parties
concerned continue to make coordinated efforts to ensure that the progress made is not
lost and the anticipated elections in October do not prove to be a fleeting illusion.

9

S/2005/395

25.
In this important regard, the principal actors in the Ivorian political drama must
be urged to face up to their primary obligations to their country and its suffering
population, show good faith and support unreservedly President Mbeki’s impressive
and dedicated mediation efforts.
(Signed on behalf of the Group) Ambassador Raph Uwechue
Chairman
8 April 2005

10

S/2005/395

Annex II
[Original: English]

Implementation of the Accra III Agreement
Fourteenth report of the Tripartite Monitoring Group
Covering the period from 15 April to 31 May 2005

I.

Introduction

1.
The present report is prepared pursuant to the Accra III Agreement of 30 July
2004, which established the Tripartite Monitoring Group and requested it to submit
regular reports on the situation in Côte d’Ivoire and on the progress made towards the
implementation of the Accra III Agreement, now extended into the recent Pretoria
Accord. This Fourteenth Report covers major developments between 15 April and 31
May 2005. The extended coverage was necessitated by the unavoidable absence of the
tripartite team variously on missions outside Côte d’Ivoire at different times during the
period.

II.

Overview

2.
The general security situation was relatively calm throughout the country
except in the West, particularly in and around Duekoue, Danane, Guiglo and Man
where there were reports of ethnic tensions as well as grave abuses of human
rights. In Abidjan, the situation has been relatively calm but insecure due to the
rising level of criminality.
3.
Immediately after the publication of the Pretoria Agreement, all sides of the
political spectrum in Côte d’Ivoire welcomed it and underscored the critical
importance of implementing the agreement in good faith. President Gbagbo spoke
about the prospects for peace, with emphasis on disarmament, leading to
reunification and the creation of conditions conducive to the holding of elections
in October 2005. The Forces Nouvelles cautioned, however, that DDR should be
implemented in tandem with safeguarding the overall security and effecting the
agreed political and legislative reforms. Meanwhile, all registered political
groups, except the Forces Nouvelles, were engaged in activities mobilising their
constituents or supporters in readiness for the impending electoral campaign. All
things being equal, the enthusiasm for the electioneering should be a good
11

S/2005/395

indicator of the political will of the Ivorian leaders to resolve the issues in the
peace process which will conduce to the holding of the elections in October 2005.

III. Developments in the peace process
The Mbeki Facilitation Mission
4.
Following the Pretoria Agreement of 6 April 2005 broadly accepted by all
the stakeholders, President Mbeki was entrusted with a mandate to consult the
Chairperson of the African Union and the Secretary-General of the UN in order to
come up with a compromise proposal on the unresolved issue of Article 35
(eligibility to the Presidency). At the end of his consultations, he addressed a
letter dated 11 April 2005 to the parties to the Pretoria Agreement in which he
ruled that nominees of the political forces signatories to the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement could stand as candidates in the forthcoming October 2005
presidential elections. He, therefore, called on President Gbagbo to use the
exceptional powers conferred on him by Article 48 of the Constitution to facilitate
this determination. (A signed copy of the letter is attached).
5.
President Gbagbo decided to organise a series of consultations to plebiscite
the views of a cross-section of identified groups on the matter, ranging from
Youth and Women’s associations; trade unions; religious and spiritual leaders;
traditional chiefs and elders; farmers and agricultural workers; presidents and
vice-presidents of Conseils generaux; mayors and vice-mayors; prefects; heads of
State institutions and their bureaus; and representatives of the National Defence
and Security Forces. Immediately following these consultations, on 26 April
2005, President Gbagbo addressed the Nation. In his Address, he indicated that as
of that day (Tuesday 26 April 2005), he would use the exceptional powers
conferred on him by Article 48 of the Constitution until the crisis was resolved.
He, therefore, announced four initial measures: firstly, candidates nominated by
the political forces signatories to the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement were eligible
to run for the forthcoming presidential elections in October 2005; secondly, he
indicated that this authorization was restricted only to the October 2005
presidential elections and hence that Mr. Ouattara was free to stand if he so
wished. Thirdly, he designated the National Institute of Statistics (INS) as the
‘sole agency” to compile the electoral lists for the elections of 2005 and to issue

12

S/2005/395

voters’ cards. Fourthly, he ordered the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC),
constitutionally in charge of the organization of the elections, to take all the
necessary measures to allow any political parties to verify the validity of the
electoral lists at their convenience.
6.
All major political parties generally welcomed President Gbagbo’s decision
to accept President Mbeki’s ruling. The FPI was delighted to note that the use of
Article 48 excluded any modification of the Constitution. The opposition parties
described the statement, as a “step forward in the restoration of peace”. However,
they had some reservations about the authority and duties allocated to the
National Institute of Statistics (INS). They questioned the neutrality of an
institution whose head was known to have close political ties with the President.
They also observed that the INS had not been allocated the requisite resources to
accomplish such a mandate. The question was also raised as to what would be the
role of the United Nations which, in the terms of the Pretoria Agreement, was to
be involved in the work of the IEC and the Constitutional Council, as well as in
the organisation of the general elections.
7.
On the Constitutional powers conferred on President Gbagbo by Article 48
of the Constitution, the opposition parties observed that according to the
Mediator’s letter, President Gbagbo was to use this article only to give a legal
basis to the eligibility of candidatures for the October 2005 elections. They
contended that all the other measures taken by the President were designed “to
allow him to control the electoral process and remain in power.” In the light of the
foregoing, Mr. Bedie and Mr. Ouattara subsequently sent a petition dated 20 May
2005 requesting President Mbeki to give his ruling on the matter. Earlier, in
another letter to the UN Secretary General, they and the leaders of UDPCI and
MFA had requested the UN to take full charge of the electoral process and the
organisation of the elections in order to ensure their integrity and credibility.
Disarmament and Dismantling of Militias
8.
In the Pretoria Agreement, responsibility for the disarming and dismantling
of all militias throughout the national territory was placed under the Prime
Minister of the Government of National Reconciliation. To this effect, certain
Defence and Security forces (FDS) would be selected by the President of Côte
d’Ivoire and placed at the disposal of the Prime Minister. They would be

13

S/2005/395

supported by UNOCI. The likely role envisaged for the UN peacekeeping force
would be to: (i) provide assistance to units of Defence and Security forces of Côte
d’Ivoire in the collection, storage and destruction of unserviceable weapons,
ammunition and explosives; (ii) provide a sense of security to disarmed militias
by means of area domination patrols in the areas of settlement.
9.
Work on this exercise has been proceeding at various levels. There would be
an initial exercise of sensitisation of the militias. The Chief of Staff of FANCI,
placed in charge, has been in consultations with the identified militias with a view
to agreeing an operational plan for their demobilisation and dismantling. The
Prime Minister attaches urgency to this task since it has become a pre-condition
for guaranteeing the security of Ministers, prospective Presidential candidates and
generally cleansing the environment of the threats to the peace process.
Disarmament, Demobilisation and Reintegration Process
10. The DDR now constitutes an engrossing agenda of business in the peace
process. Parties to the Agreement have undertaken to work out modalities for the
implementation of the National Disarmament, Demobilisation and Reintegration
Programme (PNDDR). The role envisaged for the impartial forces is as follows:
(i) Ensure the Security of groups moving towards DDR zones (a total of eleven
such zones earlier identified); (ii) Ensure the safety and security of DDR zones
including provision of armed escorts; (iii) Assist in the collection, storage and
further disposal of deposited arms, ammunition and explosives; (iv) Ensure the
impermeability of the Zone of Confidence (ZOC); (v) Organise mixed patrolling
along with FANCI and FAFN elements to promote confidence-building and a
sense of security; (vi) Provide assistance for the reintegration of some MEFN in
the restructured National Armed Forces.
(i)

Security of the Forces Nouvelles Members of the Government of
National Reconciliation

11. The protection of Forces Nouvelles members of the Government is already
being carried out by UNOCI to some extent. A plan proposed by the AU Mediator
and agreed by the parties signatory to the Pretoria Agreement is based on training
courses conducted in South Africa in which a number of ex-FANCI and ex-MEFN
are involved. This plan would not be completed before July 2005. Within this

14

S/2005/395

period of time, the strength of SBS might need to be increased as the full
complement of Forces Nouvelles Ministers return to Government.
(ii)

Security of Areas under control of the Forces Nouvelles during the
DDR process

12. The parties, signatories to the Pretoria Agreement, admitted the need to
guarantee the security of people and assets in the North. In terms of the
Agreement, six hundred military elements from FAFN are to be recruited, trained
and subsequently deployed in areas assisted by the Civilian Police component of
UNOCI. The training of these elements as security auxiliaries during the DDR
process is a revival of a proposal which was to have started as far back as 15
September 2004 and was aimed at providing public order training over a period of
45 days. The training sessions were to be organised jointly between the FAFN, the
FDS and the Civilian Police component of UNOCI. As was agreed at the various
preparatory meetings prior to September 2004, the 600 FN auxiliaries were to be
selected in accordance with the national recruitment criteria for the Police and
Gendarmerie. However, the FN insisted that the FN auxiliaries be reintegrated
into either the National Police or Gendarmerie after the completion of their police
training while the FDS contended that the auxiliaries would have to apply to the
Police and Gendarmerie Academies and would be subject to the same yearly
quotas as the regular candidates. Both sides argued that the future status of the FN
security auxiliaries would have to be resolved by the Prime Minister. It was also
agreed that Civpol would assist in the selection and the vetting procedures of the
FAFN security auxiliary candidates, in cooperation with the Human Rights section
of UNOCI, by investigating the war-time conduct, financial dealings and/or
factional activities of the candidates. Pending the full commitment of the parties,
it is envisaged that this selection and vetting process would take three months.
13. Previously, it had been agreed among the parties that the FDS would mentor
the FN security assisted by UNOCI CivPol, through their mixed patrols in the
North during and after the DDR process. Such patrols would have constituted
some sort of a catalyst for the redeployment of the State administration to the
North. However, the events of last November put the plans on hold. Consequently,
it is essential to secure a political agreement and a strong commitment from all
parties to guarantee full success in the implementation of the revived proposal.

15

S/2005/395

14. On 20 April 2005, a meeting was held between CNDDR, UNOCI CivPol
and the South African mediation team in Abidjan to discuss the following issues:
i) the creation of a Coordination Committee on the Training of 600 individuals
from FAFN in accordance with Paragraph 6 of the Pretoria Agreement; and ii) the
identification of trainers from the Ivorian Defence and Security Forces (FDS).
The parties agreed to establish a Coordination Committee (Comité de
Coordination et d’Encadrement de la Formation - CCEF) which would be chaired
by UNOCI CivPol which was also tasked to draft the terms of reference of the
Committee. The first CCEF meeting took place on 26 April 2005.
(iii) Bouake meeting on DDR
15. As provided in the Pretoria Agreement, a meeting between the belligerent
armed forces was convened in Bouake from 14 to 16 April 2005. Present at this
first meeting were the Prime Minister along with various ministers from all the
major parties, the two Chiefs of Staff of FANCI and FAFN, the Chairman of the
CNDDR and the envoys of President Mbeki with their military and police
advisors. Also present were UNOCI’s Principal Deputy SRSG, the UNOCI Force
Commander, the Civpol Commissioner, the Chief of the DDR Section of UNOCI
and the Licorne Force Commander. This first meeting enabled the two belligerent
forces to resume dialogue in order to set a date for the start-up of the DDR
process. In the final communiqué issued following the second meeting on 16
April, the two belligerent forces agreed on the following issues : (i) the
resumption of discussions and activities between both forces; (ii) the organisation
of a joint national seminar in Yamoussoukro from 2 to 6 May 2005 to elaborate
and validate the National DDR Programme including the restructuring of the
National Armed Forces (as originally called for in the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement); (iii) the commencement of the DDR process on 14 May to end on 31
July 2005 as proposed by the CNDDR; (iv) the resumption of the meetings of the
Quadripartite Commission (FDS, FAFN, UNOCI, LICORNE). On the issue of the
start-up of the DDR process, it was decided that the final time-frame should be
determined at the end of the Yamoussoukro seminar.
(iv)

Meeting of the Quadripartite Commission

16. On 19 April 2005, the Quadripartite Commission convened in Daoukro to
discuss the modalities for the withdrawal of heavy weapons along the frontline

16

S/2005/395

scheduled to start on 21 April 2005. The meeting agreed on the following points:
i) the definition of heavy weapons; ii) the identification of regrouping points, and;
iii) the timetable and modalities for the withdrawal of such weapons. The parties
defined heavy weapons as direct fire weapons of a caliber superior or equal to 20
mm and indirect fire weapons of a caliber superior or equal to 60 mm. Anti-tank
weapons, RPG7 and LRAC 89 mm, are not included in this definition. A total of
15 regrouping points have been identified in government-controlled and Forces
Nouvelles controlled zones. The ex-belligerent forces agreed to start the
withdrawal of heavy weapons along the frontline as from 21 April 2005 up to 24
April 2005. The impartial forces were to lead quadripartite commissions that
would undertake control missions in each zone from 25 to 28 April 2005 and on
30 April 2005. A meeting of the Quadripartite Commission was to be convened to
evaluate the progress made on the withdrawal of the heavy weapons.
(v)

Forces Nouvelles Workshop on DDR

17. In preparation for the national Seminar on DDR in Yamoussoukro from 2 to
5 May 2005, the Forces Nouvelles organised their own internal workshop aimed
at defining their position on some of the pending issues such as the restructuring
of the army. The workshop (22 to 25 April) was chaired by the FN Secretary
General, Mr. Guillaume Soro, with the participation of most of the FN military
zone commanders. From the discussions, indications were given that FN were
ready to embark on the DDR process and confirmed their commitment to the Joint
Operational Plan which had been agreed and signed by the two belligerent forces
in January 2004. The main issue under contention, though, related to the
reintegration of the former military deserters who formed the FN core group after
the failed coup of September 2002. They would like to negotiate a clear
reintegration plan which would include a decision on reintegration, readjustment
of grade and payment of salary arrears since September 2002. In addition, they
requested discussions on the structure of the future national Armed Forces
particularly in terms of numbers and regional/ethnic balance. In this regard, they
suggested the establishment of a Special Commission on the restructuring of the
Armed Forces which should complete its work before the elections. Some FN
senior officials also suggested that because of their perception of the lack of
confidence in the implementation of the Pretoria Agreement as well as the
environment in which the elections would take place, disarmament could only
take place after the elections, when the Armed Forces are reunified.

17

S/2005/395

(vi)

Yamoussoukro Seminar on DDR

18. Following the meeting held in Bouaké, FDS and FAFN discussed the
implementation of the DDR programme at a seminar in Yamoussoukro from 3 to 7
May 2005. The Prime Minister accompanied by the Special Representative of the
UN Secretary General and the Special Advisor of President Mbeki opened the
meeting. The Seminar was aimed at approving the main components of the DDR
programme, including aspects such as the restructuring of the defence forces, the
DDR budget and the flowchart of implementation. The CNDDR facilitated the
meeting with the participation of the South African mediation, UNOCI and
Licorne. In general, all matters pertaining to the Joint Operation Plan approved in
January 2004 were endorsed. These include disarmament, demobilization, and
social reintegration of ex-combatants and communities affected by the conflict.
19. In another commission meeting dedicated to the restructuring of the defence
forces, the following conclusions were reached:
• An audit pertaining to the FDS as well as FAFN would be conducted
between 16 May and 16 June 2005;
• A Special Committee tasked with the restructuring of the Defence
Forces will have to submit its recommendations by 23 May 2005;
• Transitional measures accompanying the establishment of the
restructured defence forces were to be in place as from 19 September
2005.
20. There were also discussions on budget and financing of the programme.
FDS and FAFN agreed on the general program timeframes for each specific
activity. However, they failed to agree on a starting date. FDS insisted on the
necessity to have a launching date for the process while FAFN merely wanted a
chronogram, since in their view it was premature at this stage to have a beginning
date while preparatory ground work was not completed. This issue was
vehemently debated with the South Africa mediation having been called upon to
intervene. FDS refused to formally sign the document pertaining to the
discussions as long as a date for the start-up of the process had not been agreed. It
was then agreed that a launching date would be further discussed and fixed at
another meeting on 13 May 2005.

18

S/2005/395

21. The FN explained their position further at a meeting convened by UNOCI
before the final session of the Seminar. DDR must be coherent in line with the
measures agreed in Yamoussoukro; it must be implemented in a secure
environment, outside any military pressure. It should render the belligerents
incapable of prosecuting further conflict, hence allowing the political process to
proceed unhindered. The process must be irreversible, implying that all envisaged
resources for implementation should be available at the outset; the FN refuse to be
put under pressure as regards deadlines, since they contend that DDR should be
de-linked from the electoral process.
22. On 14 May 2005, a reconvened Yamoussoukro Seminar saw the signing by
the Chiefs of Staff of the FDS and the FAFN of an agreement to commence DDR
on 27 June 2005 with a detailed timeframe for all phases of the DDR which were
to be implemented from June through August 2005. Surprisingly, however, on 18
May in Bouake, later statements from the Chef of Cabinet of the Secretary
General of the Forces Nouvelles suggested that the dates were all mere proposals
yet to be reviewed by the FN. The position of the FN on DDR was restated as
predicated on several conditions: the dismantling of the militias; guarantees over
the availability of sufficient funding for the entire DDR process; the review of all
the legal texts by the National Assembly as stipulated in the Pretoria Agreement,
in particular those of the IEC, the Nationality Code, the identification of citizens,
the financing of political parties, the legal regime of audio-visual communication.
Needless to say that this statement has cast a shadow over the implementation of
the DDR, considered to be critical and a trigger to a movement forward in the
peace process. It is expected that some suasive pressure will be applied on all
sides to respect the final agreement signed on 14 May 2005 in Yamoussoukro.
(vii) UNOCI Coordination meeting with partners on DDR
23. Coordination meetings have been convened periodically since 21 April
2005 at UNOCI HQ between representatives of UNDP, WFP, ICRC, IOM, and
UNFPA. Also attending the meetings were two donor agencies Japan and France,
representatives of Licorne and UNOCI Force, and other UNOCI components such
as HIV/AIDS, Gender and the Joint Logistic Operation Centre. It may be recalled
that the coordination meeting was instituted as a forum to enhance information
sharing as well as develop a UN integrated support and strategic planning to
respond to the Government’s leading role in implementing the DDR programme.

19

S/2005/395

24. At the meeting of 21 April 2005, participants were briefed on the state of
discussions to advance the DDR process following the Bouake meetings. Most of
the participants expressed concerns about the short timeframe proposed by the
CNDDR to complete the DDR process. They also raised concerns on the
financing of the entire process. It was pointed out that some funds had already
been secured to finance the immediate start-up of the DDR - a portion of the
safety net package (French funds through UNDP – 1 million Euros) and a part of
the Japanese funds are already being used to rehabilitate some of the DDR sites in
the FN controlled area. However, it was expected that as soon as the DDR process
commenced, the international community would be more willing to provide
additional funds for the DDR programme. The UNFPA representative pointed out
that after the November 2004 events, the European Union had put on hold the
funds allocated to their sensitisation and voluntary HIV/AIDS test programme.
However, they were now renewing negotiations to have the funds released. The
WFP representative indicated its willingness to provide food support during the
DDR process. Given that some UN agencies were already providing food support,
the country representative requested the overall logistic plan in order to identify
potential gaps, which would allow further discussions with the CNDDR. Both
Licorne and UNOCI military officers raised the issue of troops availability for the
DDR process due to the fact that they were already overstretched. They
underscored the need for troop reinforcements to provide full support to the DDR
process in terms of Security Council Resolution 1528. The representative of the
ICRC indicated that some 273 child ex-combatants had been demobilized in
Bouake since 2004. ICRC is mainly working on family tracing as well as assisting
UNICEF in its child soldiers programme.
(viii) Conference on Small Arms and Light Weapons
25. At the request of the Prime Minister, the UNDP Post-Conflict Unit in
collaboration with the DDR Section of UNOCI, organised a conference on Small
Arms and Light Weapons (SALW) from 17 to 20 May 2005 in Grand Bassam. The
outputs of this conference were:
- Formulation and adoption of a pilot Programme on SALW reduction and control,
- Formulation and adoption of the institutional framework of the National
Commission on SALW,
- Formulation and adoption of series of legal documents on SALW control.

20

S/2005/395

Electoral process
26. In order to ensure that free, fair and transparent elections are held, the
parties signatories to the Pretoria Agreement agreed to invite the UN to participate
in the work of the Independent Electoral Commission and the Constitutional
Council. However, consultations are still taking place to determine the extent of
UN’s involvement in the organization of these elections, the supervisory role of
the UN through the appointment of the prospective UN High Representative for
Elections in the Independent Electoral Commission, and in the Constitutional
Council. (Attached is a letter dated 23 May 2005 from the Permanent
Representative of South Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council). An Electoral Assessment Mission has been in Côte d’Ivoire
since 21 May to provide the requisite assessment of the situation.
Review of selected legislative texts by the National Assembly
27. The Council of Ministers, at its meeting on 21 April 2005, discussed seven
legislative texts to be reviewed by the National Assembly, as well as two decrees
relating to the restructuring of the National Radio and Television (RTI).
Information received indicated that there were some divergent views in the
Council over the mode of reviewing these laws. The matter has had to be referred
to President Mbeki for a ruling. Meanwhile, several sessions of the Council had
been scheduled to continue with the discussions on these matters. When
completed, the texts of legislation were scheduled to be sent by the President to
the National Assembly for its consideration. So far only two texts of legislation
have been sent to the National Assembly for consideration. These relate to the
composition of the Independent Electoral Commission and the public funding of
political parties.
28. The first Ordinary Session of the National Assembly opened on 27 April
2005. The debate on some of the adopted legislative texts referred to in the
Pretoria Agreement did not figure on the agenda. This was due to the lateness in
transmitting the texts to the National Assembly. It is now reported that the
Assembly would consider the two texts so far received. Others would be
examined as and when received.

21

S/2005/395

Human Rights
29. It is to be noted that the text of legislation on the National Human Rights
Commission which is subject to review was not among the texts considered by the
Council of Ministers on 21 April 2005. The fate of this text is yet to be
determined.
Humanitarian Assistance, Economic Recovery and Reconstruction
30. The protracted political crisis in Côte d’Ivoire has left the country
partitioned into three separate parts, beset with specific challenges. However, a
common denominator for the humanitarian community is the protection of
civilians in this conflict. While the government-held area continues to be the
breadbasket of the country and still provides some economic opportunities despite
a severe recession, impunity in large measure seems to have taken root. In the
Forces Nouvelles-controlled areas, there is a complete absence of State authority.
Despite feeble attempts to organize themselves, however, there is no rule of law
and no opportunity for citizens to seek justice. The Zone of Confidence is in a
state of lawlessness where there is a legal and administrative void and inhabitants
have to face violations of human rights with no recourse to justice. The West of
the country (both Government-controlled and FN-controlled areas) is facing a
spiral of violence and growing communal conflicts, which in some measure are
de-linked from the overall political crisis – as some of the contentious issues
predate the political divide centered around the eligibility to run in presidential
elections – such as land tenure, competition over resources and heightened ethnic
divisions. Needless to say that the proximity of the Liberian border with crossborder movement of arms and armed personnel, reports of recruitment of children,
refugees among others, remains a serious challenge to the humanitarian
community working in that area.
31. The combination of all these elements creates an unstable and volatile
situation, in particular in the West, and constitutes in some instances a hindrance
to the work of humanitarian agencies and partners and a threat to the peace
process. Meanwhile, women and children bear the brunt of the crisis in many
ways, thus calling for innovative approaches to relieve their distress and suffering.

22

S/2005/395

32. However, the Pretoria Agreement provides a ray of hope that once the peace
process is back on track, it can open a window of opportunity for the humanitarian
and development community to continue their advocacy role and take concrete
relief action on critical issues in the field:
a)

Access to social services: Education and health

33. Since the political and military upheaval in November 2004, advocacy
efforts to ensure that the Government ensures the return of civil servants to run
schools and health centers in the FN-controlled areas have failed. With the
Pretoria Agreement, it is an opportune time to resume and strengthen advocacy
efforts. School exams marking the end of last year’s school year have not been
organized leaving over 70,000 children in limbo. Meanwhile, the “Comité de
sauvetage pour l’école” has been struggling to ensure that schools are functioning
in the North, but are faced with huge obstacles such as the lack of qualified
teachers, administrative support and very low enrolment levels. As far as health
centers are concerned, according to UNICEF, 202 centers have been rehabilitated
and equipped out of 229, however many are not functioning for lack of qualified
staff.
34. Following calls for the reactivation of Government efforts to resume the
redeployment of the administration supported by various development and
humanitarian partners, President Gbagbo launched recently consultations in the
context of his decision to be committed to the “logique de la réconciliation
nationale”. Relevant Ministers, representatives of UNOCI and various
development and humanitarian agencies are locked in discussions to address these
dimensions of the Ivorian crisis.
b)

Provision of clean water

35. It is clear that the water supply and treatment system is showing serious
strains, and could completely collapse should timely action not be taken.
Gradually, many towns and villages, which were regularly supplied with water,
are facing serious shortages or complete breakdowns bringing in its wake a host
of diseases linked to a lack of clean and potable water. Some towns are more
severely affected such as Korhogo, Bouna, Odienne in the North or Guiglo and
Man in the West or neighborhoods in Abidjan such as Yopougon and Anyama.

23

S/2005/395

Obsolete equipment, lack of regular maintenance and spare parts and huge cost of
investments, in particular in the North, are challenges for the private sector,
government and the humanitarian community. There are some encouraging reports
that the Forces Nouvelles have agreed to start paying for the consumption of
water, thereby allowing for partial cost recovery. It is important to urge donors to
ensure appropriate funding of projects to avoid the collapse of the water system,
recognizing also the solid work of the ICRC, UNICEF and the EU in this area.
c)

Zone of Confidence

36. The Zone of Confidence, manned by UNOCI and Licorne peacekeepers, has
not lived up to its name and has become an area, where lawlessness prevails, due
to the absence of the police, administrative and judicial systems. Furthermore, the
Quadripartite security cell in Bangolo dismantled last year when the Forces
Nouvelles pulled out of the Government of National Reconciliation, has left a
huge security void. This situation poses several problems to the humanitarian
community in terms of access, which is sometimes denied because of lack of
security; inter-ethnic tensions are exacerbated leading to attacks and counterattacks and more importantly when alleged criminals are apprehended it is unclear
to whom they should be handed over. As it stands today alleged criminals are
released or turned over to authorities with little follow-up from the judicial
system, and likewise in the FN areas.
d)

Protection

37. Civilians bear the brunt of the crisis and this is demonstrated in the
displacement of populations as a result of attacks by unidentified armed men,
recruitments into armed groups are being undertaken whether in Abidjan or in the
western region or in the FAFN areas, preying on youth and children. Impunity is
truly taking root. While the displaced are clamoring to return to their areas of
origin, political and electoral manipulation are making their return practically
impossible. It is important to initiate reconciliation efforts, grounded in civil
society, women and youth groups, to rebuild trust and confidence in and between
communities.

24

S/2005/395

e)

Regional implications

38. Various reports confirm the involvement of certain neighbouring countries
in the Ivorian conflict, which could have a detrimental impact on the peace
process, such as import of arms, movement of armed personnel, training in
neighboring countries, providing safe havens for some, etc…Therefore, it is
imperative to establish an effective system to collect information on what occurs
along the borders and within neighbouring countries, and provide a strengthened
mandate for greater collaboration and action among the sub-regional
peacekeeping operations in Sierra Leone, Liberia, Guinea Bissau and Côte
d’Ivoire.
f)

Funding of Humanitarian activities

39. The aggressive advocacy for humanitarian funding is paying off. As of now,
resources have effectively been mobilized, in CAP, US $ 7.9 million, i.e. 20% of
the 39 millions requested (UNICEF: USD 1million, HCR; USD 6,4 million,
OCHA: USD 500,000). Besides, WFP got US $ 9.5 million (outside the CAP),
from their regional funding mechanism. But overall humanitarian funding remains
low and there is an urgent need for increased funding of humanitarian
programmes, which should be perceived as critical in supporting the consolidation
of the peace process.

IV. Conclusion
40. There are clearly now optimistic perspectives over the peace process in
accordance with President Mbeki’s Road Map. These perspectives must
necessarily be hedged in caution given the nature of such processes. Indeed, some
concerns already appear to emerge from the uncertainties in the run-up to the start
of the DDR and the divergent views on the revision of certain laws such as those
on IEC and Nationality. The electioneering campaign already launched may divert
attention from critical issues of the Agreement which demand resolution. It is
advisable for the Security Council to focus on putting in place the additional
reinforcements and resources needed to enable UN meet its various levels of
increased responsibilities in the Ivorian peace process. Beyond the military and
other related logistical men and material, there should be decisive action to

25

S/2005/395

establish, as a matter of urgency, UN’s new electoral validation mission (the UN
High Representative for Elections and Electoral Assistance in the organisation of
the elections). Expectedly, there has been the outpouring of relief over the
prospects for peace generated by the Pretoria Agreement but the international
community must sustain its pressure on all the Ivorian political actors to abide in
good faith by their professed commitment. The DDR process is now a watershed
in the entire peace momentum. Its progress or otherwise will determine the fate of
the hope raised by the Pretoria Agreement. As such, all hands must now be put
firmly on deck to ensure that it does not falter.
(Signed on behalf of the Group) Ambassador Raph Uwechue
Chairman
31 May 2005

26

S/2005/395

Enclosure
[Original: English]

Letter dated 11 April 2005 from the President of South Africa
addressed to the President of Côte d’Ivoire

27

S/2005/395

28

S/2005/395

29
