S/PV.8707

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8707th meeting

Wednesday, 29 January 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Ms. Goolab
Mr. Baati
Mr. Allen
Ms. Norman-Chalet

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-02121 (E)
*2002121*

S/PV.8707

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

civilian deaths that OHCHR has verified since the
escalation began in late April.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: Today I want, first, to express my
alarm about the dire and deteriorating humanitarian
situation affecting women and children, in particular in
the north-west of Syria owing to the intense bombing,
shelling and other fighting that we are all seeing;
secondly, to update the Security Council with regard to
the humanitarian response in the north-east following
the adoption of resolution 2504 (2020); thirdly, to update
the Council on the situation in Rukban; and, fourthly,
to draw attention to the impact of economic challenges
on the humanitarian suffering in Syria.
First, hostilities have escalated in recent days in
the Idlib area, particularly around Maarat Al-Numan,
Saraqib and western Aleppo. The fighting in those
areas appears to be more intense than anything that
we have seen in the past year. As the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, has said, civilians continue to be subject to
intense bombing and shelling. On 11 January, at least 20
civilians were reportedly killed in air strikes in Idlib. On
21 January, eight civilians were reportedly killed in Kafr
Taal, in western Aleppo, after an air strike struck near
their home. Overall, in the week from 15 to 23 January,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR) documented incidents in
which at least 81 civilians, most of them women and
children, were killed as a result of air and ground-based
strikes. That total is in addition to the more than 1,500
2/19

29/01/2020

The most alarming reports have come from southern
Idlib, where hundreds of air strikes by the Government of
Syria and its allies have been concentrated. Meanwhile,
non-State armed groups continue to shell Aleppo city,
killing or injuring dozens of civilians. Routes to the
north and west of Saraqib, including around Ariha and
other locations along the M4 highway, are clogged with
vehicles as people seek to flee the bombing and the
front lines in search of safety. Hundreds of thousands
of civilians are at risk and are therefore running away.
Most of the affected people — more than 99 per
cent — have been moving from southern Idlib to other
locations in non-Government-controlled areas. Our
assessment is that at least 20,000 people have moved in
the past two days. Some 115,000 left in the last week.
Nearly 390,000 have fled in the past two months. Many
families are moving multiple times. They arrive in a
place thought to be safe, only for the bombs to follow,
so they are then forced to move again. That cycle is all
too familiar in north-west Syria. On 12 January, Turkey
and the Russian Federation announced a ceasefire, but
it did not hold. The Government of Syria opened three
crossing points to facilitate the movement of civilians
into Government-controlled areas. Initial reports from
the Russian Federation suggest that 400 civilians
crossed through those crossing points.
The violence in north-west Syria is deplorable. As
High Commissioner Bachelet warned,
“[w]omen, men and children simply carrying out
everyday activities at home, the workplace, in
markets and at schools are being killed and maimed
in senseless violence.”
It is imperative that all parties agree to an immediate
cessation of hostilities in and around the Idlib
de-escalation zone.
Amid the ongoing fighting, humanitarian
organizations have provided food assistance for
more than 1.4 million civilians and health supplies
to treat almost 200,000 people in recent weeks. That
has all come in through the cross-border operation,
as reauthorized under resolution 2504 (2020). That
remains the only way to assist the more than 2.8 million
people in need in north-west Syria.
Efforts by humanitarian organizations within Syria
to provide cross-line assistance, including those by the
20-02121

29/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

Syrian Arab Red Crescent — with which I discussed
the issues last week and whose work I continue to
support — have not yet been facilitated by the parties
in control. The cross-border humanitarian operations
have staved off a massive humanitarian catastrophe
in the north-west, but let us make no mistake about it:
civilians are still suffering terribly.
Under current conditions, humanitarian responders
do not have the capacity to meet the level of need that
we are seeing. We are receiving reports of tensions
mounting because of the inadequate humanitarian
response. Families recently displaced and currently
sheltering on roadsides, under thin sheets of plastic, in
makeshift shelters or in unfinished buildings have been
making desperate appeals for more support.
I talked to Syrians in Idlib again last week.
Other United Nations staff continuously have similar
conversations. People feel increasingly under siege as
the bombardment follows them from place to place.
They are traumatized, and they feel totally abandoned
by the world. They do not understand why the Council is
unable to stop the carnage among a civilian population
trapped in a war zone. Their message to those present
is essentially the same one I relayed when I briefed the
Council on 30 July: “[w]e are afraid. Please help us.
Make it stop.” (S/PV.8589, p. 5).
The most urgent need is to protect the civilian
population and scale up the humanitarian response.
In order for that to be possible, I call on all parties to
facilitate safe and unhindered access for humanitarian
workers and supplies to address civilians’ essential
needs. Humanitarian organizations are also trying to
help civilians get out of harm’s way. On 25 January,
non-governmental organizations helped relocate 1,800
civilians who had asked for help to move to areas
under less imminent threat. Following negotiations
with the United Nations, the Russian Centre for the
Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab
Republic has provided assistance with a “humanitarian
pause” along specific routes to facilitate the safe passage
of civilians and humanitarian staff. Such life-saving
operations are necessary and of some value, but,
fundamentally, they underscore the basic requirement,
which is for the fighting to stop.
Secondly, the humanitarian situation in the northeast remains difficult. Some 70,000 people are still
displaced following the military operations that we saw
in October. An additional 90,000 people are living in

S/PV. 8707

camps for internally displaced persons, including more
than 66,000 in the Al-Hol camp. Those vulnerable
populations are among the 1.8 million people in the
north-east who need humanitarian assistance. An
average of 850,000 people in need received assistance
on a monthly basis in 2019 from within Syria, and that
number increased significantly during the course of
the year.
Nonetheless, with the removal of the Al-Yarubiyah
crossing point, the World Health Organization forecasts
a reduction in the medical services available and a
growing shortfall of medical supplies. Some 400,000
medical items planned for delivery are stuck on trucks
in Iraq and unable to cross. The Secretary-General
has asked members of the Council for their support in
reaching agreement for those items to be brought in.
But as of today they remain in Iraq.
The United Nations continues to advocate with
all stakeholders, including the Government of Syria,
to ensure reliable and adequate supply lines and
humanitarian capacity in the north-east. In that regard,
an agreement among the relevant parties to reopen
the M4 highway remains crucial. No United Nations
convoys containing medical supplies have gone from
Damascus to the north-east this month. There were
three airlifts in December; there have been none so far
in January. In the so-called Operation Peace Spring
area, a cross-line assessment mission to Ras Al-Ayn
originally planned for earlier this month has not yet
materialized due to conditions imposed by all parties
regarding the composition of the mission.
Experienced United Nations humanitarian staff are
not surprised by any of that. The difficulty of crossing
lines with essential aid, or moving goods and staff
through contested areas, is something that we have
become all too familiar with over the course of the
nine years of the conflict. As requested in resolution
2504 (2020), the Secretary-General will report to the
Council by the end of February on the feasibility of
using alternative modalities for the border crossing
of Al-Yarubiyah in order to ensure that humanitarian
assistance, including medical and surgical supplies,
reaches people in need throughout Syria through
the most direct routes and in accordance with the
humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence.
Thirdly, turning to Rukban, based on available
estimates, nearly 20,000 people, some 50 per cent of

20-021213/19

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.8707

the population, left the Rukban camp in recent months.
Reports indicate that several thousand more people
still in Rukban wish to leave. Efforts by the United
Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to facilitate
voluntary departures have not been successful. In the
meantime, the United Nations continues to advocate
for the relevant parties to find durable solutions for all
Rukban residents.
Fourthly, the economic situation in Syria poses
increasing hardship on civilians across the country. In
January, the Syrian pound continued to depreciate on
the informal market. In some areas, it traded at more
than 1,100 Syrian pounds to the United States dollar.
That is half the value of six months ago. Syrians going
out to buy food are finding fewer items in their markets,
including those looking for basics such as rice, oil and
sugar. Most available items cost more than ever — the
price of bread, for example, has increased by more than
50 per cent in some areas in recent months.
Analysis suggests that food security in Syria
worsened over the past year. Aid agencies try to ensure
that the most vulnerable populations have adequate
nutrition. The World Food Programme supports
4.5 million people across Syria on a monthly basis
with general food assistance, and I am grateful for
the voluntary contributions from donors that make
that possible. But any further deterioration in the Syrian
economy will leave even more people vulnerable and
in need of assistance in the year ahead, so continued
support from donors is vital.
Let me return, finally, to my initial point about
north-west Syria. The parties to the conflict and those
with influence must stop the fighting. Unless the
current hostilities stop, we will see an even greater
humanitarian catastrophe. I hope that the Council will
take every step to avert that.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Lowcock

for

I shall now give the floor to those Council members
wishing to make statements.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I will
deliver this statement on the humanitarian situation
in Syria on behalf of the co-penholders, Germany
and Belgium.
I would like first to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock for his important briefing today.
We also extend our gratitude to all humanitarian and
4/19

29/01/2020

medical workers throughout Syria, specifically to
those operating in the dangerous environment of northwestern Syria.
We are deeply concerned about the safety of the
4 million civilians in north-west Syria, especially
following reports of ongoing air strikes and shelling.
Over the last months, and in particular since last
weekend, the ongoing military offensive has again
intensified and is causing further immense human
suffering, in the midst of winter. This continues to result
in death, displacement and destruction, as described by
Mark Lowcock just now. Once again, we would recall
that there are humanitarian obligations that need to be
observed and that there are rules to warfare.
Civilians have the right to be protected from the
horror of war, and warring parties have the obligation
to ensure their protection. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has
reported that more than 1,500 civilians have lost their
lives since April, when the current military escalations
began. We condemn the loss of civilian lives. Since
1 December, an estimated 390,000 people have been
displaced. In the past two weeks alone, 160,000 have
been displaced. The vast majority, about 80 per cent,
are women and children.
Since the beginning of this military offensive,
hospitals, schools, markets and places where internally
displaced persons are located have been destroyed by
airstrikes; some of those places had been de-conflicted,
meaning that the parties attacking them were well aware
of their location. Again, over the past weeks, locations
in Idlib where civilians sought shelter or care have been
hit. Those attacks are unacceptable.
We, the co-penholders, condemn this violence and
call for accountability for those responsible. In this
regard, we support the work of the board of inquiry
as well as that of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism for Syria.
Once again, we call for an immediate cessation
of hostilities. We condemn the attacks perpetrated by
Security Council-designated terrorist groups; however,
as stated earlier, counter-terrorism efforts can never
absolve parties of their obligations under international
humanitarian law, including the principles of distinction
and proportionality.
On 10 January, the Council prolonged the crossborder mechanism, ensuring the flow of humanitarian
20-02121

29/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

aid to the people of Idlib. We said it then and we will
say it again today: we were extremely disappointed at
the fact that the Al-Yarubiyah crossing point could not
be renewed owing to opposition by one Member State.
Al-Yarubiyah was an important crossing that was
actively used. It enabled the flow of medical aid into the
north-east of the country, with 1.4 million beneficiaries
in 2019. Three weeks ago, there was no viable alternative
to that crossing. The Council has tasked the Secretary
General with looking into potential alternatives to that
crossing point, and we look forward to the report that
will be published in February.
In other parts of Syria, the situation also remains
dire. In Al-Hol camp, more than 65,000 people
continue to receive humanitarian assistance, yet the
situation remains deeply concerning. In Rukban,
several thousand people remain stuck in the camp, in a
desperate situation. The United Nations and its partners
must be able to help them leave in a voluntary, safe and
dignified manner, or to provide assistance to those
remaining in the camp.
Finally, resolution 2504 (2020) calls upon all
parties to ensure principled, sustained and improved
humanitarian assistance to Syria in 2020. That
resolution was endorsed by the Council and all its
members just a few weeks ago. It is high time for all
parties to the conflict, especially the Syrian authorities,
to live up to that obligation, and we therefore call on all
Member States to fully implement it as a priority.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his
briefing this morning.
Since the Council met last month (see S/PV.8694),
the humanitarian crisis situation in Syria has
significantly deteriorated, as we have seen and heard.
The lives of millions of civilians are now at even greater
risk, as the combined forces of the Al-Assad regime,
Russia, the Iranian regime and Hizbullah escalate their
offensive to cement a military, not a political end to the
conflict in Syria.
Russia has denied principled humanitarian aid for
those in need throughout Syria for more than eight years.
Now, with China blindly following its lead, Russia
has escalated its campaign to restrict humanitarian
access in Syria through a cynical and politicized effort
to undermine the cross-border resolution (resolution
2504 (2020)). The step taken by Russia and China on

S/PV. 8707

10 January to drastically reduce aid delivery is part of
a clear strategy to completely sever the cross-border
lifeline on which 4 million people rely. We cannot let
that happen. The Council must work with, not against,
humanitarian partners on the most important task at
hand: ensuring that humanitarian assistance reaches
the millions of civilians in need across Syria, including
in the north-east, where more than 1 million lives hang
in the balance.
The closure of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing halted
approximately 40 per cent of United Nations medical
equipment and supplies to civilians in north-east
Syria. At Al-Hol camp, the amount of critical medical
supplies was cut overnight by 60 to 70 per cent. Other
items that routinely crossed Al-Yarubiyah included kits
that help combat water-borne illnesses, supplies for
child protection and educational activities that reach
thousands of traumatized children, and life-saving
nutrition services for tens of thousands of children
and pregnant women. These entirely preventable cuts
in aid confirm what we already know: there is not a
single good reason for that border crossing to have
ever been closed. The United States looks forward to
the Secretary-General’s report to the Council, which
should include a clear and specific analysis of whether
or not there are feasible alternatives to Al-Yarubiyah.
We expect that the report will document the access
restraints facing United Nations agencies and other
humanitarians operating in the country.
There are those on the Council who question
why United Nations aid cannot simply be delivered
in a rapid, unhindered manner through Damascus.
The answer to that is clear. The Al-Assad regime
is using humanitarian aid as a weapon of collective
punishment against Syrian civilians — a strategy
that, sadly, is not new. Take for example the situation
at the internally displaced persons camp in Rukban. It
required enormous effort to convince Russia and the
regime to agree to three humanitarian deliveries in the
past 18 months. We cannot allow Rukban to serve as
a model for how we deliver aid in Syria, where Russia
and the regime time and again refuse, restrict and delay
the delivery of life-saving aid to a population entirely
reliant on humanitarian assistance. The Council should
not accept such a bleak reality for the millions of
Syrians counting on us to ease their suffering.
That brings me to another disturbing example of
the Russians and their ally, the regime, knowingly
exasperating humanitarian tragedy. As we have just

20-021215/19

S/PV.8707

The situation in the Middle East

heard, in the past two days alone, as a result of the
offensive in north-west Syria, 20,000 civilians were
forced to flee their homes in Idlib and western Aleppo,
due to a barrage of air strikes and artillery fire launched
by the combined forces of the Al-Assad regime,
Russia, the Iranian regime and Hizbullah. Those air
strikes have continued unabated, striking more than
50 communities since 14 January and killing at least
50 civilians. Russia and the regime are writing their
military strategy in Syrian blood.
The United States offers its full support to the
United Nations board of inquiry mandated to investigate
attacks that have struck United Nations and United
Nations-supported facilities in north-west Syria, for
which the regime and Russia are overwhelmingly
responsible. We will continue to support the board of
inquiry and its work and encourage all Member States
to do the same. The United States remains eager to work
with its partners in the Council to ensure unhindered
humanitarian access to all Syrians, regardless of who
controls the territory.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mark Lowcock for his briefing.
As Mr. Lowcock said, our immediate priority is to do
everything in our power to end the offensive under way
in Idlib.
France strongly condemns the intense bombing by
the regime’s air force and its allies in Idlib governorate.
The fight against terrorist groups cannot be used as a
pretext for indiscriminate bombing, which primarily
affects civilians. The hospital in Sarjeh and ambulances
and infrastructure belonging to the White Helmets
have all been the target of strikes. It is shocking
and unacceptable that health facilities and schools
remain the target of attacks, in breach of international
humanitarian law. The report submitted on 16 January
by the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic, documenting violations
of children’s rights in Syria (A/HRC/43/CRP.6), is
telling. Government forces deliberately attack schools
and use them for military purposes, thereby not only
committing war crimes but also ruining the future of a
generation deprived of education. Those responsible for
such violations will be held accountable.
The worsening humanitarian crisis is extremely
worrisome. Three million people, nearly 80 per cent
of whom are women and children and nearly 400,000
people who have been displaced since early December,
6/19

29/01/2020

are exposed to daily attacks by the regime and its allies.
In that context, we must focus our efforts on three
priority areas.
The first is immediate de-escalation. We call on the
signatories to the Idlib ceasefire agreement — first and
foremost Russia — to resume strict compliance with
their commitments and ensure an effective ceasefire in
the north-west, with a view to ending hostilities.
The second is the protection of civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, as well as civilian
infrastructure. Respect for international humanitarian
law is non-negotiable. The board of inquiry established
by the Secretary-General to investigate the attacks in
the north-west, which we fully support, must shed light
on the incidents.
The third is ensuring safe and unhindered
humanitarian access by ongoing cross-border
assistance. France will continue to help the Syrian
population. In that regard, an additional €5.27 million
in emergency aid was made available at the end of last
year for civilians in north-west Syria, via the United
Nations Cross Border Humanitarian Fund, based
in Gaziantep.
I would also like to return to the issue of the
consequences of resolution 2504 (2020), on crossborder humanitarian aid. Make no mistake, as Mark
Lowcock underscored earlier, the resolution, adopted
by the Council on 10 January, which is essential for
providing humanitarian assistance for 3 million people,
has also seriously reduced the ability of the United
Nations to provide medical aid and vital medicines
to those in need in north-east Syria. The loading of
eight to 10 World Health Organization trucks, whose
convoy should have passed the Al-Yarubiyah crossingpoint in mid-January, is on hold in Erbil. There is no
reason that those medicines and trauma and surgical
kits should not reach victims in urgent need across the
border, from Iraq or from Damascus. It is a matter of
life and death for them, and is a gross violation of the
principle of the impartiality of humanitarian aid, which
is unacceptable.
The Security Council’s mandate to the SecretaryGeneral to present alternatives by the end of February
to allow for the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
including medicines, to north-east Syria is therefore
essential. We call on everyone to shoulder their
responsibility in taking a decision based on an objective
analysis of the alternatives presented by the Secretary20-02121

29/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

General. The parties, in particular the Syrian regime,
must now ensure full, safe and unhindered access
for humanitarian actors to people in need, wherever
they may be. In addition, I wish to reiterate that we
are disappointed about the fact that the mechanism
was renewed for only six months, when humanitarian
operations need predictability and stability for effective
planning and operations. We must reconsider the
relevance of returning to a one-year mandate when we
renew the mechanism in July.
I will conclude by underscoring that the ongoing
offensive in Idlib jeopardizes the quest for a negotiated
political settlement to the crisis, although we all know
that an inclusive and lasting political solution, in line
with resolution 2254 (2015), is crucial for stabilizing
Syria and ending civilian suffering. We will return to
that key issue later today.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I also thank UnderSecretary-General Lowcock for his briefing. He
mentioned the experience of United Nations officers
and humanitarian officials for more than nine long years
in Syria. Through him, we send our thanks to them for
the job they have to do in such terrible circumstances.
We are appalled by the significant escalation in the
Syrian regime’s and Russian violence in Idlib. We remain
deeply disappointed that the 12 January ceasefire barely
lasted a couple of days. The human cost of the military
escalation is awful. Since 1 December 2019, more than
140 civilians have been killed by Russia and the regime.
Since 29 April 2019, more than 1,500 civilians have
been killed in north-west Syria, with approximately
half of all casualties being women and children. More
than 358,000 people have been displaced as a result of
the escalation in violence, and the United Nations now
anticipates the possible further displacement of another
500,000 people in front-line areas.

S/PV. 8707

As recently as three days ago, an air strike disabled
Al-Eman hospital in Sarja. Having repeatedly called
for scrutiny of such attacks, we once again welcome
the Secretary-General’s board of inquiry that is
investigating some of the past attacks in Idlib. We call on
the Secretary-General to make its findings public. Let
me also restate our call for a full cessation of hostilities
and a recommitment to the de-escalation agreement.
While all eyes are on the north-west, we must not
neglect those in other parts of the country who are
deliberately being denied humanitarian assistance.
As we all know, because of the decision by China and
Russia to veto a humanitarian draft resolution, the
United Nations can no longer use the border crossings
into the north-east and south of Syria. The Russian
Ambassador argued that the crossing in north-east
Syria was not needed because humanitarian assistance
could be provided from Damascus. However, the truth
is that the regime is not providing these people with the
aid that they require, or allowing the United Nations
to do so. It is not just the north-east — communities
in former opposition-held territory, such as eastern
Ghouta and eastern Aleppo, are not receiving regular
needs-based, quality humanitarian assistance. The
Syrian regime believes that those communities are not
aligned with its own politics, and so it punishes them
for their perceived disloyalty by preventing them from
receiving food and medicine. Russia and China, having
acted to prevent life-saving aid reaching those in need,
should now act to ensure aid can be delivered. We look
to the United Nations, including through the SecretaryGeneral’s upcoming report in February, to highlight the
gaps and challenges in the humanitarian response and
help us to find a solution so that aid can be delivered
where it is needed.

The population density within that everreducing pocket is already greater than in Gaza. The
humanitarian system is overwhelmed. Those innocent
civilians are in urgent need of food, shelter, water,
health and winterization assistance. But we continue to
see air strikes and shelling on civilian infrastructure. I
remind all parties, including those around the table, yet
again, of their obligation to comply with international
humanitarian law.

The United Kingdom has long supported the
provision of humanitarian aid to all of Syria, including
the parts under the control of the Syrian authorities.
Indeed, the United Kingdom has contributed over
$4 billion since 2012. I note that 60 per cent of all
contributions to the United Nations humanitarian
response plan in 2019 came from the United States, the
United Kingdom and Germany. It is incumbent upon
us to ensure that aid is provided on a principled basis
and is getting to those who most need it, wherever they
may be.

On 11 January alone, 26 communities in Idlib
were affected by air strikes. Targets included schools,
hospitals and camps for internally displaced people.

The United Kingdom is grateful for the continued
work of the United Nations to find a solution for the
people of Rukban, in what remain extremely challenging

20-021217/19

S/PV.8707

The situation in the Middle East

conditions. More needs to be done in order to ensure
the safety of the remaining residents in Rukban and
those who have been leaving to seek shelter elsewhere.
There has been no humanitarian assistance to Rukban
since the end of September, and then we were able to
provide only one month’s worth of supplies. We are
also concerned about the fate of some who have left
the camp voluntarily. The United Nations must have
permanent and open-ended access to shelters in Homs
and the final destination points of internally displaced
persons from Rukban. That will ensure adequate
monitoring and reporting on conditions, particularly
on protection and human rights issues, and we would
welcome the United Nations incorporating that into its
regular reporting and keeping the Council apprised.
In conclusion, the humanitarian situation in Syria
remains, as Mr. Lowcock said, dire and deteriorating.
The situation in Idlib is particularly worrisome, as
Russia and the regime bomb civilians in the area. I hope
my Council colleagues will join me in calling for an
immediate ceasefire there, reiterate the importance of
cross-border aid and call on the regime and those allied
to them to let the United Nations do its job to save lives.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
listened attentively to the briefing by Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock. At present, a large number of people
in Syria remain in need of humanitarian assistance. At
the same time, the grave political, economic, security
and counter-terrorism situations are complex and
closely related to the humanitarian situation. In order
to resolve the humanitarian issues in the country, we
must take all factors into consideration and adopt an
integrated approach. In that regard, I would like to
emphasize the following points.
First, while scaling up humanitarian assistance,
we should work to meet the basic humanitarian needs
and improve the living conditions of the Syrian
people by lifting unilateral economic sanctions and
supporting reconstruction projects in order to address
both the symptoms and causes of the issue. The Syrian
Government is actively working to rebuild housing,
livelihoods and medical and educational facilities.
Recently, Syria’s first anti-cancer drug factory was
completed in the capital city of Damascus, which
demonstrates a commitment to resolving the shortage
of medicine caused by unilateral sanctions.
Unilateral economic sanctions and insufficient
funding for reconstruction are major challenges to
8/19

29/01/2020

improving the humanitarian situation for civilians
in Syria, who are suffering from a lack of fuel, food
and medicine. That is an important aspect of the
humanitarian issue in Syria. I hope that the current
situation will be addressed in future humanitarian
briefings by the Secretariat and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). China
will actively participate in the Syrian reconstruction
process under the Belt and Road Initiative, as well
as providing Syria with humanitarian assistance
within our means, helping to train more personnel for
reconstruction and contributing to the strengthening of
Syria’s independent development capacity.
Secondly, the international community must work
together to adopt unified criteria to combat all forms of
terrorism and bring terrorists to justice in accordance
with relevant Security Council resolutions and
international law. Humanitarian and security issues in
Syria are intertwined, and the elimination of terrorist
forces is a necessary condition for the restoration
of peace in Syria. Terrorist forces currently occupy
most of Idlib, threatening the security and safety of
civilians, destroying infrastructure and exacerbating
the humanitarian situation, and must be resolutely
fought against. The prominent issue of foreign terrorist
fighters in Syria and spillover effects thereof pose
common challenges and threats to countries of origin,
the countries concerned and the countries of the region,
which must work together to tackle this scourge.
According to relevant reports, in Al-Hol camp there
are still cases where women are being used to provide
financial support to terrorist organizations. It is
important to be vigilant about various forms of terrorist
support. The Secretariat should closely follow, collect
and consolidate information relating to that issue and
inform the Security Council in a timely manner.
Thirdly, humanitarian relief efforts should strictly
comply with international law and basic norms of
international relations, the Charter of the United
Nations and General Assembly resolution 46/182. They
should adhere to the principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence while emphasizing a
humanitarian nature and professionalism. They must
also refrain from interfering in the internal affairs
of the recipient country. Humanitarian assistance to
Syria should respect and safeguard its sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity and
avoid politicizing humanitarian issues. The Syrian
Government bears the primary responsibility for
20-02121

29/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

improving the humanitarian situation in the country.
OCHA should strengthen coordination with the Syrian
Government and actively explore ways to increase the
delivery of humanitarian assistance from within Syria,
while maintaining openness and transparency and
ensuring the Security Council is informed in a timely
fashion. Cross-border humanitarian relief is a special
relief mechanism adopted in specific circumstances.
In the light of developments in Syria, the United
Nations should proactively propose plans to evaluate
it and make adjustments accordingly. In the search
for alternatives, our priority should be to listen very
carefully to the views of the Syrian Government and
strengthen cooperation among all Syrian parties.
A political settlement is the fundamental way to
improve the humanitarian situation in Syria. China
supports the United Nations, particularly Special Envoy
Pedersen, in adhering to the principle of a Syrian-led,
Syrian-owned process and in promoting a political
solution that addresses the concerns of all parties.
In resolving the Syrian question, all parties should
behave responsibly and constructively. The current
humanitarian situation in Syria is the misfortune of the
Syrian people, but it is also a misfortune for the entire
international community. Just now, the representatives
of the United States and the United Kingdom once again
abused the platform of the Security Council. In their
statements, they made unfounded accusations against
China and other countries, which we strongly refute. I
would like to emphasize that the accusations are totally
groundless and unwarranted. As we all know, due to
the sensitive nature of the issue of the humanitarian
situation in Syria, the Security Council has conducted
many rounds of consultations on the extension of the
cross-border mechanism. However, owing to the failure
to reach consensus, the Security Council has had to
put the issue to a vote a few times. In order to avoid
confrontation, China has always tried its best to seek
middle ground, and we hope that we can find a downto-earth solution. We have been communicating with
all the parties concerned very closely, as I think the
penholders can testify to as well.
After many rounds of consultations, we eventually
found a solution. It may not be the most satisfactory to
everybody, but it is the best way out of the situation at
that moment, and we are very happy to have contributed
to finding it. The role China played in the process has
been acknowledged by Council members. Using this
opportunity to accuse China is utterly unwarranted and

S/PV. 8707

a manifestation of power politics. As I have just said,
because of the divisions and differences on the issue
of Syria, the Council has had to conduct consultations
and put the issue to the vote many times, and I believe
that every country is entitled to vote according to its
own position. At the same time, we can see that the
United States and the United Kingdom voted against
the alternative draft resolution. Why do they expect
other countries to vote with them? Do they think we are
still in a period of colonialism and the whole world has
to side with them? That time has long passed.
Furthermore, it is the United States and the United
Kingdom that should take the primary responsibility
with respect to the issue of Syria. China is not the
problem. We are not promoting regime change in Syria;
we have not bombed the country; we do not have a
single soldier there; we have not occupied any oil fields
or taken any assets from Syria. Therefore, the United
States and the United Kingdom are not in a position to
make accusations against China. They claim that they
are defenders of humanitarian values, which is totally
hypocritical. The entire world has recognized that
hypocrisy. We hope that, on the issue of Syria, all can
assume their responsibilities and avoid politicizing the
humanitarian situation. We hope that the international
community will make concerted efforts to find a
political solution so that the Syrian people can enjoy
their human rights and the humanitarian situation can
improve. Making such wild accusations by abusing the
Security Council will not be conducive to resolving
the situation on the ground; they will only sow more
discord. We hope that the representatives of the
countries concerned will reflect deeply on that.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his
vivid briefing.
It has been recognized repeatedly in different ways
this morning that, for almost a decade, the people of
Syria have had to endure the perils of war and the
resulting effect of living through one of the worst
humanitarian crises the world has seen. Like our fellow
Council members, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
remains deeply concerned about the severity of the
humanitarian situation.
Syria remains the largest refugee crisis in the world.
Millions of Syrians have been forced to flee their homes
and have become internally displaced, while millions
more have left their homeland entirely. They are forced

20-021219/19

S/PV.8707

The situation in the Middle East

to reside in extremely difficult conditions where access
to basic needs, such as clean running water, is a daily
struggle. For that reason, we cannot stress enough the
need for safe, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian
access through the most optimal channels. We echo our
support for resolution 2504 (2020), authorizing crossborder operations, having embraced the mechanism for
the sake of human dignity. We look forward to receiving
the Secretary-General’s report on the feasibility of
alternative modalities for the Al-Yarubiyah crossing by
the end of February.
On the point of refugees and internally displaced
persons, we must underscore that conditions should be
cultivated within Syria to facilitate the safe, voluntary,
well-informed and dignified return of nationals. Without
stability, security and reconstruction, refugees and
internally displaced persons are barred from embarking
on the difficult journey of rebuilding their lives.
Hostilities continue to intensify, even in areas
where ceasefire arrangements have been established.
We call on the parties to exercise maximum restraint
and to de-escalate and we strongly condemn attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure, especially those
that have caused disruptions in medical and education
services. We also remind parties that operations aimed
at eradicating the scourge of terrorism do not absolve
them of their obligations under international law and
that the fundamental principles of armed conflict must
continue to be observed and respected. Accountability
for acts committed in violation of international law
is inextricably linked to lasting peace. It is therefore
important that perpetrators be held responsible in
order to prevent impunity and bolster confidence in
justice. Accordingly, we welcome the board of inquiry
established by the Secretary-General to investigate
a series of incidents that have occurred in northwest Syria.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines appreciates
that the humanitarian situation cannot be discussed
independently of the political process. The conflict
does not have a military solution and can be resolved
only through a credible, balanced and inclusive political
process that meets the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people. We emphasize the need for an inclusive
and consultative process. We must make every effort
to further dialogue with the Syrian Government on all
decisions that concern the country with respect for the
country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
10/19

29/01/2020

Such decisions should not be subject to the
machinations of geopolitical interests and greatPower intrigue. Despite seemingly insurmountable
challenges, the Syrian people continue to display an
extraordinary resilience. It is our genuine hope that the
Council’s commitment to supporting the Syrian people
will manifest itself in ending the conflict and ensuring
a sustaining peace for Syria.
We have a burning responsibility to the Syrian
people. We must help them, and we must make it stop.
Ms. Goolab (South Africa): I thank Mr. Lowcock
for his briefing on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
Recent reports of an escalation of violence in
the Idlib region of Syria and the resulting civilian
casualties are of great concern to South Africa. That
increase in violence has also forced the displacement of
thousands of people since the beginning of 2020. Living
under the constant threat of violence and displacement
disproportionally affects the most vulnerable groups
of society, including women, children, the elderly and
those with disabilities.
South Africa calls for the utmost restraint, the
de-escalation of hostilities and for all parties to adhere
to their international human rights and international
humanitarian law obligations with regard to the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure.
We once again urge all parties to abide by their
commitments under the various ceasefire agreements
that have been previously agreed to.
Armed groups must cease their activities, and
State actors who have the ability to encourage those
groups should impress upon them the need to abide
by the ceasefire and comply with international law.
While South Africa recognizes the right of States
to counter terrorism, such actions should be in line
with international human rights law and international
humanitarian law obligations.
In order to address the prevailing humanitarian
challenges in Syria, efforts must be geared towards
facilitating humanitarian assistance. We commend
the various humanitarian agencies and their personnel
for continuing their essential work in challenging
circumstances. Tens of thousands of people remain in
camps in Syria. We have also taken note that many are
seeking to leave those camps. We call on the relevant
authorities to provide the necessary access to the United
Nations and its partners to support those who wish to
20-02121

29/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8707

leave, in line with the principles of a dignified, safe and
voluntary return.

the violence to continue to escalate. It is frustrating to
actually know the real answer to this question.

South Africa supported the adoption of resolution
2504 (2020) earlier this month, which extends the
mandate of the cross-border humanitarian assistance
programme. We note the upcoming report of the
Secretary-General on his assessment of the impact of
the closure of the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing for
the provision of humanitarian assistance. It should be
acknowledged that, for the comprehensive distribution
of aid to all those in need, a cessation of hostilities and
a ceasefire must be enacted.

Since the resumption of hostilities, from April
2019 to 15 January this year, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
reported approximately 1,500 civilian casualties in
the Idlib de-escalation zone, including 293 women
and 433 children. The number of people displaced,
many of whom have been displaced multiple times,
is also alarming. With camps overcrowded and the
humanitarian response overstretched, concrete and
sustainable actions are urgently needed. In that regard,
my delegation wishes to underline the following three
main points.

South Africa is firm in its belief that the political and
humanitarian situations in Syria cannot be addressed
independently of one another. The continuation of
violence and hostilities has a negative impact on the
humanitarian situation, which in turn also affects
political progress. Similarly, progress in the political
sphere will support efforts towards ensuring that all
Syrians are able to live in a safe, secure and prosperous
environment free of violence.
In conclusion, South Africa remains committed to
supporting the protection of the fundamental interests
of the Syrian people and the maintenance of peace and
stability in the Middle East in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): We thank UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock for his update on
the humanitarian situation in Syria. We would also
like to thank him for accommodating his schedule
with the Security Council’s on such short notice.
The grim information that he just shared with us is
indeed troubling.
The deteriorating humanitarian condition as a
result of increased violence in north-west Syria would
have been prevented, had all the relevant parties
remained committed to their obligations in protecting
civilians and civilian infrastructure in accordance with
international humanitarian law.
My delegation believes that it is imperative for all
parties with influence on the ground to ensure that the
Syrian people are well protected. During the Council’s
briefing on the situation in the north-west in June 2019
(see S/PV.8553), my delegation emphasized that the
Council needed to give the right answer when asked what
would happen to the people in north-west Syria should

First, immediate humanitarian assistance — such as
food, health-care services, shelter, water and sanitation,
as well as winterization items — is urgently needed, not
only by the people in north-west Syria but also in the
north-east of the country. Many internally displaced
persons in the overcrowded camps in those areas are
in need of food in order to survive. Many displaced
families are in need of sleeping bags and blankets to
ensure that their children can survive another day during
the extreme winter weather. We commend the tireless
efforts of the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners in addressing the urgent needs of millions of
people in Syria.
Secondly, we note that the cross-border operations
have continued to scale up during December and January,
with more than 1,000 truckloads of humanitarian
deliveries. The Council’s decision to renew the crossborder mechanism with two crossing borders needs to
be reviewed and assessed comprehensively, based on
the actual information on the ground. Most important,
it must be based on the needs of the Syrian people.
We look forward to receiving by the end of February
the report of the Secretary-General on the feasibility
of using alternative modalities for the Al-Yarubiyah
border crossing.
Lastly, safe, unimpeded and sustained access needs
to be provided to the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners to all requested areas, according to the United
Nations comprehensive assessment of need.
Some have said that people are tired of hoping for
peace in Syria. Obviously, there are reasons behind
that. However, Indonesia fully believes that we should
not tire of helping the Syrian people in need, and we

20-0212111/19

S/PV.8707

The situation in the Middle East

should not tire of increasing our efforts to alleviate
their suffering.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): First, I want to thank
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his
very thorough briefing on the difficult humanitarian
situation in Syria.
We remain gravely concerned about the
developments in the north-west of Syria. The military
operations carried out by the Syrian army, and
supported by the Russian Federation, have unleashed
a mass exodus. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), over
past two months more than 350,000 people have left
their homes in the southern parts of Idlib. Most of
them are now heading towards the Turkish border.
Turkey is already the largest host country for Syrian
refugees, with over 3.6 million Syrians residing there.
As the Syrian Government consistently violates former
ceasefire and de-escalation agreements, the pressure of
displaced people will only grow further.
Taking these concerns into account, Estonia joins
the humanitarian co-penholders Belgium and Germany
in their calls for the establishment of an emergency
humanitarian ceasefire in Idlib and across Syria. The
fight against terrorism should not lead to the violation
of human rights and dignity.
Regarding the situation in the north-east of Syria,
initial reporting by OCHA indicates that there are
serious concerns about the potential lack of health
supplies in the area after the closure of the Al-Yarubiyah
crossing earlier this month. Besides scarce aid, one of
the immediate results of the closure of Al-Yarubiyah
has been that the humanitarian organizations are
increasingly looking to work through local partner
networks. Essentially, if earlier the United Nations
and Security Council had had more control over the
movement of aid and goods into Syria, that is now
decreasing. The help will always find the most direct
way to those in need, the only difference being that we
now have less information about it.
The challenges of the north-east are most visible
in Al-Hol camp, where recent winter floods have
caused substantial damage. Close to 3,000 tents had
to be replaced in the aftermath of these heavy rains in
recent months. Worsening living conditions have led to
new tensions. These are highlighted by the fact, that in
January alone, two murders and three attempts to kidnap
children have been reported in Al-Hol camp. Similar
12/19

29/01/2020

issues apply to the southern parts of Syria, despite
getting less media attention. Waves of assassinations
and kidnappings threaten renewed violence in the area.
Finally, the solution to the Syrian crisis has already
been well-articulated in the resolution 2254 (2015). A
nationwide ceasefire, followed by a meaningful political
process, would enable the international community to
engage with the Syrian authorities and bring on the
reconstruction of the country full swing. Unfortunately,
that road map to peace remains neglected by those in
power in Damascus.
Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for
his briefing and for his efforts at the head of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA).
Bringing an end to the violence and terrorism in
north-western Syria is today an urgent necessity if we
are to prevent the humanitarian catastrophe threatening
4 million people living in that region and to avoid
hindering efforts to find a solution to the conflict
through negotiation leading to security and stability
in Syria.
My delegation is deeply concerned by the
escalation of violence over the past few weeks in Idlib
and neighbouring towns and by indications of renewed
clashes in the region that are unprecedented in nature. In
that regard, and given the humanitarian repercussions
and suffering of the inhabitants of the region, Tunisia
expresses its concern over the loss of dozens of lives
among civilians and the increased exodus of people
seeking shelter from the violence. We condemn attacks
on civilians, whoever the perpetrator, including
those committed by terrorist groups and their allies,
such as Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and other extremist
jihadist factions. We call on all parties to respect their
commitments under international humanitarian law
and international law to ensure civilian protection at
all times and guarantee assistance in a safe, unimpeded
and sustained way so as to meet the needs of all.
We regret the violations of the ceasefire
agreement concluded between Turkey and the Russian
Federation on 19 January, particularly because the
ceasefire — which lasted just a few days — allowed
some displaced persons to return to their homes. We
call on the guarantors to work to promote a lasting
ceasefire in the region and to reduce tensions so as to
20-02121

29/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

calm the overall situation until stability and security
can be restored across sisterly Syria.
The short-term potential for breaking this current
cycle of emergency humanitarian aid in Syria is very
weak due to the lack of calm and the faltering political
process. We believe that, despite their importance,
de-escalation efforts in Idlib are only a temporary
solution to the humanitarian crisis. We will not reach
a lasting solution unless we find a practical, shared
solution that excludes terrorist groups in Idlib and
eliminates them from the region.
With regard to cross-border humanitarian assistance,
I commend the solidarity of Syria’s neighbours over the
past few years through assistance provided to millions
of people crossing Syria’s borders or within the country,
including through the United Nations cross-border
assistance plan. Based on our experience in seeking to
resolve the ongoing humanitarian crisis in Libya, we
understand the burden this imposes on neighbouring
countries and their societies.
My country’s delegation notes the continued
consultations under way within OCHA following the
adoption of resolution 2504 (2020), on the continuation
of cross-border assistance. Tunisia looks forward to the
report of the Secretary-General, to be issued next month
under that resolution, with respect to the possibility of
using alternative routes and avoiding the Al-Yarubiyah
crossing point.
Against that background, we believe that ending
the system of cross-border humanitarian assistance
will require a progressive approach, in full respect
for Syria’s sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity,
leading to the safe, unimpeded and sustained delivery
of humanitarian assistance, pursuant to international
law and the principles of humanitarian work.
Finally, the Syrian crisis is now entering its tenth
year and the brotherly Syrian people are still facing
indescribable suffering. My delegation reaffirms the
fact that the solution cannot be a military one. The only
possible way to bring an end to the suffering of the
Syrian people is through a political approach, pursuant
to resolution 2254 (2015), that responds to the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people to live in liberty and
dignity and to maintain the unity, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria. That will promote security
and stability in the region.

S/PV. 8707

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Lowcock for
his briefing.
The Dominican Republic remains concerned about
the humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab Republic.
At the outset, we reiterate our regret at having been
unable to achieve the complete renewal of the crossborder mechanism whereby millions of people receive
food and health assistance. We reiterate that every
humanitarian decision, in this and any other context,
must be based solely on the needs of the population.
Despite the urgent needs, most regrettably humanitarian
action in the country continues to be politicized and
apportioning blame seems to be the priority. That
only serves to undermine the real capacity of the
international community to fulfil its moral obligation
to provide for and meet those needs in a constructive
climate. It should be recalled that just as sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity are fundamental
international principles, so too is the responsibility of
States to protect their populations, not to cause suffering
and to safeguard their livelihoods and well-being.
In north-western Syria, the ongoing hostilities are
creating an atmosphere of insecurity for the civilian
population, forcing them to leave their homes, without
possessions, in search of protection and access to
basic services. Unfortunately, not everyone has that
possibility. Many remain in tents or makeshift facilities
in a situation of complete helplessness. What would we
say if we suddenly found ourselves facing one of those
displaced by violence? Would we tell them that what we
are doing is necessary to ensure their protection?
From any perspective, what is happening in northwest Syria is clearly a testament to the indifference
and inability of all parties, directly and indirectly
involved in this conflict, to take concrete measures to
protect the civilian population. It is precisely for such
situations that international humanitarian law exists. It
exists to help parties to protect the life and dignity of
the population.
The
flagrant
violations
of
international
humanitarian law and the conventions on children, the
disabled and human rights have turned the humanitarian
situation in Syria into turmoil, in which the most
affected are women and children. Not only have they
paid the highest price in this conflict, but also we are
forcing them to lose faith in organizations such as the
United Nations, which is called upon to bring about a

20-0212113/19

S/PV.8707

The situation in the Middle East

world of peace and prosperity for all, based on the rule
of law.
Calls for restraint, respect for ceasefire agreements
and compliance with the laws of war seem to be falling
on deaf ears. Despite their admirable resilience, the
Syrian people cannot continue to be subjected to
the levels of violence that still prevail. That is why
we reiterate that only a political solution based on
resolution 2254 (2015) and the genuine political will
of all sides will make it possible to change, once and
for all, the trajectory of this horrific conflict, which we
believe must begin with the following measures. First,
there must be an immediate cessation of hostilities and
an assessment of the real impact of the partial renewal
of the cross-border mechanism and the new reality on
the ground needs to be taken into account. Secondly, in
the same context, it is essential to ensure safe, ongoing
and unhindered humanitarian access for all of Syria,
particularly for the almost 400,000 newly displaced
persons. The fate of those people is in the hands of
us all.
Finally, the Dominican Republic reiterates its
position that there is no justification for attacks on
hospitals, schools and other civilian infrastructure and
that no solution other than a political one can put an end
to this conflict in order for Syria to follow the path of
peace, prosperity and development.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): Through
you, Mr. President, I would like to convey my thanks
to Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing.
How can we not be concerned about the continued
fighting between Government troops and armed groups
in Idlib province, which, unfortunately, continues
to drive civilians from their homes in this very cold
weather. The 20,000 people displaced in the past few
days must draw our attention.
We reiterate our appeal to the parties to the conflict
to respect their obligations in terms of protection of
civilians and to allow humanitarian workers access
to those severely affected by the ongoing hostilities.
The Niger commends the efforts of the humanitarian
agencies in their daily work to provide assistance
to those in need, which should be made possible
throughout Syria;
We urge all stakeholders to commit to a ceasefire to
give the resumption of dialogue a chance in the context
of the political process. The first stage of that must be
an end to the violence.
14/19

29/01/2020

My delegation would like to reaffirm its support
for the cross-border mechanism for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to Syria, whose mandate we
renewed on 10 January (see S/PV.8700). That aid is
not being fully delivered. We must recognize that, and
further efforts must be made. Moreover, that is why we
eagerly await the report of the Secretary-General on
that issue.
We must listen to the messages from the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs so as to
respond in the best possible way to the calls for help
from the thousands of women and children who are so
badly in need of such assistance and are, I would say,
in distress.
In conclusion, as I have said in the past, a
united Security Council, particularly with regard to
humanitarian matters, is an effective Council, one
whose decisions take into account what is the most
important, that is, life and the survival of millions of
Syrians who are counting on us.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We listened carefully to the briefing by
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock but, clearly,
he did not have time to stay and listen to us and the
Syrian representative. That is a shame. I am sure that it
would have been useful for him to hear what we have to
say, and I hope that his colleagues will convey to him
exactly what we have to say.
Despite the continuing trend towards stabilizing
the situation in a large part of the territory, the
return to Syria of a peaceful life and the restoration
of the socioeconomic infrastructure, there still
remain hotbeds of tension and the population needs
humanitarian assistance. In that regard, we note the
active participation of the representatives of the relevant
United Nations bodies, the International Committee
of the Red Cross, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and
non-governmental humanitarian organizations in
providing assistance to the population in coordination
with the Syrian authorities.
The situation in territories that are not under the
control of the Syrian Government remains extremely
worrying — in Idlib, on the east bank of the Euphrates
river and in the area around Al-Tanf. At the beginning
of January, the Russian and Turkish forces again tried to
establish a ceasefire in Idlib. However, radical groups
led by the recognized terrorist organization Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham once again ignored that and continued
20-02121

29/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

to shell positions of the Syrian forces and nearby towns,
particularly Aleppo. The number of those attacks is
as many as 60 incidents a day. Naturally, such armed
provocations, which have already claimed dozens of
lives and injured hundreds of civilians this month alone,
cannot go unanswered. The Syrian Government forces
have been forced to respond to the terrorist attacks,
conduct limited operations to counteract the terrorist
activity and mitigate the threats coming from Idlib.
Today, we have heard statements that duplicate one
another about schools, hospitals, markets and internally
displaced persons (IDPs) camps being bombed. We
were given supposedly accurate figures for the number
of people killed and injured. We have heard that before,
word for word. I again wonder where that reliable data
is coming from. Where were so many medical facilities
that have already been bombed found? They now run
into the dozens, if not hundreds, in Idlib province alone.
The escalation in Idlib is due not to the operations of the
Syrian forces but rather to the intentional provocations
carried out by terrorists.
Three humanitarian corridors have been
operationalized since 13 January to facilitate the
withdrawal of civilians from the de-escalation zone.
Temporary accommodation centres in the province
of Hama have been prepared for persons without
permanent residence. Unfortunately, terrorists continue
to use the practice of human shields, holding civilians
hostage and preventing them from escaping and shelling
checkpoints. That is further proof of the position that we
have repeatedly stated that the problem in Idlib cannot
be resolved as long as it is overrun by terrorists who
have been recognized as such by the Security Council.
The situation in the area beyond the Euphrates has
improved, thanks in large part to the implementation of
the Russian-Turkish memorandum of 22 October 2019.
Regular Russian-Turkish patrols have been established
on agreed border points. Moreover, Russian forces
are undertaking energetic efforts to rebuild destroyed
infrastructure, provide medical care to those in need
and deliver food and basic necessities.
The most acute problem, in addition to Idlib,
remains the humanitarian situation in the major refugee
and IDP camps located in American-controlled areas:
Rukban in the south and Al Hol in the north-east. The
United Nations plan to evacuate the remaining residents
of the camps has been delayed for five months due to
the refusal of the fighters to give the necessary security

S/PV. 8707

guarantees to United Nations personnel. Humanitarian
convoys cannot resolve the problems that Rukban is
facing. Furthermore, assistance often does not reach
refugees but instead remains in the hands of the
militants. Efforts must be continued to fully evacuate
people from the camps.
Mr. Lowcock today did not give a particularly
positive assessment of the cross-line assistance. We
recall that the lion’s share of assistance to and within
Syria is cross-line aid, including to the north-east in
Al-Hasakah governorate. All humanitarian agencies
of the United Nations, apart from the World Health
Organization, deliver humanitarian assistance to the
north-east from Syrian territory.
I would also like to address the recent adoption of
resolution 2504 (2020). The resolution explicitly and
implicitly focuses the United Nations on cooperation
and finding ways to resolve problems with the
legitimate authorities of Syria, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 46/182, as it should, and
international law.
Instead of whipping up passions here, we would
recommend that the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs establish, as quickly as possible,
effective cooperation with the legitimate authorities in
Damascus. That is in the interest of the United Nations
and in our own interest. We expect that the February
United Nations report will provide information about
alternative routes for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance from Syrian territory. As we have already
said, an alternative to Al-Yarubiyah and the ability
to deliver humanitarian assistance to Al-Hasakah
governorate exist. We would like to hear about the steps
that have been taken to that end and the results that
have been achieved.
I would now like to offer a few statistics, which
speak for themselves. One million people in Idlib are
covered by cross-border assistance. The remaining
10 million people in Syria are covered by regular
humanitarian programmes, as confirmed in the latest
Secretary-General report (S/2019/949). With respect
to the alleged lack of cooperation on the part of the
Syrian Government, the number of humanitarian
convoys agreed to with Damascus is steadily growing
each month. The statistics were provided at the meeting
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs Syria Humanitarian Task Force in Geneva.

20-0212115/19

S/PV.8707

The situation in the Middle East

What is stable is the financing of the humanitarian
response plan for Syria, which remains at around 60 per
cent. The interesting point is that as more territory
comes under the control of the Syrian Government, the
fewer donor contributions there are for the humanitarian
response plan. The humanitarian principles of humanity
and impartiality were mentioned; where are they?
We agree with those who have said today that the
humanitarian issue in Syria has been unacceptably
politicized, including in post-conflict recovery. Some
of our colleagues brag about politicizing it by imposing
more requirements on the Syrian authorities. We call
on the United Nations and members of the international
community to join post-conflict recovery projects and
to lift unilateral sanctions in the interest of normalizing
the lives of Syrians — that is, of course, if members
of the Council really do care about the well-being of
Syrian civilians.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Viet Nam.
I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for his briefing. We highly appreciate the
tireless efforts of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to deliver
assistance to Syrian people in need.
We remain deeply concerned over the escalation
of hostilities in north-west Syria during the past
month. Continued reports of the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in that area, especially the
impact on the civilian population, are of particular
concern. We share the concern over the high number
of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and civilian
casualties, especially among woman and children.
We are troubled by the plight of some 2.7 million
people in north-western Syria in urgent need of
assistance, including food, shelter, water, health care
and winterization assistance. For that very reason, 20
days ago we joined other Council members in voting
in favour of resolution 2504 (2020) to renew the crossborder mechanism for the delivery of humanitarian aid
to Syria. In order to address the situation, we would
like to emphasize the following points.
First, all parties to the conflict must fully respect
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations and international humanitarian law, and meet
their obligations to protect the civilian population and
objects. We call on all the parties to abide by the latest
16/19

29/01/2020

ceasefire brokered by Russia and Turkey and to return
to dialogue.
Secondly, humanitarian assistance on the ground
needs to be maintained where it is needed. Humanitarian
aid must go to the right people. The Syrian Government
has the primary responsibility in that regard, with
the continuous joint support of Member States and
international organizations.
Thirdly, humanitarian work should also help create
a favourable environment for the political process,
reconciliation and reconstruction in Syria. At the
same time, it must be carried out in full respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Syria.
Fourthly, Viet Nam has consistently held the
position that all disputes and conflicts must be settled
by peaceful means, in accordance with international
law, including the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. We therefore urge all concerned parties to
constructively engage in dialogue and negotiations. In
that regard, we deeply appreciate the tireless efforts
of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy,
Mr. Pedersen.
Viet Nam stands together with the United Nations
and the international community in continuously
supporting Syria’s Constitutional Committee as it
moves forward towards a comprehensive and lasting
political solution for Syria.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me at the outset to convey some good
news to the Security Council and its anti-terrorism
subsidiary bodies, as well as to the international
community. The Syrian Arab army and its allies have
liberated the city of Maarat al-Numan, which is on the
road between Idlib and Aleppo. Of course, the liberation
of that historic city is of the utmost importance.
Now that we have eradicated terrorism from Maarat
al-Numan, we must liberate the two nearby small towns
Saraqib and Ariha. Only then will we be able to reopen
Aleppo airport, and that is the crux of the matter. This
is important information. Reopening Aleppo airport
would mean that we no longer need cross-border aid
operations, especially through the intelligence centre in
20-02121

29/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

Turkish Gaziantep. We in the Government are working
with our allies to liberate that area.
This, of course, runs counter to the plans of some
who would like to continue cross-border aid operations.
Reopening Aleppo airport would mean that we no
longer need cross-border aid operations. From what I
understood from the statements of some present, they
do not want us to reopen Aleppo airport so that they can
continue to interfere in our domestic affairs through
cross-border aid operations.
As usual, we have heard Secretariat officials and
representatives deliver identical statements on the
suffering of the Syrian people in the current crisis.
Some presented fabricated figures and played around
with them; some spoke of 3 million or 4 million civilians
in Idlib. In fact, the accurate figure is 800,000 civilians
in Idlib, plus 90,000 terrorists; if we add their families,
we get 300,000. So overall we have 1.1 million civilians
and mostly foreign terrorists and their families. Some
stated that there are approximately 3 million in the
north-east of Syria, thousands in Rukban camp and
thousands more in Al-Hol camp. However, over the
past nine years no one, not even the Under-SecretaryGeneral, has spoken of the suffering and the difficult
living conditions of all Syrians inside and outside
the country as a result of terrorism, under its various
names; as a result of occupation by various occupying
forces by means of various forms of aggression; and as
a result of the unilateral coercive economic measures
imposed by various countries. I would like to thank my
friend the Chinese Ambassador for having addressed
this highly important matter.
What I would like to focus on today, in our
commitment to conveying to the Council the concerns
of the Syrian people, is a form of terrorism that is
complementary to the armed violence of the terrorist
organizations designated by the Security Council and
associated entities, namely, economic terrorism and
the policies of collective punishment applied by some
Governments of Member States to dissuade us from
making our own choices and from having our own
national positions.
This is in flagrant violation of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations. It is inconsistent
with the principle of sovereign equality among States.
It is inconsistent with all human rights instruments and
the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. The tune those Western

S/PV. 8707

countries are playing day and night, claiming that they
want to empower all Member States and to ensure that
no one is left behind. That is what they are saying. I am
just repeating what they are saying — do not kill the
messenger. It seems that they interpret this phrase as
eliminating others so that they can move on and no one
else is left behind.
Today all Syrians — around 24 million of them — are
suffering. Not 1, not 2, not 10 million — 24 million
Syrians are suffering under a wide array of coercive
measures that affect their daily lives. The Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) is
shamefully ignoring our repeated appeals to accord
this issue the importance that it deserves, at least in
its reports. Even more shameful are the responses
that we get from OCHA representatives in closed
consultations. They say that they are not allowed
to speak about this matter, as their careers would be
affected or they might be punished or even sacked. That
excuse is worse than the crime, especially coming from
people who are supposed to be carrying out a noble
humanitarian mission in a professional, impartial and
humanitarian way.
OCHA has issued 64 written reports and hundreds
of briefings without a single reference to the Syrian
children suffering from bitter cold in schools, hospitals
and homes without heating as a result of coercive
measures that prevent us from importing fuel to
compensate for our national oil and gas, which are
plundered by the proudly American occupiers.
The American occupiers claim that they love
Syrian oil and gas. Today, we heard the American
Ambassador ask the Syrian Government and its
Russian ally to deliver humanitarian aid to Rukban
camp in the Al-Tanf area. That is what we heard a
while ago from the United States Ambassador. The
United States of America is occupying the Al-Tanf area
in Syria, where it is protecting and arming a terrorist
group called Maghawir al-Thawra, which attacked the
city of As-Suwayda in the south two years ago and
massacred hundreds of civilians at 4 a.m. Men, women
and children were massacred, at 4 a.m. The terrorist
group that attacked As-Suwayda massacred hundreds
of civilians and kidnapped dozens of women and
children is sponsored by the United States of America
in the Al-Tanf area.
Nevertheless, my American colleague is asking us
and our allies to allow the delivery of humanitarian aid

20-0212117/19

S/PV.8707

The situation in the Middle East

to Rukban camp and the Al-Tanf area, meaning that the
Americans are occupying our territory, sponsoring a
terrorist organization on our territory and then asking
us to deliver humanitarian aid to that area. It is as if
they, a major Power, had never heard of something
called the responsibility of an occupying Power under
international humanitarian law. The occupying Power
is supposed to deliver humanitarian aid to civilians
living in the area under occupation.
In any case, after dozens of reports and hundreds
of briefings, OCHA has not reported on the newborns
who have lost their lives as a result of the power cuts to
incubators in some health centres and hospitals. It has
not reported on other newborns who survived but were
killed by coercive measures that prevented them from
receiving milk and other basic nutrients. OCHA has not
reported on mothers who are educating their children
by candlelight. In dozens of reports and hundreds of
briefings, OCHA has not reported on those who lost
their lives in operating rooms because of a ban on the
import of surgical thread, the anti-clotting medication
used during surgeries, and basic medical equipment
such as MRI and X-ray machines and others.
Nevertheless, Mr. Lowcock today deemed that the
closure of Al-Yarubiyah crossing, which, by the way,
is under the control of the United States of America, is
what is preventing us from importing surgical thread.
He also spoke of 400 different types of drugs and
supplies, including surgical thread. There is therefore
no other crossing that can be used to import surgical
threads except the Al-Yarubiyah crossing. Is that really
true? Only through Al-Yarubiyah are we able to import
surgical thread? It is as though that crossing specializes
in imports of surgical threads. Those are the lies we
have heard today.
In the dozens of reports and hundreds of briefings,
OCHA has not once mentioned people with special
needs, who are affected by coercive measures. They are
unable to receive artificial limbs or electric wheelchairs.
In the dozens of reports and hundreds of briefings,
OCHA has not mentioned the Syrians unable to import
materials to meet their basic needs, such as food and
medication, as a result of the sanctions imposed on the
banking sector, which makes it impossible to conduct
financial transactions. OCHA has not mentioned the
plight of Syrians abroad, who cannot access consular
services in several countries or transfer even a small
amount of money to help their families in Syria. OCHA
has not mentioned the fate of the tens of thousands of
18/19

29/01/2020

Syrians who drowned in the Mediterranean at the hands
of Turkish human traffickers.
Nine difficult years have passed and not once have
we heard OCHA asking Germany, for instance, to allow
Siemens, a German company, to supply the necessary
spare parts for the power plant in Jandar, which was built
by Germany decades ago. It is a purely humanitarian
matter borne out of a basic need for hospitals and
schools and to assist Syrian civilians. What is the
point of those reports and meetings it they are unable
to provide spare parts for a power plant? Has OCHA
not heard the complaints of United Nations offices and
international organizations operating in Syria about
the effects of coercive measures on humanitarian
operations? Has it not reviewed the reports issued by
the Economic and Social Commission for Western
Asia confirming the considerable adverse effects of
coercive measures on humanitarian deliveries in Syria?
Has OCHA not heard what Mr. Idriss Jazairy, Special
Rapporteur on unilateral coercive measures, said about
the adverse effects of such measures on the enjoyment
of human rights. He said,
“[s]uch coercive unilateral measures exacerbate the
humanitarian suffering of the Syrian people. It is
hard to believe that they are there to protect Syrians”.
Should OCHA not remove its head from the sand and
describe the situation as it is?
What I am talking about is humanitarian criticism
about the humanitarian situation in Syria. I said all of
that because OCHA reports to the Council must be in
line with its noble mission. However, that is not the case.
As the saying goes, do not go around fire expecting
not to sweat. Whoever makes that mistake must suffer
the consequences.
OCHA has not reported on many effects of coercive
measures. Some in the Council might deem that issue to
be a secondary one, merely as collateral damage. That is
how the liars refer to it: collateral damage. It is a lovely
phrase. However, such matters affect all the Syrian
people, and are therefore a top priority for us and for
anyone who respects the principles of international law
and international humanitarian law. I assure the Council
that we have no problem with OCHA as an institution.
We have a problem with those controlling OCHA, who
replace the humanitarian agenda of the United Nations
with that based on the views of their countries. If they
were honest, they would not have refused to respond
to our calls to provide assistance to the 40 towns and
20-02121

29/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

cities in Idlib and surrounding areas that were liberated
from terrorism this month. Hundreds of thousands of
civilians were liberated from terrorism, but OCHA has
never provided humanitarian aid to them.
In conclusion, my country underscores that we
will build on the great achievements we made in
cooperation with several United Nations agencies, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and 38 foreign
non-governmental organizations authorized to work
in Syria, including five French organizations, three
American organizations, five British organizations, four
German organizations, three Russian organizations and

S/PV. 8707

others from Denmark, Norway, the Netherlands, Italy,
Spain, Austria and Finland.
My country stresses that it is of the utmost
importance to immediately and unconditionally lift all
coercive measures and end once and for all the policies
of economic punishment adopted by the Governments
of some Member States, as they are inconsistent with
international law, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. I assure the Council
that, despite the pressure on the Syrian people, we
will not relinquish our sovereignty or allow anyone to
prevent us from making our own decisions.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

20-0212119/19
