S/2019/619

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 August 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 1 August 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
In a letter dated 7 July 2019 addressed to me, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Emigrants of Lebanon requested the Security Council to extend the mandate of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for a further year, without
amendment to its mandate, its concept of operations and its r ules of engagement. In
that regard, and further to my report to the Council of 17 July 2019 ( S/2019/574) on
the implementation of Council resolution 1701 (2006), I hereby request the Council
to consider the renewal of the mandate of UNIFIL, which is due to expire on
31 August 2019.
I commend both the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense Forces on
their continued commitment to maintaining the cessation of hostilities and their close
cooperation and coordination with UNIFIL. The relative calm and stability in
southern Lebanon and along the Blue Line, as well as in northern Israel, should not
be taken for granted and must be preserved.
There has been no tangible progress towards a permanent ceasefire and a long term solution to the conflict, as called for in resolution 1701 (2006). Both parties have
yet to fulfil their respective obligations under the resolution. Israel must withdraw its
forces from northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line and cease
violations of Lebanese airspace. The Government of Lebanon must exercise effective
authority over all Lebanese territory, prevent hostile actions from its territory, ensure
the safety and security of the civilian population, in addition to that of United Nations
personnel, and ensure the disarmament of all armed groups so that there will be no
weapons or authority in Lebanon other than those of the Lebanese State. UNIFIL, in
close coordination with the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
Lebanon, continues to work with the parties in fulfilling those obligations.
The beginning of 2019 was marked by increased tensions between the parties
that have kept UNIFIL on high alert. Three tunnels were confirmed by UNIFIL to
cross the Blue Line, in violation of resolution 1701 (2006). In addition, Israel, and
more recently Lebanon, conducted construction work in close proximity to the Blue
Line, as detailed in my most recent reports to the Council ( S/2019/237 and
S/2019/574).
The liaison and coordination arrangements that UNIFIL has established with the
Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense Forces, bilaterally and through the
tripartite forum, remain vital for mitigating tensions in sensitive areas along the Blue
Line. I encourage the parties to re-engage in the process to mark the Blue Line visibly
on the ground, without prejudice to future border negotiations, as a confidence -

19-13176 (E)

060819

*1913176*

S/2019/619

building measure, as well as to assist with the monitoring of violations and prevent
inadvertent crossings. It is of paramount importance that the confidentiality and
effectiveness of the tripartite meetings be maintained. In that regard, I encourage the
parties to respect the integrity of the location where the tripartite meetings are held.
The Lebanese authorities should take all action to ensure that there are no
unauthorized armed personnel, assets or weapons in the area between the Blue Line
and the Litani River, bearing in mind the primary responsibility of the Lebanese
Armed Forces in that regard. In accordance with its mandate, UNIFIL remains
committed to taking all action necessary within its capabilities to ensure that its area
of operations is not utilized for hostile activities of any kind.
The Government of Lebanon continues to express its strong commitment to
expanding the capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces on land and at sea, which
remains vital for enhancing State presence in southern Lebanon. Mobilizing
additional international support to build that capacity is a key priorit y, and follow-up
to the commitments made at the ministerial-level meeting known as the Rome II
conference is critical for progress in that regard. UNIFIL, in consultation with the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, is engaged in
mobilizing international support for developing the capabilities identified as priorities
by the Lebanese Armed Forces, including the deployment of a model regiment to
southern Lebanon and the development of a transition strategy for the gradual transfer
of responsibilities from the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force to the Lebanese Navy.
UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces continue to work closely together
through the conduct of exercises and provision of training, on land and at sea, with
the aim of increasing the capacity, capabilities and presence of the Lebanese Armed
Forces in southern Lebanon and the territorial waters of Lebanon. The Maritime Task
Force continues to support the Lebanese Navy in carrying out maritime interdiction
operations and providing training.
By enabling a safe and stable maritime environment, the Maritime Task Force
contributes to maintaining calm in Lebanon by deterring the use of Lebanese
territorial waters for illicit purposes and mitigating the spillover effects of regional
crises, as well as enhancing maritime trade in that part of the Mediterranean.
UNIFIL has maintained a high operational tempo and continued to enhance the
visibility and effectiveness of its operations in accordance with Council resolutions
2373 (2017) and 2433 (2018), including through foot patrols, increased night patrols
along the Blue Line and a more effective use of air assets, including by increasing the
number of operational flights, such as reconnaissance of sensitive areas, and
undertaking night flights over rugged and difficult terrain. The mission conducts an
average of 13,884 operational activities per month, which include s 7,458 patrols. Of
those activities, 32 per cent are conducted at night. Since August 2017, UNIFIL has
also increased by 43 per cent the number of activities conducted in close coordination
with the Lebanese Armed Forces, with some 70 operational activiti es conducted per
day in coordination with the Forces, of a daily average of 450. Thus, UNIFIL makes
a critical contribution to conflict prevention and security and stability.
The freedom of movement of UNIFIL in its entire area of operations and along
the full length of the Blue Line remains critical and has been generally respected. The
number of incidents involving restrictions of its freedom of movement remains
exceedingly small compared with the overall number of activities and patrols, and all
such incidents have been detailed in my reports on the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006). It is the responsibility of the Lebanese authorities, including the
Lebanese Armed Forces, to ensure that UNIFIL has the ability to carry out its
mandated activities unhindered. UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces also

2/3

19-13176

S/2019/619

continued to visit and monitor Green without Borders sites situated in close proximity
to the Blue Line.
Recalling that the Government of Lebanon has the primary responsibility to
ensure that the freedom of movement of UNIFIL in its area of operations is fully
respected and unimpeded, I note that the United Nations has not been informed of
criminal proceedings to date to bring to justice the perpetrators of the attack on
UNIFIL peacekeepers that occurred on 4 August 2018 in Majdal Zun. Such
proceedings remain critical for preventing future incidents and retaining the
confidence of troop-contributing countries. In relation to the tunnels confirmed by
UNIFIL to cross the Blue Line, it is also essential that the Lebanese authorities
undertake a thorough investigation on the Lebanese side and that UNIFIL gain access
to relevant sites.
In the absence of progress towards a permanent ceasefire, the abili ty of UNIFIL
to deter, prevent and deconflict remains crucial. All efforts, therefore, must be made
to take advantage of the relative calm to make progress on outstanding elements of
resolution 1701 (2006). The priority remains for the parties to take the necessary steps
towards a permanent ceasefire and long-term solution to the conflict. UNIFIL, in
close coordination with the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
Lebanon, is ready to lend its full support to the parties in that process.
As at 16 July 2019, the total number of military personnel was 10,505 members,
including 551 women. The Maritime Task Force comprised six vessels, two
helicopters and 748 military personnel. The UNIFIL civilian component included
237 international and 585 national staff. I am grateful to the 43 troop -contributing
countries and continue to encourage them to increase the number of women deployed
to UNIFIL.
Regarding the financial aspects of UNIFIL, the General Assembly, by its
resolution 73/322 and decision 73/555 of 3 July 2019, appropriated an amount of
$480.1 million for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2019 to
30 June 2020. Should the Council decide to extend the mandate of the Force beyond
31 August 2019, the cost of maintaining UNIFIL would be limited to the amounts
approved by the Assembly.
As at 25 July 2019, unpaid assessed contributions to the special account for
UNIFIL amounted to $72.5 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions for
all peacekeeping operations at that date amounted to $5,584.6 million. The
reimbursement of troop costs has been made for the period up to 30 April 2019, while
the reimbursement of the costs of contingent-owned equipment has been made for the
period up to 31 March 2019, in accordance with the quarterly schedule.
I should like to express my appreciation to the Head of Mission and Force
Commander of UNIFIL, Major General Stefano Del Col, and to all the military and
civilian personnel of UNIFIL, for the work that they are carr ying out in southern
Lebanon and for their commitment to the service of peace.
I should also like to express my appreciation for the continued united and
steadfast support of the Council for UNIFIL and its mandated activities. With the
above information in mind, I recommend that the Council extend the mandate of
UNIFIL for a further 12 months, until 31 August 2020.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

19-13176

3/3
