S/PV.8227

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8227th meeting

Tuesday, 10 April 2018, 10.50 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Ms. French

Agenda
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region (S/2018/209)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-10074 (E)
*1810074*

S/PV.8227

The situation in the Great Lakes region

The meeting was called to order at 10.50am.

active and exert control over their disarmed former
members and dependants in transit camps, whose
continued presence further exacerbates tensions with
the host population. The issue of the ex-Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23) members WHO are still in Rwanda and
Uganda is yet to be fully resolved.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region
(S/2018/209)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Congo to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Said Djinnit,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/209, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
I now give the floor to Mr. Djinnit.
Mr. Djinnit: Since my most recent briefing to
the Council, a year ago (see S/PV.7923), my Office
has continued to support the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region, in
close collaboration with the African Union and the
other guarantors of the Framework agreement, namely,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC). During the period under review,
I and my Office focused our engagement on a number
of critical areas.
The first issue is that of negative forces in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The negative forces, including the Allied Democratic
Forces, continue to attack and terrify the population,
causing suffering and displacement and fuelling
mistrust between the countries of the region. The Forces
démocratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) remain
2/21

10/04/2018

Based on the outcome of the visit of representatives
of signatory countries and the guarantors to the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in September 2017, which my Office promoted, the
leaders of the region, at the eighth high-level meeting of
the Regional Oversight Mechanism, held on 19 October
2017 in Brazzaville, adopted the following decisions,
among others.
They called for the strengthening of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
Intervention Brigade and for the repatriation, without
conditions and no later than 20 October 2018, of
disarmed FDLR combatants and dependants still in
camps in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of
ex-M-23 members WHO remain in Rwanda and Uganda.
As a next step, the Joint Follow-up Mechanism
on the repatriation of disarmed combatants and their
dependants is expected to be launched in Goma at the
end of this month.
Secondly, I turn to support for peaceful dialogue
and electoral processes. Our focus has remained
on the situations in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Burundi, two core countries of the
Framework agreement.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, despite the
progress made in preparations for the elections, tensions
persist between the Government and the opposition over
conditions for the holding of the elections. My efforts
during the period under review focused on mobilizing
concerted regional and international support for the
implementation of the 31 December agreement and
the holding of peaceful and credible elections. In this
regard, we have been promoting initiatives by the
Framework agreement guarantors and engaged key
Congolese stakeholders.
With the same aim, I maintained close contacts with
regional leaders, particularly President Sassou Nguesso
of the Republic of the Congo and President Lourenço
of Angola, in view of their role and engagement on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as
18-10074

10/04/2018

The situation in the Great Lakes region

the African Union and other partners. Most recently,
I facilitated a consultation in Addis Ababa between
the African Union Commission Chairperson and
representatives of the guarantors and Special Envoys
for the Great Lakes region.
Regarding Burundi, the political and human
rights situation remains of great concern, particularly
as the country is heading towards a referendum for
constitutional changes. In consultation with Special
Envoy Kafando, I seized every opportunity to encourage
regional leaders to remain focused on the crisis and to
support the efforts of the East African Community
facilitation to ensure progress in the inter-Burundi
dialogue and to maintain the legacy of the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi.
The third critical area is addressing the root causes
of conflicts in the region. In this regard, the continued
illicit exploitation and trade of natural resources from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo contributes, as
we know, to financing negative forces and deprives the
country of critical sources of growth and development.
As recommended by the meeting on natural resources
that we convened jointly with the ICGLR in July 2017,
my office will continue to encourage greater political
commitment by the core countries of the region to curb
the illicit trafficking of resources from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Human rights violations and impunity remain
central to the instability in the region. Recent cases
of the extradition of leaders of armed groups are
encouraging, but more concerted efforts are necessary
to advance judicial cooperation. Together with the
ICGLR, we are working to operationalize the judicial
cooperation network that we jointly established in 2016.
The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region is of great
concern to all and requires greater attention. My Office,
together with the ICGLR and with the support of the
United Nations regional team, especially the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, is preparing to convene stakeholders’
consultations on forced displacement to raise awareness
of the magnitude of the problem and reinvigorate the
commitment to finding lasting solutions to conflict and
displacement in the region.
Furthermore, within the United Nations regional
team, we have continued to implement the Great

S/PV. 8227

Lakes Regional Strategic Framework as a cross-border
approach to assist in addressing the root causes of
conflict. We have also been supporting women, youth
and civil society to enable them to play a key role in
promoting the objectives of the Framework agreement.
For instance, we are now preparing, together with
ICGLR and the African Union women mediators,
known as #FemWise, joint high-level missions to
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic and South Sudan to promote
the role of women in peace and political processes.
Lastly, we have continued to mobilize the leadership
of the region through the governing mechanisms of
the Framework agreement to promote dialogue and
cooperation among signatory countries. The Regional
Oversight Mechanism and its Technical Support
Committee of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework are indeed critical vehicles to ensure
sustained political engagement with regard to the
regional commitments under the Framework agreement
and to address contentious issues. I am encouraged by
indications of greater ownership, as exemplified by the
commitment of Uganda — succeeding Angola and the
Republic of the Congo — to assume the chairmanship
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism later this year.
This past February marked the fifth anniversary
of the Framework agreement. On that occasion, we
organized consultations on 26 and 27 February in Addis
Ababa to assess its implementation. That initiative came
in the wake of the adoption of resolution 2389 (2017),
which requested the Secretary-General to engage in
high-level dialogue to assess progress and challenges
in the implementation of the Framework agreement and
to present his vision on the way forward. It came to
light that, although progress is slow and the Framework
agreement has yet to fully deliver on the expectations it
raised, it remains a vital tool for promoting cooperation,
peace and security in the region, in complementarity
with the 2006 Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes Region.
Progress was noted in some areas, such as the
defeat of the M-23 rebel movement, the weakening of
the FDLR and the establishment of confidence-building
mechanisms, as well as increasing economic cooperation
and integration. However, participants highlighted that
greater political will is needed to fully implement the
commitments under the Framework agreement. It was
noted that mistrust among core countries in the region
also continues to undermine progress.

18-100743/21

S/PV.8227

The situation in the Great Lakes region

(spoke in French)
The discussions in Addis Ababa brought to light the
fact that the signatory countries must, with the support
of the international community, strengthen their efforts
to bring about lasting peace to the region. In that
regard, I underscore the important role that regional
organizations are playing in finding a lasting solution to
instability in the region. I therefore recall the following
priorities that should guide our collective action.
First, increased resolute efforts must be made
to dispel mistrust among the countries in the heart
of the Great Lakes: the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi. In that regard, I
welcome the sustained commitment of the leaders of the
region and the African Union. At the recent meeting I
had on 29 March with President Sassou Nguesso, in his
dual capacity as Chair of the ICGLR and Chair of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, we discussed possibilities
for strengthening relations among those countries
through the good offices of the leaders of the region.
Secondly, in the months to come we must continue
to focus our attention on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo both in terms of security in the
eastern part of the country and in terms of the electoral
process. Although measures are being considered
to enhance the effectiveness of the MONUSCO
Intervention Brigade, the financing of armed groups
must also be addressed by effectively combating the
illicit exploitation and trafficking of natural resources.
Moreover, all parties concerned must fully commit
to the repatriation of unarmed foreign combatants.
In addition, in order to ensure the implementation
of the 31 December 2016 agreement and to create
the conditions for an inclusive and credible electoral
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it is
essential that the Security Council remain united in its
support for the ongoing work under way in the region.
Thirdly, we must not lose sight of the situation
in Burundi. Greater commitment on the part of the
leaders of the region and the African Union, with the
support of the United Nations, is needed to reinvigorate
dialogue among all stakeholders in Burundi, led
by the East African Community and its Facilitator,
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa.
Fourthly, the countries of the region and
humanitarian actors must come together to come up
with sustainable and regional solutions to the worrying
4/21

10/04/2018

humanitarian crisis in the Great Lakes. I hope that
the consultations that we intend to facilitate with the
ICGLR and stakeholders will help in that regard.
Lastly, it seems to me that at some point the United
Nations, in cooperation with leaders of the region, must
address the problem of overlapping mandates and goals
of the Framework agreement and the ICGLR Pact,
while considering the comparative advantages of both
instruments and the need to ensure complementarity
and synergy between those two mechanisms.
The Great Lakes region remains one of the most
volatile and complex regions of the continent, even
though it could significantly contribute to Africa’s
stability and development. I encourage the Security
Council to continue to urge all stakeholders to work
towards the common goal of bringing lasting peace,
stability and development to the region and its people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Djinnit for his very informative briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Balé (Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French):
Today’s Security Council meeting is taking place within
the historical context of the five-year anniversary of
the signing of the Addis Ababa Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region, in keeping with the spirit of
paragraph 24 of resolution 2389 (2017). I therefore thank
you, Sir, for associating this commemorative meeting
with the dual chairmanship of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework and of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), which was entrusted to
President Denis Sassou Nguesso. Accordingly, we have
been afforded the opportunity to share the region’s
vision with Council members.
I am grateful to Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral Said Djinnit, whose detailed briefing throws
light on the tragedy unfolding before our eyes, but hope
for a prosperous future remains possible through the
regional cooperation mechanism that is the Framework
agreement. Five years following the signing of the
historic Addis Ababa agreement on 24 February
2013, the time has undoubtedly come to assess the
level of commitment of each of the signatories to that
instrument, which foreshadowed much hope, especially
18-10074

10/04/2018

The situation in the Great Lakes region

as symbolized by the end of the Mouvement du 23
mars rebellion.
Today’s meeting is part of the momentum of the
work of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, in particular that of its seventh ordinary summit
of Heads of State and Government and eighth high-level
meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework that were
held in Brazzaville, Republic of the Congo, on 19 October
2017. The ICGLR summit considered the political and
security situation in the region within the broader
theme, entitled “Fast-tracking implementation of the
Pact to facilitate stability and development in the Great
Lakes Region”. Among other things, I would mention
the summit’s adoption of the recommendations of the
Self-financing Mechanism of the Regional Initiative to
Fight against Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources,
which is an essential tool for successfully combating
the illegal exploitation of natural resources in the Great
Lakes region. The aim is to eradicate that scourge
and ultimately achieve sustainable natural-resource
management, which is one of the six pillars of the Great
Lakes Regional Strategic Framework.
The conclusions of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism meeting could be summarized as follows:
neutralization of negative forces; repatriation of
disarmed combatants; and engagement of political
dialogue and processes in the region. The Special
Envoy laid out for us the remedies we intend to
implement to tackle those scourges. The Special Envoy,
WHO works closely with the countries of the subregion
and whose regular consultations are appreciated by
the Chair-in-Office, has delineated all of the issues
in a comprehensive manner. I would ask the Council
to allow me to limit my remarks to a synopsis of the
activities of the combined presidency of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism and the ICGLR.
Since the holding of the seventh ICGLR summit and
the eighth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region on 19 October 2017, in Brazzaville, the
Chair-in-Office of the two bodies has been constantly
monitoring the political and security situation in the
countries of the region. The particular attention paid to
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is undoubtedly commensurate with the country’s
strategic position in the Great Lakes region.

S/PV. 8227

Five months after the seventh summit of Heads of
State and Government of the member countries of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
efforts have been made to stabilize the subregion.
Developments in the region, and particularly in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, have led the
ICGLR to hold two tripartite meetings: in Brazzaville
on 9 December 2017 and in Kinshasa on 14 February
2018. Those summit meetings were held under the
auspices of the current Chair-in-Office of the ICGLR
and the Regional Oversight Mechanism, President
Sassou Nguesso, together with the leaders of the
Republic of Angola and the Democratic Republic of
Congo, President João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço
and President Joseph Kabila Kabange, respectively.
They also met in Luanda for a third tripartite summit.
These tripartite consultations made it possible
to consider the political and security situation in
the subregion, and in particular the evolution of the
electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The worrisome security situation in eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo was also at
the centre of their exchanges, which ended with a firm
condemnation of the activism of the armed groups. The
consultations, sometimes extended to include civilsociety participants or other stakeholders, enabled the
Chair of the Regional Oversight Mechanism to hold
talks on 9 January in Brazzaville with the President
of the Conférence épiscopale nationals du Congo,
Cardinal Laurent Monsengwo Pasinya, at the head of a
delegation of Catholic bishops, following the repression
of the Catholic demonstrations that had taken place on
31 December 2017 in Kinshasa.
On 10 January 2018, the Chair of the ICGLR,
drawing on the conclusions of the most recent summit
on the stabilization and development of the region,
drew the attention of Secretary-General António
Guterres and of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, to the need
for a decision on the neutralization of negative forces
following the recommendation on the strengthening of
the Force Intervention Brigade of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with a view to adapting it
to the new challenges linked to the fight against the
negative forces operating in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in order to maintain military
pressure and intensify operations against the armed
groups, in particular the Allied Democratic Forces,

18-100745/21

S/PV.8227

The situation in the Great Lakes region

the Forces démocratiques de liberation du Rwanda
and the Kamuina Nsapu, which continue to destabilize
the country.
Furthermore, during the period under review, it
must be acknowledged that the first electoral process
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo made notable
progress. Since the publication of the electoral calendar
on 5 November 2017, the alignment of the country
around the holding of elections on 23 December 2018
has been strongly established.
But those advances must not obscure the many
challenges that could compromise the success of the
process. Thy include respect for the road map by the
political class as a whole, the financing of the elections
and the logistics essential to their realization, the
difficulties in mitigating the demands of the opposition
now taken up by the Catholic Church and other religious
denominations, and the strengthening of the country’s
security in relation to the activism of armed groups.
We are entering the critical phase of the process.
We therefore urge the political class and civil society
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to properly
assess what is at stake by showing greater responsibility
and the ability to go beyond themselves by privileging
the general interest, in order to guarantee a peaceful
electoral process. In this undertaking, the international
community has a part to play in providing support and
assistance that could prove decisive. Consequently,
with foresight and respect for the sovereignty and
independence of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the parties to the Framework Agreement and the
guarantors must honour their commitments, particularly
in the regional and international mobilization efforts
in favour of peace and stability in the country and, at
the same time, work towards the implementation of the
electoral road map.
In Kenya, while the commitment made on 9 March
2018 by President Uhuru Kenyatta and opposition
leader Raila Odinga to reconcile the country is to be
welcomed, the reconciliation process must nevertheless
be sustained with the support of the main actors.
With respect to the follow-up of the implementation
of the road map of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, the
Chair of the ICGLR and Regional Oversight Mechanism
and his colleagues have deplored the persistence of
violence in the Central African Republic and reiterated
their call to the international community to increase
6/21

10/04/2018

its support for the process of stabilization and national
reconciliation. The armed groups are called on to cease
all hostilities and participate in the peace process
under the aegis of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
The Chair of the ICGLR and the Regional Oversight
Mechanism is following with great attention the dialogue
process being led by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD). He supported the efforts of
the High-level Implementation Panel on the Sudan
and South Sudan, and all African Union mechanisms
supporting the progress achieved by IGAD in the
implementation of the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in South Sudan of August 2015.
In Burundi, oversight of the process has allowed
us to take note that a constitutional referendum is
scheduled for May 2018. However, the process of
dialogue led by the East African Community, currently
in a jam, will have to be relaunched under the impetus
of the mediator, President Museveni, and the facilitator,
former President Mkapa. The involvement of the
African Union, which has maintained dialogue with
regional leaders on ways and means to promote the
East African Community’s efforts, is being followed
with great interest. It is worth noting that the release of
740 prisoners, a majority of whom were sentenced for
participation in the insurrectional movement of 2015, is
a reason for appeasement in the sociopolitical crisis in
the country. With regard to relations between Rwanda
and Burundi, the Chair of the ICGLR and the Regional
Oversight Mechanism is continuing his efforts to
alleviate tensions and improve relations between the
two countries.
The problems of peace and security in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the Great Lakes region,
which have been the setting for conflict for decades,
are undoubtedly linked to those of development, one
conditioning the other. Starting now, we should be
thinking beyond electoral deadlines, which cannot be
an end in themselves. Making lasting peace and stability
in the region, which is the aspiration of its peoples, also
requires means other than electoral consultations. As
we have said, and we can only agree with the obvious:
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is undoubtedly
the nerve centre of the Great Lakes region, and it is not
in vain that it constitutes the cornerstone of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework. It is our duty to
help it to regain lasting stability so that it can play the
role to which its immense potential predisposes it and
18-10074

10/04/2018

The situation in the Great Lakes region

so that it can be deployed as a catalyst for integration, a
vector of peace and stability.
The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework,
with its Regional Oversight Mechanism, remains an
essential mechanism for achieving lasting peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in the region. That is why the international community
as a whole must mobilize around the efforts of the
countries of the region in the context of strengthened
and coordinated cooperation. The implementation of
the Framework agreement requires greater political
commitment on the part of the signatories to give it
substance and life.
In conclusion, I would like to assure Council
members of the continued commitment of President
Sassou Nguesso, in his triple capacity as current
Chair-in-Office of the ICGLR, Chair of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, and President of
the Republic of the Congo, a country party to the
Framework agreement. He will support any initiative
that helps to coordinate our actions and to strengthen
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations to serve the noble cause of peace, in
particular in the Great Lakes region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Balé
for his very informative briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council WHO wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by warmly thanking Mr., Djinnit, not
only for his very informative briefing but also for his
outstanding work and unwavering commitment to
peace in the Great Lakes region. I also wish to thank
Ambassador Balé, Permanent Representative of the
Congo, in his dual capacity as the representative of the
chairmanship of the Joint Follow-up Mechanism of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework agreement
and the chairmanship of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR). Five years after
the signing of the Framework agreement, it was
important for the Security Council to take stock of its
implementation and to consider ways to move forward
with its implementation. The regional dimension of the
Great Lakes crisis must not be overlooked.

S/PV. 8227

As a close partner of the countries of the region and
a permanent member of the Security Council, our most
cherished wish is to see them build on the trajectory
towards lasting peace and stability, which will finally
allow them to benefit from the wealth of their natural
resources in order to ensure the well-being of their
people and to focus on their development.
That trajectory involves strengthening political
stability, the democratic legitimacy of institutions and
the fight against impunity. In that context, the political
and security situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is of particular importance. The elections
scheduled for 23 December should allow, for the first
time, a peaceful transition of power. Without credible
elections that are accepted by all, the stability of the
country and of the entire region is at stake. To achieve
that, it is essential to ensure respect for the electoral
calendar and trust in the process of organizing the
elections through their openness and transparency.
There must also be a peaceful environment, in which
all candidates can declare themselves and campaign
freely without fear of reprisals.
Respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms is crucial to holding free, credible, transparent
and peaceful elections. In that context, we welcome
the commitment of countries in the region to followup and support for the Congolese people on the path
towards the open, free and peaceful organization of
the elections.
That trajectory also requires better regional
integration to ensure good cooperation among the States
of the region. By establishing such interdependence,
thanks to the comparative advantages of each for the
benefit of all, the region will experience real economic
change and development. It is a priority objective of
the African Union and France, which has adapted its
support policies and mechanisms to make its action
part of a regional perspective.
The French institute of Goma, the Hall of Volcanoes,
which was inaugurated six months ago and brings
together French-speaking countries, multilingualism,
training and new technologies, therefore seeks to be
accessible to the young people of the entire region.
That tool is aimed at not only the young people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo but also, beyond its
near borders, those of Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi, to
create projects and common aspirations for an effective
regional partnership.

18-100747/21

S/PV.8227

The situation in the Great Lakes region

To achieve that, the full and complete implementation
of the Addis Ababa Framework agreement is essential.
France welcomes the renewed commitment of the
countries of the region to that end. The meeting of the
Follow-up Mechanism on 19 October set ambitious
goals, in particular for the repatriation of disarmed
combatants. France encourages the countries of the
region to do their utmost to ensure that those objectives
are fully implemented.
Such commitment is all the more essential given
that negative forces continue to operate in the region.
A lasting resolution of that problem requires decisive
action in three areas, and regional organizations,
the ICGLR and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), have a key role to play.
First, with regard to military engagement against
armed groups, a key role will be played by the Force
Intervention Brigade of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), provided by SADC. The renewed
mandate of MONUSCO should enable it to rebuild
its capacity for mobility in order for it to engage in
decisive offensive actions, as it did with respect to the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23).
Secondly, political action must be taken in order to
demobilize, repatriate and reintegrate those combatants
in their countries of origin. I am thinking in particular
of the Forces démocratiques de liberation du Rwanda
and former members of the M-23, as well as those of
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army in
Opposition (SPLM/A-IO), WHO will soon have been
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo for nearly
two years. There has been progress with regard to the
SPLM/A-IO and commitments have been made with
respect to other groups. I am pleased about that.
Lastly, I turn to the issue of tackling the illicit
trafficking in natural resources, which sustains those
armed groups, contributes to their survival and fuels
an economy of war and predation. As long as such
trafficking continues, no lasting stabilization can be
envisaged. There is a need for strong consistent action
by the countries of the region, as well as the ongoing
commitment of international partners to transparency
in the mining industry and a better traceability of
minerals. In that context, the resolve of the ICGLR
and its consultation with the United Nations Group
of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
demonstrated by the annual meeting in Paris of the
8/21

10/04/2018

ICGLR-Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development-United Nations Group of Experts Forum
on Responsible Mineral Supply Chains, deserves to
be welcomed.
Five years after the signing of the Framework
agreement, visible and notable progress in its
implementation would be an extremely positive sign
of the commitment of all signatory countries to the
stability and development of the Great Lakes region.
Rest assured that France will continue to fully support
the countries of the region in that undertaking.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank Special
Envoy Said Djinnit for his comprehensive briefing on
the general situation in the Great Lakes region over the
past six months. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Balé, Permanent Representative of the Congo, for
his presence in the Chamber today and for his very
useful statement.
We very much appreciate the great contribution
that Special Envoy Djinnit has made for peace in the
Great Lakes region. It must of course also be mentioned
that we remain very grateful for his major contribution
to peace in the Horn of Africa in his previous role.
Five years after the signing of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, the security
situation in the Great Lakes region remains worrisome
despite the many efforts to find peaceful solutions to
the conflicts in the region. The continued instability in
the countries of the Great Lakes region has displaced
many people and caused a major humanitarian crisis,
which requires close attention. However, we also note
the modest progress registered in some of the key
conflict-affected countries in the region.
For obvious reasons, I will focus mostly on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The challenge that
the Democratic Republic of the Congo faces in terms
of the presence of numerous armed groups operating in
the eastern part of the country and the huge implications
for the security of the country and the region cannot be
overlooked. That is why we believe that there is a greater
need to address the challenge, including in the context
of cooperation among countries of the region within the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
We thank Special Envoy Djinnit and the Permanent
Representative of the Congo for stressing the destructive
role of negative forces, including with respect to the
18-10074

10/04/2018

The situation in the Great Lakes region

preparation for the elections. One hopes that the Council
will consider this matter as a serious challenge. In the
light of that, we once again welcome the progress made
in the electoral process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the steps taken so far by the Government
to organize the elections. We hope more efforts will
be made in promoting confidence-building measures,
which we believe are vital to creating the atmosphere
needed for the successful holding of elections this year.
It is also absolutely necessary for all Congolese
parties to exercise maximum restraint, refrain from
making inflammatory statements, defuse the political
tensions prevailing in the country and seize the positive
momentum created to implement the 31 December
political agreement, which is the only viable framework
for resolving the current political impasse in the
country.
We express appreciation for the role of countries
in the region, particularly President Denis Sassou
Nguesso, in his capacity as the current Chair of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Regional Oversight Mechanism of the Peace,
Stability and Cooperation Framework. Trust is of
critical value, not only in business, it is perhaps even
more critical in politics. It is in that spirit that we
attach great importance to the role of the President of
the Congo, Mr. Sassou Nguesso. We believe enhanced
coordination between the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, the United Nations, the
African Union, the Southern African Development
Community and other international partners will be
vital to ensuring the successful holding of the elections.
While taking note of the improvements in the overall
security situation in Burundi, the current political
situation can be resolved only peacefully through an
inclusive dialogue on the basis of the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi and the
Constitution of Burundi.
It is imperative to ensure that the ongoing efforts
towards constitutional reform are conducted through
broad consensus on the part of all stakeholders so as
to preserve the country’s security and stability. The
peace process laid out by the East African Community
in that regard remains very important. We believe that
coordination and coherence among the East African
Community, the African Union and the United Nations
is key to making progress in the peace progress.

S/PV. 8227

Looking forward, the work of the Office of the
Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region remain absolutely critical. We appreciate
the outcome of the meeting held in Addis Ababa last
month on the occasion of the fifth anniversary of the
signing of the Framework, which brought together
representatives of the signatories and guarantors to
review the status of the implementation. We recognize
that, five years on, important challenges remain. In
the light of the regional dynamics and the continuing
multifaceted challenges, the need to redouble efforts
towards the full implementation of the Framework
Agreement cannot be overemphasized.
Finally, we fully concur with the priority areas
identified in the report with regard to achieving peace
in the countries of the Great Lakes region.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to begin by thanking the
Peruvian delegation for having convened this meeting,
and the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region,
Mr. Djinnit, for his informative briefing. We also thank
the Permanent Representative of the Republic of the
Congo, Mr. Balé, for the illuminating information he
has just provided us.
I would like to take this opportunity to extend our
condolences to the Catholic Church in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the assassination of a priest
last Sunday, killed by unidentified armed elements
after holding mass.
The Great Lakes region is of strategic importance
for the African continent, and the stability of the region
is linked to the stability of the entire continent. It is
essential that the countries in the region, which share
many common interests and challenges, are able to find
common language to try to address their problems. In
order to do so, they must use the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, signed on 24 February
2013 in Addis Ababa, which continues to be a very
useful instrument.
In order to stabilize the Great Lakes region, we
must create a favourable environment and promote the
economic development of the region. In an environment
of peace and security, its great potential and natural
resources would allow the flourishing of that important
region, since peace would make it unnecessary to spend

18-100749/21

S/PV.8227

The situation in the Great Lakes region

the immense amounts of money wasted today on armed
conflicts that are bleeding them dry. The international
community must help those countries by assisting in
the development of key economic sectors.
For the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, it is
important that countries of the region develop policies
that promote confidence, encourage neighbourly
relations and help resolve differences through direct,
frank and inclusive dialogue. They must also respect
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the other countries in the region. We hope that the
international community will act based on respect for
the sovereignty and views of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and help the country implement political
agreements, advance security sector reform, strengthen
governance in certain areas of the country, promote
national reconciliation and work to achieve peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region.
Neighbouring countries, regional organizations
and subregional organizations have an important role
to play alongside the international community. Leaders
of neighbouring countries, the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and
the East African Community are uniquely positioned
to resolve the question of Burundi, the question of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other issues.
We take this opportunity to express the
appreciation of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea to
His Excellency President Denis Sassou Nguesso of
the Congolese Republic both as President of the Great
Lakes Conference and of the Follow-up Mechanism of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, and
to President João Lourenço of Angola for their efforts
to resolve the problems that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Great Lakes region are facing.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is key to the comprehensive stabilization of the
region. The international community must support the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in that process. The
country will be going through a decisive stage when it
holds elections in December, which we hope will lead
to the beginning of a new stage for the future of the
Congolese people. The post-electoral process of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is as important as the
current situation. That is why possible outcomes must
be closely reviewed. The stability of the country is key
to the entire region. The United Nations Organization
10/21

10/04/2018

Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo must complete its delicate task and collaborate
closely with the Government. All stakeholders in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should pool their
efforts and try to find solutions to their differences,
while prioritizing the interests of all Congolese.
We are pleased to note that the situation in Burundi
has stabilized and that the members of the Council
have been able to agree on a statement with regard to
the country. We hope that Burundians will be able to
resolve their problems internally through negotiations.
In conclusion, I would like to call on the United
Nations to continue to play a leading role and to
coordinate all efforts and mechanisms for the
stabilization and development of that important region.
Equatorial Guinea is prepared to make its modest
contribution to that process.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I wanted to take the
floor because we are at an important point in this region.
I also want to welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General back to the Security Council and,
through him, to thank the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) for everything it is doing. It
was also extremely helpful to have the update from
the Ambassador of the Congo. I would like to start by
saying to my good friend the Ambassador of Equatorial
Guinea that the contribution that his country makes is
not modest. It is much more than that.
It has been five years since the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework was signed. It has proved to
be crucial to pursuing peace and stability in the Great
Lakes region. But as the Special Representative and
the Ambassador of the Congo have spelled out, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has always been
at the centre of the Framework, and the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo — the nerve
centre — affects the stability of the region. As the
Council has discussed in recent days, we are now at
a critical juncture. What happens in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo over the next few months could
be a defining moment for greater regional stability. We
have a choice between seeing the situation improve or
seeing it overturned. The United Kingdom, for its part,
remains committed to supporting the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and
to the holding of free, fair and credible elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in December.
18-10074

10/04/2018

The situation in the Great Lakes region

We welcome the progress that has been made in
the five years since the signing of the Framework. I
would like to highlight the increase in the participation
of women and the commitment to greater regional and
international cooperation in the course of advancing
peace and security. Nevertheless, we are concerned
about the fact that progress has not been made in
the implementation of key elements, including the
repatriation of foreign combatants. As the Ambassador
of the Congo highlighted, we welcome efforts to
reinvigorate the Framework, and urge all its signatories
to implement it in full. We are very supportive of what
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
had to say on judicial issues.
We are also concerned about the continued
proliferation of violence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, particularly in North and South Kivu,
Tanganyika, Ituri and the Kasais. The results of that
instability have indeed been devastating. A total of
4.5 million Congolese have fled their homes and
communities. There are more internally displaced
people in the Democratic Republic of the Congo than
anywhere else in Africa, and more than 13.1 million
people are in need of humanitarian assistance and
protection. We therefore support the other calls that
have been made in the Council for regional players
to come together in the interest of stability in the
coming months. I also would like to endorse what the
French Ambassador said about the importance of that
regional cooperation.
I would like to conclude by talking about elections.
Credible and constitutional elections are the only way
to end the political crisis and achieve stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we urge the
signatories of the Framework to ensure that peaceful and
credible elections can take place in December 2018. That
means that the electoral calendar must be respected, key
milestones met and the confidence-building measures
of the 2016 December agreement implemented in full.
Critically, that includes freeing political prisoners and
opening the political space and permitting peaceful
demonstrations. This is a region that is in all our
interests. The United Kingdom pledges to work together
with partners to achieve progress.
I have some other remarks on other aspects of
the region and the Framework, but I will save them
for consultations.

S/PV. 8227

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region
of Africa, for his detailed briefing. We have also
noted the statement of Mr. Raymond Balé, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of the Congo and Chair
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism.
We concur with the views of colleagues that
the Framework Agreement on Peace, Security and
Cooperation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region is the cornerstone for ensuring stability
in the Great Lakes region. We advocate full compliance
with all obligations by all the signatories of this still
relevant document, including respect for sovereignty,
non-interference in other countries’ internal affairs
and the strengthening of confidence-building measures
among the countries of the subregion.
In that regard, we support an early start to
the operations of the Joint Follow-up Mechanism
established by the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda to counter the Allied
Democratic Forces. The fact that the Regional Oversight
Mechanism among the countries of the region is
holding regular meetings is a positive development and
a testament to the fact that the structure is robust and
can act independently and without external guidance.
We should note that, five full years after its signing,
the Framework Agreement’s military provisions are
still far from being implemented. We commend the
efforts of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which remains committed to combating
gangs and stabilizing the situation. We support full
cooperation between Kinshasa and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in that area. However, the armed
groups continue to be active in the country and in the
region as a whole. Their activities prolong inter-ethnic
conflicts, fuel illegal trafficking in weapons and
worsen the humanitarian situation. It is clear that a
military solution alone cannot resolve the conflict.
Comprehensive measures are needed to address its root
causes, including the strengthening of State authority
and the restoration of social institutions in territories
liberated by the rebels.
We are concerned about the situation with respect
to the repatriation of several hundred ex-combatants
from the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) from Uganda
and Rwanda to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

18-1007411/21

S/PV.8227

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Of course, the ongoing contacts between the Congolese
authorities with the leadership of the M-23 are welcome
news, but the lack of progress in this area has already
led to recidivism on the part of ex-M-23 combatants
WHO have infiltrated the Democratic Republic of
the Congo from Uganda. In that regard, we cannot
help being concerned about the continuing mutual
accusations, including about with regard to support
for combatants and their recruitment of refugees into
their ranks. We think that the countries involved
should show maximum restraint and take steps to
avoid any escalation, including by using the expanded
Joint Verification Mechanism, as provided for in the
Framework Agreement.
Another challenge for the Framework Agreement
is the issue of the presence of allies of Riek Machar,
former Vice-President of South Sudan, on the territory
of Democratic Republic of the Congo. We note the
progress that has been made in addressing that situation,
and we call on Mr. Djinnit, in cooperation with Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui to do everything
they can to make sure that the relevant provisions of
resolution 2348 (2017) are implemented. We note the
role of the Special Envoy in support of engagement
in the region, in particular with private investors,
with a view to generating momentum for economic
cooperation among the countries of the region and
building peace and trust among them.
Many countries of the region are at the stage
of actively building or reforming their democratic
institutions. Some have entered the crucial pre-elections
period. We believe that any domestic political solution
in those countries should lead to long-term stability if
it is arrived at and accepted by the participants in the
political process themselves. In our view, the imposition
of solutions, much less attempts to subjectively interpret
agreements reached, are unacceptable.
We believe that the responsibility for the
normalization of the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is borne by the Congolese
people themselves. In that regard, constructive external
assistance can play a positive role. Above all, what is
necessary is the energetic and robust mediation efforts,
coordinated with the united nations of such regional
organizations as the African Union, the Southern
African Development Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
12/21

10/04/2018

Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China wishes to thank Mr. Said Djinnit, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region, and Ambassador Raymond Balé for their
briefings. China commends the efforts undertaken by
the Special Envoy to achieve peace and stability in
the Great Lakes region and will continue to actively
support his work.
In recent times, thanks to the joint efforts of the
international community and regional countries, the
peace process in South Sudan has been revitalized and
progress made with regard to elections preparation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and national dialogue
in Burundi. All of that points to an improvement in the
political situation of the Great Lakes region. However,
at the same time peace and stability remain fragile.
In particular, the rampant activities of illegal armed
groups, communal tensions and the lack of economic
and social development are seriously undermining
regional peace and development.
The Great Lakes region lies at the heart of the
African continent. Maintaining the peace and the
stability of that region has a direct bearing on the peace
and the stability of the whole continent and requires
the robust support and assistance of the international
community. First, it is necessary to respect the
leadership of regional countries and organizations.
China has always called for African solutions to African
problems and respects the sovereignty, independence
and the territorial integrity of the countries concerned.
China also respects the leading role played by regional
organizations in mediation efforts. My country
supports the full role played by regional and subregional
organizations — such as the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the East African Community and the Southern African
Development Community — in the mediation processes
and encourages the countries of the region to continue
to implement the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. China hopes that the international
community and regional countries and organizations
will strengthen their cooperation so as to work together
to find political solutions to the problems at hand.
Secondly, support should be given to security
capacity-building in the countries of the region. The
international community should increase the amount
of assistance they give to the Great Lakes region in
terms of peace and security capacity-building and help
18-10074

10/04/2018

The situation in the Great Lakes region

the relevant countries to assume their responsibility for
the maintenance of internal peace and security as early
as possible. China welcomes the cooperation among
the countries of the Great Lakes region in response
to the threat from armed groups and encourages
those countries to implement the Nairobi Declaration
and promote disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.
China hopes that the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will, as per the Council’s mandate, strengthen
coordination with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo so as to play an active role in
fighting armed groups in efforts to maintain peace
and stability.
Thirdly, the root causes of the regional conflicts
must be tackled. A lack of development is one the leading
causes of instability in the region. The international
community should honour its assistance commitment in
a timely fashion and increase humanitarian assistance.
At the same time, it is necessary to increase assistance
and investment in the infrastructure of these countries,
including health, education, trade and connectivity.
Efforts should be made to promote the economic
and social development of the countries of the region
and to find effective solutions with respect to youth
employment and refugees. China supports the peace
process in the Great Lakes region and has actively
participated in relevant United Nations peacekeeping
operations there. China has provided support to the
countries of the region in terms of infrastructure,
agriculture, the sustainable development of resources
and energy, and has played an active and positive role in
helping the countries of the region to enhance their selfdevelopment capacity and the livelihood of their people.
We are ready, together with the rest of the international
community to continue to play a constructive role in
achieving peace and stability and the development of
the region.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke
in French): The Ivorian delegation thanks Mr. Said
Djinnit, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region, and Ambassador Raymond
Serge Balé, Permanent Representative of the Republic
of the Congo, which chairs the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, for their updated briefings on the

S/PV. 8227

implementation of the Framework agreement on peace,
security and cooperation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region.
Over the past three months, the Council has
discussed the situation in the Great Lakes region on
many occasions, addressing issues specific to certain
countries of the region. Today’s briefing provides us
with a complete picture of the situation, in view of the
progress made in the implementation of the Framework
agreement on peace, security and cooperation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
Region and the region, signed in Addis Ababa on
24 February 2013.
Despite that progress, it is clear that the prospects
for lasting peace and security in the Great Lakes region
continue to face security, political and humanitarian
challenges. In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire commends
the combined actions of the signatory States to
the Framework agreement, as well international
organizations such as the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern African
Development Community and the East African
Community, in synergy with the African Union and
the United Nations, to provide appropriate responses to
the security, political and humanitarian challenges in
the region.
My country also invites the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
Mr. Djinnit, to pursue his efforts towards the effective
implementation of the Framework agreement, and
supports the priorities jointly defined by the leaders
of the signatory countries of the agreement and the
Secretary-General with a view to the implementation
of paragraph 24 of resolution 2389 (2017).
Given the persisting tensions in some countries of
the region, Côte d’Ivoire encourages all stakeholders
in the political processes and dialogues to increase
their engagement in order to reach a definitive and
lasting resolution of current crises. My country calls
on all parties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to implement the 31 December 2016 agreement, in an
atmosphere of calm, with a view to holding credible
elections on 23 December 2018.
Turning to Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire commends
the efforts of the facilitator, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa,
to relaunch the inter-Burundian political dialogue
under the auspices of the East African Community.
My delegation further welcomes the decision taken

18-1007413/21

S/PV.8227

The situation in the Great Lakes region

by the Heads of State of the East African Community
during the organization’s summit, held on 23 February
in Uganda, to continue to support the Burundian
political process. We therefore invite all Burundian
stakeholders to participate in this process, which
should be both inclusive and aligned with the spirit of
the Arusha agreement.
The deterioration of the security and humanitarian
situation is especially alarming, particularly in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This is attributable to the attacks and violence by armed
groups against civilians and United Nations forces,
community-level conflicts and persistent clashes in
the Central African Republic and in South Sudan. The
consequences thereof include a mass exodus of people,
which is fuelling a large flow of refugees and displaced
persons, and the ensuing humanitarian crisis in those
countries, specifically in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Hence my delegation welcomes the renewed
willingness of the United Nations, during the
eighth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, to neutralize armed groups by stepping up
the means afforded to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo Intervention Brigade, jointly with the
Congolese authorities. We further commend the
efforts undertaken by the international community,
humanitarian organizations, neighbouring States
and local non-governmental organizations to deliver
humanitarian assistance to people in need. We
encourage donors to contribute to the success of the
high-level international conference for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, scheduled to be held on 13 April
in Geneva.
The Addis Ababa Framework agreement sets
out the outlines for the main national, regional and
international measures that are necessary to end the
persistent violence in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in the region. For the countries of the
Great Lakes region, regional organizations and the
international community, this remains the framework
for adequate cooperation to tackle in a concerted
manner the structural causes of the instability plaguing
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
To that end, Côte d’Ivoire calls upon the United
Nations and the whole of the international community
to scale up their support to promote the more effective
14/21

10/04/2018

implementation of the agreement, which is crucial to
peace and stability in this important area of Africa.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Envoy Said Djinnit for his briefing and commend his
tireless efforts and dedication to achieving peace and
stability in the region. We welcome the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of the Congo — which
chairs the Peace and Security Council Framework
Regional Oversight Mechanism — Ambassador
Raymond Serge Balé, and thank him for his briefing
as well.
Kazakhstan commends the ongoing efforts of the
signatory countries to implement the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, which is vital
for achieving stability in the region. We welcome
the growing ownership of the signatories in terms of
implementing the Framework and working towards
ongoing reforms. At the same time, we express concern
at the recurring cycles of conflict and violence, as
well as at the deteriorating humanitarian situation in
the region.
The destabilizing activities of local and foreign
armed groups are exacerbating political tensions in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is necessary
to support and strengthen the capacity of the Forces
armies de la République démocratique du Congo
to combat armed groups with the assistance of the
Intervention Brigade of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is also important to reactivate the regional
follow-up mechanism to expedite the repatriation of
disarmed combatants in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and neighbouring countries.
We welcome the efforts of the Special Envoy in
working with the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern
African Development Community, the European Union
and other partners to develop a coordinated regional
and international approach for stabilization in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this regard, we
hope that the recent meeting of the guarantors, held
in Addis Ababa from 24 to 26 February, will bring
positive results. The political aspiration and will of
regional leaders are important.
We share the concern about the lack of progress in
the inter-Burundian dialogue. We call on all stakeholders
to make efforts to establish a constructive dialogue
18-10074

10/04/2018

The situation in the Great Lakes region

in the spirit of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi, leading to peaceful, free and
inclusive elections. We therefore welcome the efforts
of the facilitator, the former President of Tanzania,
Benjamin Mkapa. The international community should
continue to support the East African Community in the
promotion of inclusive dialogue.
The suffering of the 11 million internally displaced
persons (IDPs) in the region should remain the focus
of the international community. We commend the work
of the Special Envoy in seeking durable solutions and
coordinating the work of humanitarian organizations.
Donors’ commitments in this process are crucial. We
hope that during the high-level humanitarian conference
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo scheduled to
take place in Geneva on 13 April, viable solutions will
be found to provide vital support to the millions of IDPs
and refugees.
Important factors for stability in conflict-affected
countries are the observance of human rights and an
effective system of justice. To that end, cooperation
between judicial bodies of the countries of the region
can become an effective mechanism in the eradication
of impunity and thus should be supported.

S/PV. 8227

in providing assistance in a coordinated manner across
the region.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the Special Envoy
and Ambassador Balé for their remarks this morning.
I think that their briefings underlined very clearly
the interconnected nature of the challenges facing
the region and the need for an integrated approach
that addresses the root causes of conflict. We fully
support their efforts to strengthen regional dialogue in
order to advance peace and development efforts in the
Great Lakes.
Five years after its adoption, the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region continues to be
relevant for peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, regional stability and the United Nations and
the international community’s engagement for peace in
the region. Regional leadership and ownership of the
Framework are critical. Complementary efforts such
as the Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework are
more likely to be effective when accompanied by strong
national leadership.

We further note that the Peace and Security Council
Framework is an essential foundation for sustainable
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region. We therefore encourage
all signatories to continue their efforts to fulfil its
provisions with a view to addressing the root causes
of conflict, including the strengthening of regional
cooperation and economic integration.

We fully support the important regional efforts
under way to implement the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. These include the
revitalization of the Regional Oversight Mechanism
and the active engagement by the chairmanships of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region on
issues of regional stability, peaceful electoral processes
and transition. In addition, the use of the expanded
Joint Verification Mechanism, which helped defuse
tensions involving a February cross-border incident in
North Kivu, is welcome. Those examples illustrate how
further strengthening the region’s forums for dialogue,
information-sharing and transparency, as well as
increased joint monitoring, will enhance mutual trust
and transparency. That could help the region resolve
key issues central to building sustainable peace.
The United Nations has an important role to play in
supporting those efforts, and we fully support the work
of the Special Envoy in that regard.

To conclude, we would like to underscore the
significance of strengthening the security-development
nexus while addressing the current political, security,
social and economic situation in the region. Such
challenges also require a concerted response from
regional and international partners. We are convinced
that all United Nations agencies should deliver as one

The current situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is the most pressing issue facing the region.
The severe humanitarianissue, the delicate political
situation and increased insecurity are of great concern,
and also potentially threaten regional stability. We
fully support regional efforts to resolve the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Close

The illegal exploitation of natural resources in the
current conflict zones, which have become a source of
income for armed groups and criminal networks, must
be addressed by both the countries of the region and
bilateral partners by ensuring the implementation of
the Regional Initiative against the Illegal Exploitation
of Natural Resources of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region.

18-1007415/21

S/PV.8227

The situation in the Great Lakes region

cooperation with and among those actors continues
to be essential, however. For that reason, we welcome
the current cooperation among the guarantors of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We firmly support
the efforts of the Republic of the Congo, as ICGLR
Chair, together with Angola, for fostering dialogue
with the Democratic Republic of Congo. In partnership
with regional actors, we must all support the holding of
credible, transparent, inclusive and peaceful elections
on 23 December 2018, with the ensuing democratic
transfer of power in accordance with the Constitution
and the New Year’s Eve agreement. That is necessary
to foster stability and peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
For there to be lasting peace and stability in the
region, it is essential that women’s voices are heard. We
strongly endorse the call from the Women’s Platform
for the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for greater support for women’s participation in peace
and political processes, especially in the context of
elections. More needs to be done to implement the
Nairobi declarations and to take necessary actions
involving disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
reintegration
and
resettlement.
The
Judicial
Cooperation Network could also help in the areas of
judicial cooperation and combating impunity.
The Great Lakes region is home to an estimated
130 million people spread across five countries. The
people of the region have suffered from decades of
instability and conflict. Successfully overcoming
challenges will require concerted action at the national,
regional and international levels that links peace
and security and economic and social development.
Continued leadership from the region, including the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, will be essential if the people of the
Great Lakes region are to finally have the peace and
sustainable development that they desire.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation to
Special Envoy Said Djinnit for his valuable briefing
and his efforts to establish dialogue and cooperation
with the countries of the Great Lakes region in order
to overcome the various challenges they face. I also
thank Ambassador Balé of the Republic of the Congo,
in his capacity as Chair of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, for his briefing.
16/21

10/04/2018

The Great Lakes region faces serious challenges
in terms of security, stability, declines in development
indicators, and the spread of armed groups that
pose the main obstacle to the establishment of State
authority. The latter threaten the lives of millions of
civilians and play a role in pillaging natural resources,
thereby depriving the people of the region of important
development resources. The humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate and raise serious concern,
given the large number of refugees, internally
displaced persons and those in need of humanitarian
assistance. Those challenges can be addressed only
through cooperation among the countries of the region,
collective responsibility and finding sustainable
solutions to strengthening regional and international
partnerships, in particular with the African Union,
the United Nations, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, the European Union and the
Southern African Development Community. Stability
in the Great Lakes region and neighbouring countries
will undoubtedly affect in a positive way the potential
for development, security and improving the living
standards of the people of Central Africa in specific
and across the continent of Africa in general. In that
regard, I would like to reflect on four main aspects.
First, concerning the political aspect, establishing
security in any one of the States in the region closely
depends upon its political stability, in particular
with regard to the peaceful transfer of power and the
sustained engagement of all segments of society in
political processes. There will be no progress without
empowering the national institutions of those States,
while building advanced political frameworks and
cooperation among the countries of the region, as
well as the engagement of their Governments as
part of international efforts made by regional and
international organizations. We remain concerned
about the deteriorating humanitarian situation in those
areas marred by political tensions. In order to improve
the situation and establish comprehensive peace, the
following priorities should be implemented: ending
conflicts in the countries experiencing political tensions;
neutralizing illegal armed groups; expeditiously
addressing the humanitarian crises resulting from
forced displacement; and protecting human rights and
preventing impunity in the Great Lakes region.
Secondly, the United Nations missions in countries
neighbouring the Great Lakes region are the largest in
terms of their human component and annual budgets.
18-10074

10/04/2018

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Such contributions attest to the firm belief in, and the
vital and critical role of, peacekeeping operations in
restoring State authority, achieving peace and stability
and alleviating humanitarian suffering, particularly in
the Central African region which has suffered for many
years. Radical solution must be found to address the
problems leading to humanitarian suffering, namely, in
South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Central African Republic and Burundi.
Thirdly, the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region was described as the framework of
hope when the agreement was signed, in 2013, and as a
MODEL to bring about stability. Peoples hoped that it
would be a cornerstone for stability and advancement
in the whole Great Lakes region. Regrettably, the
agreement is entering its fifth year with unprecedented
humanitarian suffering and an increase in the number
of refugees, with 11 million forcibly displaced persons.
In that regard, we reiterate the need for countries of the
region to commit to the agreement, and we commend
the tireless efforts of the Special Envoy. We look
forward to the implementation of the provisions of the
agreement and overcoming all obstacles.
Fourthly, the regrettable security situation in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has taken a turn for the worse, as evidenced by the
escalation of violence by armed groups fighting among
themselves and controlling natural resources. They
even attack peacekeepers in United Nations missions,
illustrated by the worst attack of its kind in the history
of the United Nations, which was launched by the Allied
Democratic Forces against Tanzanian peacekeepers on
7 December 2017, killing 15 peacekeepers and injuring
53 others. That attests to the need to unify the efforts of
Governments of the Central African region to combat
armed groups in the region, limit their influence and
eliminate them gradually.
In conclusion, we hope that the conference to be
held in Geneva in three days’ time will contribute to
alleviating the humanitarian crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region. It
will be the first-ever humanitarian donors’ conference
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Its goal is to
alleviate the humanitarian suffering of the Congolese
people, and, as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we are keen on
promoting the role of the Committee in anchoring

S/PV. 8227

security and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo through continuous communication with
Member States, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and all the relevant stakeholders.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First of all, let
me thank Special Envoy Said Djinnit for his briefing
and, above all, his important work. I would also like to
thank Ambassador Raymond Serge Balé of the Republic
of the Congo for his statement and his personal efforts.
In the light of the fifth anniversary of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework, I will make three
points: first, the Framework is as relevant today as it
was five years ago; secondly, the political instability
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi
constitute an additional serious threat to peace and
security in the region; and, thirdly, we should increase
coordination with the countries in the region on these
issues.
As to my first point, the continued relevance of
the Framework, five years since its signing, significant
progress has been achieved, as others, such as our
colleagues from Côte d’Ivoire and Equatorial Guinea,
have said today. The presence of some foreign armed
groups has been reduced. Judicial and development
cooperation in the region has increased. Regional
organizations like the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) have been strengthened.
However, significant challenges remain.
Armed groups continue to operate within and
across the borders. Members of foreign armed groups,
including the Mouvement du 23 mars and the Forces
démocratiques de liberation du Rwanda, have yet to
be repatriated. The Framework remains the viable
political framework to deal with these challenges. Its
relevance was once again demonstrated after the border
clashes between the Rwandan and Congolese armies
on 13 February. We welcome the investigation by the
expanded Joint Verification Mechanism of the ICGLR
in that regard. We furthermore welcome the renewed
commitment of the signatories to the Framework, as
communicated after the high-level meeting of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism last October.
As to my second point, the political instability
in the region, security challenges in the region have
evolved, and 2018 is a crucial year for peace and
security in the Great Lakes region. Elections are due
to be held in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

18-1007417/21

S/PV.8227

The situation in the Great Lakes region

The contested referendum on constitutional reform
is planned in Burundi. But every single political and
security crisis in the Great Lakes region has crossborder effects. The Great Lakes region is home to the
biggest displacement crisis in Africa. It is of course the
primary responsibility of Governments to prevent the
suffering of their peoples. We call on the Governments
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi to
respect fundamental human rights and open up political
space to enable the full and free participation of peaceful
political parties, civil society and the media, which hold
the key to opening the door to peaceful, inclusive and
credible political processes and to national and regional
stability. The meaningful participation of women is
vital to achieve that end. We welcome the words of the
Special Envoy on his ambitions to include women at all
levels in political processes, as he just mentioned.
As to my third point, the importance of regional
coordination, we often talk of African solutions to
African problems, and our Chinese colleague just did
so. We agree that only regionally owned and shared
efforts will provide sustainable solutions to regional
problems. The Framework continues to serve as an
important platform to enable such solutions. It is geared
towards addressing the root causes of conflict so as
to put an end to the recurring cycles of violence. We
welcome the role that the African Union, the ICGLR
and the Southern African Development Community
have played in strengthening the implementation of the
Framework. We strongly believe in their important role
in mitigating evolving security challenges in the region.
We strongly support the Special Envoy in focusing his
good offices on supporting those efforts.
In conclusion, there is a proverb that says, “If a man
is stung by a bee, he does not destroy all beehives”. This
is true for the Framework as well. Challenges remain,
but with commitment and effort its implementation will
be strengthened. Let us aim for reaching that goal as
we advance towards the next anniversary of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework. Enhancing
peace, security and cooperation is crucial for the people
of the Great Lakes region.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia welcomes the briefing of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region, Mr. Said Djinnit, and we thank
him for his work. We also welcome the briefing by the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of the Congo,
Ambassador Raymond Serge Balé, whose country is
18/21

10/04/2018

chairing the Regional Monitoring Mechanism of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
Despite the size of the conflict, Bolivia is optimistic
about the efforts of regional and international partners
to promote sustained and concerted support for
the implementation of the agreements reached. On
24 February 2013, the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region was adopted. The agreement is a
regional milestone that endorses national, regional
and international actions, whose main objective is
to eradicate violence through cooperation among its
signatory countries with a view to building lasting
peace and stability by addressing the root causes
of conflict, deepening collaboration and building
confidence among neighbouring countries. In that
regard, we call on the signatory countries of the Addis
Ababa agreement to continue to promote the search for
peace and to consolidate the full implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
Bolivia supports the political initiatives and
recommendations set out in the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/209) on the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework,
which, among other objectives, seeks to have a
positive impact on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration plans, as well as on the repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration of the various insurgent
groups, both Congolese and foreign, operating in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in other
countries in the region.
Resolution 2389 (2017), on the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, reaffirmed the intention
of all its members to support the regional initiative by
emphasizing the need for full respect for the principles
of non-interference, good neighbourliness and regional
cooperation. Furthermore, the resolution emphasizes
that the fight against the illegal exploitation of natural
resources is paramount, as that is ”one of the major
factors fuelling and exacerbating conflicts in the Great
Lakes region”.
As one of the world’s richest in natural resources,
this region is unfortunately currently experiencing a
quasi-imposed reality. The large multinationals and
international consortiums operating in the area have
18-10074

10/04/2018

The situation in the Great Lakes region

become a factor that contributes through harmful
neocolonial mechanisms to the weakening of the ability
of States to use and enjoy their wealth. The promotion
of the purchase of diamonds, copper, cobalt and coltan,
among other resources that are illegally exploited by
armed groups, underwrites their war-making activities,
providing them with the means that appear to perpetuate
conflicts. Indeed, the activity of armed groups in the
region, such as the Forces démocratiques de liberation
du Rwanda, the Allied Democratic Forces, the Lord’s
Resistance Army, anti-balaka or ex-Séléka factions, the
Mayi-Mayi groups and various other groups that are
joining the inter-ethnic and intercommunity clashes
in different areas of the region, constantly threaten the
consolidation of security, peace and stability.
Bolivia once again expresses its concern about the
environment of violence and the deteriorating security
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic and South Sudan. We also
express our concern at the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in the region, which is deepening the
complexity of the conflict, with millions of internally
displaced persons and refugees, WHO constitute the
most vulnerable populations. Addressing the climate of
insecurity in the region, the current political impasse
and the continuing uncertainty surrounding election
timetables are key issues that need to be addressed.
Finally, aware that the challenges to achieving
stable and permanent peace in some of the countries
of the world remain complex, Bolivia considers it
essential to strengthen the mechanisms that contribute
to increasing confidence through strategic alliances,
strengthened dialogue and close collaboration with
regional and subregional partners. The Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region is a great example
that should be replicated in support of each and every
initiative that favours, first, conflict prevention, and,
more important, peacebuilding.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Allow me to start with
expressing my thanks to Special Envoy Said Djinnit
and Ambassador Serge Balé of the Congo for their very
informative briefings.
Let me first focus on the current political and
security situation in the Great Lakes region, since it has
a huge impact on the large population movements and
directly affects the humanitarian situation of the people
on the ground. The preconditions for stabilization in the

S/PV. 8227

whole region are well known. They include conducting
reliable electoral processes that build the trust of
citizens in the authorities, re-establishing the rule of
law and respecting human rights and good governance,
since, despite all the efforts to date, the number of
serious violations in those areas has been increasing.
Tensions around the political processes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi, as
well as South Sudan and the Central African Republic,
still remain great obstacles to stability in the region.
The political situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has strategic importance. Implementing the
confidence-building measures and ensuring a peaceful
electoral process by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are critical to the stability of
the Central Africa region. Moreover, cross-border
issues related to the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are of importance in order to
address the root causes of the conflict in the region.
Countering illegal cross-border activities is an essential
condition for the limitation of the destructive activity
of armed groups and for the successful submission of
combatants to the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme.
We are concerned about the recent significant
increase in the number of refugees and internally
displaced persons, as there is a clear link between
forced displacement and instability in the region. We
also believe that greater attention must be paid to the
human rights situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Burundi, South Sudan and the Central
African Republic. An effective international response
is needed to put an end to violence and human rights
violations and abuses, especially in the case of attacks
that target women and children.
We appreciate the efforts made to implement of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. However,
more progress is still required in that regard. The full
implementation of the Framework is in the interests
of all its signatory States. They should increase their
commitment and ensure that the achievements in that
regard will not be lost. We should bear in mind that the
conflicts in different parts of the region have various
causes. More effort should be put into preventive
diplomacy and the promotion of good practices.
The international community must demonstrate its
continuing interest in the situation on the ground.

18-1007419/21

S/PV.8227

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Ms. French (United States of America): I would
like to thank Ambassador Balé and Special Envoy
Djinnit for their briefings and their work to advance
the commitments under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region.
A little more than a month ago, the United States
was pleased to join with fellow donors, the signatories
and the guarantors of the Framework agreement
in Addis Ababa for the fifth anniversary of that
agreement. That forum proved a useful opportunity to
take stock of the accomplishments that have occurred
under the Framework agreement, to review those
elements of the agreement that remained unfulfilled
and to discuss ways in which the Framework agreement
mechanism could be more effective and work within
the existing regional organizations. The signatories
to the Framework agreement understood that there
were inherent linkages between peace, development
and security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the prospects for long-term stability across the
broader region.
That theme is also reflected in the recent report
of the Secretary-General on the Great Lakes region
(see S/2018/209). He stressed that the uncertainty
surrounding the political situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is compounded by the persistent
activities of armed groups in the territory. However,
we would take that point a step further. The political
impasse resulting from the delayed elections has
heightened tensions and undermined the already weak
to non-existent State authority and risks increased
violence and unrest, as it provides space for armed
groups and other malign actors to continue to operate.
We would urge the Special Envoy to focus on ensuring
that the elections go ahead and that the 31 December
agreement is fully implemented.
We agree that we must continue to urge action
against the armed groups operating in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We cannot
pretend that there is any solution to those problems
without the full implementation of the 31 December
agreement, the electoral provisions in the Constitution
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
electoral calendar.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo must hold
inclusive and credible elections in December that lead
to a peaceful democratic transfer of power. No more
20/21

10/04/2018

delays will be tolerated. We were particularly heartened
in Addis Ababa to see consensus on the importance of
the election in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to regional stability. The continued strong leadership of
the African Union, the Southern African Development
Community and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region will be critical ahead of the
elections in order to ensure that the preparations
continue to move forward and that potential spoilers
are held accountable.
While we remain focused on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo during this critical period, we
must not lose sight of other challenges to peace and
security in the Great Lakes region. In that regard, we are
particularly concerned about the planned constitutional
referendum in Burundi on 17 May. We have already
seen numerous reports of violence and the intimidation
and harassment of those perceived to be opponents of
the referendum. We are concerned that the referendum
will exacerbate the political tensions in Burundi and
that the development of the proposed constitutional
revisions has not been conducted in a transparent
and inclusive manner. Failure to respect the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement risks further
destabilizing Burundi with unpredictable repercussions
for both the country and the region.
As is the case in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the region has an important role to play in
promoting stability in Burundi. We urge the regional
stakeholders to intensify their efforts to foster dialogue
and to bring an end to the long-standing political
impasse in Burundi. The role of Special Envoy Djinnit
will be critical in working to strengthen and to support
the regional mechanisms advancing peace and security
in the Great Lakes region as the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Burundi go through this very important
period. We urge him to continue to engage with key
stakeholders in the region and to inform us of any
additional steps necessary to advance his mission.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
We would like to thank Mr. Said Djinnit, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region of Africa, for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Region
(S/2018/209). We are also grateful for the information
18-10074

10/04/2018

The situation in the Great Lakes region

shared by Ambassador Raymond Serge Balé on the
Regional Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework.
Peru acknowledges the efforts and the commitment
of the signatory countries to implement the Framework
and the important role of the guarantor countries. We
express our support for the efforts under way.
We highlight the importance of the regional
approach in responding to the complex and unstable
situation in the Great Lakes region. We believe that
the efforts made by the various parties in the light of
the common challenges must be consistent in order
to be complementary and to thereby bring about
more effective cooperation to the benefit of all. We
therefore support the processes of political dialogue
and mutual understanding in the region. We believe
that is necessary in order to deal with the challenges
in the areas of security, humanitarian assistance,
the protection of human rights and the promotion of
sustainable development, in short, in order to achieve
sustainable peace in the region.
More specifically, we would like to reiterate the need
to comply with the electoral calendar in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and to move forward in the

S/PV. 8227

inter-Burundian dialogue under the auspices of the East
African Community. We deem it appropriate that such
processes be carried out in an inclusive manner with a
view to strengthening the institutional framework and
accountability, and we call for broad participation of
the population, and especially that of women and young
people committed to sustaining peace and developing
their respective countries.
We must also express our concern about the
humanitarian situation in the Great Lakes. Violence
and insecurity generated by armed groups in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, the
Central African Republic and Burundi have produced
more than 11 million displaced persons in vulnerable
situations WHO need to be protected. We stress the
importance of prioritizing the protection of women,
girls and boys.
Peru supports the immediate priorities identified in
the report, which involve initiatives aimed at promoting
peace, including firm action against armed groups, as
well as urgent coordination to address the humanitarian
crisis and a determined fight against impunity.
The meeting rose at 12.40pm.

18-1007421/21
