United Nations

A/RES/67/160

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 March 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 69 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2012
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/67/457/Add.1)]

67/160. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and
the Optional Protocol thereto
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions, the most recent of which was
resolution 66/229 of 24 December 2011, as well as relevant resolutions of the
Human Rights Council, the Commission for Social Development and the
Commission on Human Rights,
Welcoming the fact that, since the opening for signature of the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 1 and the Optional Protocol thereto 2 on
30 March 2007, 154 States and 1 regional integration organization have signed and
126 States have ratified or acceded to and 1 regional integration organization has
formally confirmed the Convention and 91 States have signed and 76 States have
ratified or acceded to the Optional Protocol,
Noting that, while the Convention has enjoyed a very high level of ratification
in a short time, the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities currently
meets for only one one-week session and one two-week session per year, and noting
that, in particular cases, members of the Committee may require reasonable
accommodation, as defined in the Convention,
Noting also that document and translation costs for the reports of States parties
constitute the largest part of the budget for the Committee,
Recalling its resolutions 66/254 of 23 February 2012 and 66/295 of
17 September 2012 on the intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on
strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights treaty
body system, and recognizing in this regard that a long-term solution to the problem
of the increasing number of reports of States parties to the Convention can be found
in this context,

_______________
1
2

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
Ibid., vol. 2518, No. 44910.

12-48820

*1248820*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/160

Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol thereto

1.
Calls upon those States that have not yet done so to consider signing and
ratifying the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities1 and the
Optional Protocol thereto2 as a matter of priority;
2.
Welcomes the holding of the fifth session of the Conference of States
Parties to the Convention from 12 to 14 September 2012;
3.
Also welcomes the work of the Committee on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, and encourages sustained efforts by the Committee to improve the
efficiency of its working methods;
Encourages States parties to adhere to the page limit established by the
4.
Committee for reports of States parties, and notes that this would reduce the
operating costs of the Committee;
Authorizes for the Committee, without prejudice to the intergovernmental
5.
process of the General Assembly on strengthening and enhancing the effective
functioning of the human rights treaty body system, two annual pre-sessional
working group meetings of one week each, starting in 2014, with the participation
of up to six members of the Committee, to be held after the two annual sessions of
the Committee, in order to ensure the most efficient and effective use of its annual
session time by allowing time for the consideration of additional reports;
Also authorizes for the Committee, without prejudice to the
6.
intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on strengthening and enhancing
the effective functioning of the human rights treaty body system, the addition of two
weeks of meeting time per year to the existing regular sessions, starting in 2014;
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General 3 and the activities
7.
undertaken in support of the Convention;
8.
Encourages the Inter-Agency Support Group on the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities to continue its work to mainstream the
Convention throughout the United Nations system through its Strategy and Plan of
Action, approved in 2010, and calls upon the Department of Economic and Social
Affairs of the Secretariat and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to continue strengthening their cooperation in this regard;
Invites the Secretary-General to intensify efforts to assist States to
9.
become parties to the Convention and the Optional Protocol thereto, including by
providing assistance with a view to achieving universal adherence;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the progressive
implementation of standards and guidelines for the accessibility of facilities and
services of the United Nations system, taking into account relevant provisions of the
Convention, in particular when undertaking renovations, including interim
arrangements;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take further actions to promote the
rights of persons with disabilities in the United Nations system in accordance with
the Convention, including the retention and recruitment of persons with disabilities;
12. Requests United Nations agencies and organizations, and invites
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to continue to strengthen
efforts undertaken to disseminate accessible information on the Convention and the
_______________
3

2/3

A/67/281.

Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol thereto

A/RES/67/160

Optional Protocol thereto, including to children and young people to promote their
understanding, and to assist States parties in implementing their obligations under
those instruments;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-ninth session a report on the status of the Convention and the Optional
Protocol thereto and on the implementation of the present resolution.
60th plenary meeting
20 December 2012

3/3
