UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FOURTH

YEAR
lJ-x”/&!i

2110th

13 JANUARY

MEETING:

NEW

CL

1979

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

-if:3

agenda (S/Agenda/21

10)

Page

. , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Telegram dated 3 January 1979 from the Deputy Prime Minister in charge of
Foreign Affairs of Democratic
Kampuchea
to the President of the Security
Council (S/13003)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV.2110

a‘hpii

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the Oflcial Recor& of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2110th MEETING
Held in New York on Saturday, 13 January 1979, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Donald 0. MILLS

participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure.

(Jamaica).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Anderspn
(Australia), Mr. Abe (Japan), Mr. Dashtseren (Mongolia),
Mr. Francis (New Zealand), Mr. Yang0 (Philippines) and
Mr. Jaroszek (Poland) took the places reservedfor them at
the side of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ZllO)
1. Adoption

3. Miss KONIE (Zambia): Mr. President, I have the
greatest pleasure in congratulating you on behalf of the
Zambian delegation on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. Ordinarily, one would wish to commiserate
with a representative of a Member State assuming such a
burden immediately upon the commencement of his
country’s term of membership of this august body.
However, it is the good fortune of the Council that it
should be so in your case, particularly in the present
delicate situation, in view of your proven capabilities and
diplomatic skill, which have won you the admiration and
respect of many in the United Nations.

of the agenda

2. Telegram dated 3 January 1979 from the Deputy
Prime Minister in charge of Foreign Affairs of
Democratic Kampuchea to the President of the
Security Council (S/13003)
The meeting’ was called to order at 4 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Telegram dated 3 January 1979 from the Deputy Prime
Minister in charge of Foreign Affairs of Democratic
Kampuchea to the President of the Security Council
(S/l3003)

4. Jamaica is a country that is dear to us in Zambia. We
attach the utmost importance to our excellent relations with
your great country and we have always greatly admired
Jamaica’s courageous, active and most constructive role in
international relations. Jamaica today stands as one of the
pillars of the forces championing the cause of justice,
independence, equality, peace and development. It goes
without saying that it is a matter of great pleasure and
satisfaction to us in the Zambian delegation that we shall have
the opportunity to work closely with the Jamaican delegation in the next two years as members of the Security Council.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the 2108th and 2109th meetings, I invite the
delegation of Democratic Kampuchea to be seated at the
Council table.‘1 invite the representatives of Cuba, the
German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Indonesia,
Malaysia, Singapore, the Sudan, Thailand and Viet Nam
to take the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

5. It is also gratifying to my delegation that the other new
members of the Council are Bangladesh, Norway and
Portugal. Similarly, those are countries with which Zambia
has excellent relations. They are countries that have also
distinguished themselves in their commitment to the cause of
a new world order truly compatible with the principles and
purposes of the United Nations as enshrined in the Charter.
My delegation also looks forward to a friendly, w-operative
and productive working relationship with those wuntries,
and indeed with all the older members of the Council.
Needless to say, the latter’s experience of the workings of the
Council will be invaluable to us. At this juncture, I wish to
acknowledge with thanks the warm words of welcome to us
extended by all members of the Council.

At the invitation of the President, the delegation of
Democratic Kahpuchea took a place at the Council table;
Mr. Roa Kouri ,(Cuba), Mr. Zachmann (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Hal& (Hungary), Mr. Anwar Sani
(Indonesia), Tan Sri Zaiton Ibrahim (Malaysia), Mr. Koh
(Singapore). Mr. Sahloul(Sudan), Mr. Guna-Kasem (Thailand) and Mr. Ha Van Lau (Viet Nam) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Japan, Mongolia, New
Zealand, the Philippines and Poland in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion. In
accordance with the usuaf practice, .I propose, witn the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to

6. For the second time in its short history of 14 years as an
independent Republic, Zambia has been honoured by being
elected to serve on the Security Council. We did so in 19691

1970. As then, Zambia in&nds to contribute its utmost to the
furtherance of the ideals of the United Nations. Our
commitment to the cause of justice, independence, equality,
peace and development in the world is a matter of public
record. We, together with others, particularly in the nonaligned movement, have spared no effort in the struggle to
transform our imperfect world into the one envisaged in the
Charter.

members, we have been able to appreciate your great
qualities as a skilled and experienced diplomat. We are
therefore convinced that you will most honourably
discharge the responsibilities of your present offlice.
13. I wish also to welcome the new members of the
Council: Bangladesh, Norway, Portugal, Zambia and, of
course, your country, Jamaica. We are very happy to be
able to work with them and draw closer the links of
friendship for even more effective co-operation in the
future.

7. Zambia will continue to strive relex$essly to build a new
pattern of international relationships, in which the era of
oppression, racism, racial discrimination, exploitation and
power politics will have gone by and will be good only for
historians. During its two-year term on the Security Council,
Zambia pledges to foster the cause of peace, justice and
equality the world over. We hope in this regard to seechange
come about in southern Africa and the emergence, on a
world-wide basis, of a new pattern of relations truly founded
on the ideals of the United Nations.

14. Finally, my delegation wishes to pay a tribute to the
eminent representatives whose term of office ended in
December 1978. In this context, I wish to expressthe wholehearted gratitude of my delegation to Ambassador
Ramphul, the Permanent Representative of Mauritius,
who, with his well-known effectiveness, admirably
defended the interests of Africa here during the past two
years.

8. The issue before the Council is both tragic and complex.
My country is gravely concerned at the turmoil in South-East
Asia and the continued loss of life and property. For decades
the region of South-East Asia has been ravaged by war and its
people have known nothing but misery. One would have
hoped and expected that, after the victories of the peoples of
Indo-China three years ago, they would have been allowed to
enjoy peace and tranquillity and to devote their time and
energies to the reconstruction of the economies of their
countries. One would have wished that any rnisunderstandings between the countries and peoples of the region would be
resolved by peaceful means in the spirit of brotherhood and
goodneighbourliness.

15. From everything we have heard in this chamber,
essentially we see that once again the region of Indo-China
is at war. Once again we real& what all this mians in terms
of atrocities and loss of human life and property. From the
facts described here by a directly ‘concerned party it
appears--quite apart from any reasons whidh some may
find to justify them-that particularly grave,actions have
been taken, since there has been an attack on the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of a State Member. In
other words, those acts are a clear threat to peace and
security not only in that part of Asia but also in the world at
large. If only for those reasons, the Council should consider
this matter with all the required seriousness.
,
16. In consistency with the principles of non-alignment
and of the Charter of the United Nations, my delegation
cannot but protest against all such actions or manoeuvres
by any country which are a threat to the independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and politic@ n5gimes of
other countries. Indeed, we believe that countries should
refrain from resorting to force or the threat of force in their
bilateral relations, from interfering in the internal affairs of
other countries and engaging in subversive activities against
them by any means whatsoever.
I

9. The present conflict in South-East Asia of which the
Council is seized concerns two countries which are important
and active members of the non-aligned movement. This, to
my delegation, is all the more regrettabIe in view of the very
essenceof non-alignment and the persistent efforts of the nonaligned countries to promote conditions of peace and justice
in the world. The conflict that has arisen could, in the view of
my delegation, seriously undermine and destabilii the
cohesion of our movement.
10. The conflict involving Kampuchea and Viet Nam has
serious implications
both for the region and for
international peace and security. It is the strongly held view
of my Government that the conflict should be contained
and that an honourable, peaceful and durable solution
should be found without delay. We wish, in this regard, to
appeal to all the major Powers to exercise restraint in order
to prevent the conflict from escalating.

17. The delegation of Gabon sincerely deplores what has
happened and is continuing to happen in Cambodia. We
deem it to be the Council’s duty clearly to state that it
disapproves of any act of the kind whether perpetrated
against Cambodia or any other country.
,
18. The people of Cambodia has suffered too much and
for too long for the Council to remain insensitive to its
appeals. With that concern in mind, my delegation wishesat
once to assure representatives that we shall support any
initiative or decision of the Council that could lead to
ensuring respect for the boundaries and the territorial
integrity of Cambodia and could so order events that the
peoples of those countries might at least be able to live in
peace and settle their problems themselves, without any
interference from third countries.

11. Within the context of the search for a solution, I wish
to emphasize that my Government attaches a lot of
importance to the principles of non-interfer?nce in the
internal affairs of States and respect for their independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. It is our hope that these
cardinal principles of international relations will not be
compromised in the present situation.
12. Mr. NGUEMA-MBA
(Gabon) (interpretation fi-om
French): My delegation sincerely congratulates you, Sir, on

19. Mr. FUTSCHER PEREIRA (Portugal): As this is the
fast time that I have had the privilege of speaking in the
Council, I wish to address to you, Sir, the sincere greetings
of the Portuguese delegation on your assumption of the
presidency for the present month. Knowing your great

your accession to the important functions of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January and wishes
to assure you of our complete co-operation. Having kndwn
you at the head of another important United Nations organ
and also of a group of which our two countries are
2

qualities and experience, my delegation is certain that you
will conduct the Council’s work in the most able marmer,
,thus ensux$ngall possible successful results for our common
endeavours.

and hostility that for so iang has marked the relationship
between Kampuchea and Viet Nam. Neither do we have
any doubts about the appalling record of violation of the
most basic and elementary human rights in Kampuchea
which has filled with indignation all those who respect
human life and the rights of the individual.

20. I should also like to extend these greetings to all the
other members-tothose
who have already been serving in
this Council and those whose countries, like mine, have
recently been elected.

28. We do not know exactly what has been going on in
Kampuchea these last two weeks, but that again is the fault
of the Pol Pot Government. Had Kampuchea been an open
society, all the claims now made of invasion would have
been instantly verified. The Pol Pot Government certainly
had good reasons not to allow the outside world to know
what was happening in its own country, and the price for
this is always heavy.

21. It is a very great honour for my country to have
acceded to the Security Council. And I thank you,
Mr. President, and those representatives who have spoken
before me and welcomed our presence here for the kind
words that were addressed to us. I shall add only that we are
well aware of the heavy responsibilities that have been
bestowed upon us. We shall spare no effort to honour them
and co-operate with all representatives in the common
search for solutions to the problems confronting us.

29. In any case, there are no nor can there be any sociopolitical considerations that would justify the invasion of
the territory of a sovereign State by the forces of another
State; and not even provocative actions or the fear of an
imminent attack could excuse such an act of aggression.
Differences, however serious, should be resolved through
peaceful means. It is not enough to accept, or even to
proclaim, this principle; it has to be respected and it has to
be reflected in the actions of countries. Not even the
imperatives of ideological solidarity could justify an
intervention in support of a revolution against a
Government which-no matter how unpalatable-was the
recognized Government of a sovereign State.

22. Once again the attention of the international
community is turned towards Indo-China, an area of Asia
that for centuries has been tom apart by conflicts which
have, if anything, grown worse in our lifetime. Let us bear in
mind that, at least for the young generations of that region
of the world;life has so far meant only insecurity, death,
hunger, the breaking up of families, the wanton destruction
of properties and of a rich cultural heritage, and an endless
accumulation of terror and squalor that is the very essence
of war.
_ ..-.
23. We have all admired the courage, the dignity and the
endurance of the various peoples of Indo-China. But they
have surely by now paid more than whatever price may be
required to gain the right to live finally in peace.

30. It seems even pointless to invoke now the principles
laid down in the Charter, since they cannot but be present in
the minds of us all. But we believe it worthwhile to state that
small countries-and we must bear in mind that the United
Nations is composed mainly of small countries-cannot
feel secure if those principles, although universally
proclaimed, are violated with impunity.

24. The whole world had certainly hoped that after their
struggle for liberation those countries would at last have
reached a period of the healing of wounds and national
reconstruction, in the full enjoyment of their sovereignty so
arduously won. It is therefore with deep dismay that we see
political forces,‘which seemed united for so many years in
defence of their right to self-determination and national
independence and which both claimed to be inspired by the
same ideological principles for the organization of a just
society, now turned against each other, rivals and even
enemies, showing a spirit of intolerance, well revealed even
in this chamber by the language we have heard.

31. The principles upon which the United Nations is
based must therefore be respected and peace, security and
stability must be restored in the region. The principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of another country
must be upheld and the situation redressed by the
suspension of hostilities and the withdrawal of all foreign
forces from Kampuchea.
32. On behalf of my Government, I express the fervent
hope that the Security Council, although limited in its
capacity to remedy the prevailing situation, will be firm, as
is its duty, in proclaiming and defending those principles
without which no international order is possible.

25. Even if scarce and not always completely reliable, the
information at our disposal on the situation in Kampuchea
soon made it quite clear that that situation constituted a
threat to the peace and security of South-East Asia, and that
is why the Portuguese delegation has always clearly
expressed the view, without prejudging responsibilities, that
it was the duty ‘of the Council to examine and discuss it.

33. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Malaysia. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
34. Tan Sri ZAITON Ibrahim (Malaysia): Mr. President,
allow me at the outset to convey my delegation’s
appreciation to you and to the other members of the
Council for giving me this opportunity to express the views
of my Government on the matter before the Council.

26. What has been stated in the Council in the last two
days has not given us a totally clear picture of the situation
in Kampuchea, and some aspects may therefore be subject
to doubts. But, in broad outline, it seems to us undeniable
that we are confronted with a clear violation of the principle
of non-intervention in the internal affairs of a sovereign
State.

35. I should like, before proceeding any further, to extend
to you our warmest congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. We are indeed
gratified to see you presiding over the deliberations on such
an important matter and feel confident that under your

27. My delegation does not find it diflicult to accept the
proposition that the Pol Pot Government might have had
some responsibility in the creation of the climate of mistrust
3

distinguished leadership and thanks to your diplomatic
skills they will be concluded expeditiously and fruitfully.

understanding in order to build a prosperous, stable and
peaceful South-East Asia. We can only hope that such
intervention will not’ sharply escalate into a wider conflict
with the spectre of a bloody and protracted war which will
certainly assume dangerous proportions if compounded by
big-Power involvement.

36. My delegation welcomes the decision of the Council to
consider the situation arising from the escalation of the
armed conflict between Viet Nam and Kampuchea. We
consider it important for the Council to meet in order to
focus attention on the serious situation that has arisen in the
region. No doubt, the meeting will throw more light on the
developments there and, in doing so, will assist members of
the Council to take a decision on the measures necessary to
deal with the situation appropriately.

41. At their special meeting at Bangkok on 12 and 13
January 1979, the Foreign Ministers of the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), namely those of
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and
Thailand, deplored the armed intervention against the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Kampuchea and called for appropriate measures to restore
peace, security and stability to the region. My Government
fully supports the joint statement of the ASEAN Foreign
Ministers, which is contained in document S/13025. We
affum that the people of Kampuchea must be allowed to
determine their future by themselves, free from any
interference or influence from outside Powers. We also call
for the immediate and total withdrawal of the foreign forces
from Kampuchea.

37. My delegation has requested that it should be allowed
to participate in the debate on the problem, not only
because we consider the present escalation of the conflict to
be a threat to the peace, security and stability of South-East
Asia, but also because we are deeply distressed that the
conflict involves two neighbouring countries with which
Malaysia enjoys friendly relations. It has always been the
position of my Government that the countries in SouthEast Asia should strive to live in peace and harmony, to co
operate for the common benefit of all concerned, to seek
solutions to disputes by peaceful means and refrain from
interfering in each other’s internal affairs. Relations should
be based on respect for each other’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity and on co-operation
with each other in the strengthening and maintenance of
peace, security and stability in the region. We are also
committed to the goals of regional co-operation and the
establishment of a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality in
South-East Asia which, we hope, will secure for the region
the peace and stability that we all desire, so as to enable us to
pursue our destiny without outside interference. Indeed,
what has taken place in Indochina has convinced us more
than ever of the urgency of translating the proposal into
practical reality.

42. In the final analvsis. it is essential that the countries
concerned should fully respect the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the Bandung Declaration and
live up to their pledges to maintain friendly and peaceful
relations in a spirit of respect for each other’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and for fhe principle of
non-interference in and non-subversion of-the internal
affairs of States.
43. We note in this connexion the pledge of the
representative of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the
effect that his Government will seek to strengthen good
relations and cooperation with countries in South-East
Asia on the basis of these principles. Indeed, a commitment
to them would not only help to solve the present problem
but would also strengthen the foundation of friendly
relations among the States of South-East Asia, promote
mutual understanding, confidence and trust, and pave the
way for us to increase our co-operation in our common
efforts to secure a peaceful and stable South-East Asia for
the well-being of our people.

38. It is in line with this policy that my Government has
observed strict neutrality in the unfortunate border dispute
that has recently arisen between the two neighbouring
countries in the region, Kampuchea and Viet Nam, with
which we enjoy the closest of relations. We have also
consistently urged both parties to settle their dispute by
peaceful means through negotiations carried on in a spirit of
equality, mutual understanding and respect, and to refrain
from the use of force. We have also urged outside Powers
that in no circumstances should they seek to justify
interference in the internal affairs of Kampuchea.

44. In conclusion, we hope that the Security Council will
be able to adopt a resolution which will affirm respect for
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Kampuchea, affirm the right of the people of Kampuchea
to decide their future for themselves without outside
interference, call for the withdrawal of all foreign forces
from Kampuchea and create the necessary conditions
conducive to the restoration of peace and stability in the
region.

39. However, the recent developments have resulted in an
escalation which has brought about an armed intervention
against the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Kampuchea. The situation has now assumed a
political dimension which is fraught with dangers. Above
all, the armed intervention constitutes a serious violation of
the fundamental principles which govern peaceful relations
between nations. Clearly, armed intervention by any
country, in one form or another, irrespective of its military
or political justification, cannot be condoned: it is to be
deplored by all, and we would be deceiving ourselves if we
did not admit that that was true.

45. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Singapore, whom I invite to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
46. Mr. KOH (Singapore): Sir, it is fortunate for the
Security Council to have a man of your high intelligence
and great diplomatic skill as its President for this month.

40. The armed intervention in Kampuchea is an
unfortunate development&nfortunate
principally because
it is taking place at a time when the countries in South-East
Asia are exerting every effort to promote co-operation and

,+47. My delegation has asked to be allowed to speak before
-the Council on the complaint of the Government of
Democratic Kampuchea against Viet Nam for two reasons:
first, because the escalation of the armed conflict between
4

Democratic Kampuchea and the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam poses a particular threat to the peace, stability and
security of the region of South-East Asia, of. which
Singapore is a part; secondly, because all countries should
be concerned when a stronger and more powerful country
resorts to force in its international relations and intervenes
in the internal affairs of a smaller and weaker country, in
clear violation of the Charter of the United Nations. This
concern is particularly felt by small and militarily weak
countries such as my own.

immediately and unconditionally withdrawing its forces
from Democratic Kampuchea and by respecting the
sovereign right of the people of that country to determine
their future by themselves, free from foreign interference.
53. The Security Council will no doubt wish to consider
what appropriate action it should take in this matter. In the
view of my delegation, any resolution of the Council should
contain the following four elements. First, it should deplore
the armed intervention by Viet Nam in the internal affairs of
Democratic Kampuchea which thus violates its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. Secondly, it
should reaflirrn the sovereign right of the people of
Democratic Kampuchea to determine their future by
themselves, free from the interference or influence of
outside Powers, Thirdly, it should call for the immediate
and total withdrawal of Vietnamese forces from the
territory of Democratic Kampuchea. Fourthly, it should
request the Secretary-General-or send a United Nations
mission-to verify the withdrawal of foreign forces from
Democratic Kampuchea.

48. My Government strictly upholds the principle of noninterference in the internal affairs of other States. If the
conflict in Democratic Kampuchea were a conflict of an
exclusively internal character, we would not have asked to
speak to the Council. The fact of the matter is that the
con&t is not of an exclusively internal character, The
evidence is irrefutable that the Government of the Socialist
Republic of Vie? Nam has sent its armed forces across an
international border into Democratic Kampuchea and
intervened in the affairs of that country.

54. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of New Zealand. I invite him to take’s place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

49. It has been said by others that the Government of
Democratic Kampuchea, led by Pol Pot, has treated its
people in a barbarous fashion. Whether that accusation is
true or false is not the issue before the Council. We hold the
view that the ,G&ernment of Democratic Kampuchea is
accountable to the people of Democratic Kampuchea. No
other country has a right to topple the Government of
Democratic Kampuchea, however badly that Government
may have treated its people. To hold to the contrary
principle is to concede the right of a foreign Government to
intervene and overthrow the Government of another
country.
:

55. Mr. FRANCIS (New Zealand): Mr. President, I
would congratulate you on -Jamaica’s accession to the
presidency of the Council. You have shown great skill in
conducting the Council’s work and we all owe you a debt of
great gratitude. I would also thank the members of the
Council for allowing my delegation to take part in the
debate.
56. New Zealand is greatly concerned about recent
developments in Indo-China. This is a region which has for
decades been plagued by instability and warfare. More
recently, however, we had begun to hope that there were, at
last, real prospects for peace and stability. We sawevidence
of a slow but sure improvement in the relationship between
the countries of Indo-China and their neighbours to the
west and to the south. New Zealand has tried to do what it
can to encourage that process. That has been a basic
principle in guiding our own relationship with the countries
of the area. We attached and continue to attach the utmost
importance to building the foundations for peaceful
coexistence and co-operation between the nations of the
region.

50. It is the‘sovereign right of the people of Democratic
Kampuchea to choose and to change its government. No
other country, has the right to do so. It is the sovereign right
of the,people of Democratic Kampuchea to choose its own
political, soctal and economic system. No other country has
the right to do,so. In short, it is for the Kampuchean people
and the Kampuchean people alone to determine their own
destiny, and Viet Nam must respect their right to do so.
51. Less than three months ago the Prime Minister ofthe
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, Mr.Pham Van Dong,
visited my country as well as Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines and Thailand. In his discussions with the leaders
of the countries members of ASEAN, the Prime Minister of
Viet Nam said that Viet Nam would respect the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries
and that it would not subvert the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of other countries in South-East
Asia. The visits of the Vietnamese Prime Minister and the
statements he made in the five ASEAN capitals were
positive contributions to the promotion of friendly cooperation between Viet Nam and the other countries of
South-East Asia.

57. It has therefore been with growing dismay that we
have watched the deterioration of relations between
Democratic Kampuchea and the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam. Of course there is a long history behind this hostility
between two neighbouring States. But that only adds to the
importance of making real efforts to negate that sorry
heritage in the wider interests of the harmonious
development of each country. Tragically, not enough effort
has been made on either side. A resurgence of old
animosities has been a grave setback to the causeof peace in
the region and, by extension, in the world at large. This is a
matter of grave concern to us all, however far one’s country
may be from the region-and mine is closer than many. The
conflict between Kampuchea and Viet Nam has brought
with it the wider danger of the involvement of the great
Powers in the affairs of South-East Asia and the extension
of unwanted rivalries into an area that can well do without
them. We have time and again expressed our concern over

52. The leaders of Singapore said’at the-time of the Prime
Minister’s visit that we expected Viet Nam’s deeds to match
its words. We regret to say that, after Viet Nam’s armed
intervention in the internal affairs of Democratic
Kampuchea, my country as well as other countries in
South-East Asia will have serious doubts about the
credibility of Viet Nam’s words and about its intentions.
Viet Nam can, to some extent, re-estabiish its credibility by
5

this wider aspect of the conflict in our discussions with other
Governments. It is important, we believe, to reiterate this
concern in this forum.

terms of office have just expired. In this last connexion, I
should like to record my delegation’s thanks to
Ambassador von Wechmar of the Federal Republic of
Germany for his efficient conduct of the business of the
Council during December.

58. The situation the Council is considering today is
complex and confused. It is one in which many elements are
far from clear. One thing, however, that is clear is that
Vietnamese forces have entered Kampuchea and are
fighting the forces of Democratic Kampuchea. They have
violated the territorial integrity of another State. My
delegation can only deplore such an action as contrary to
the central principle of the Charter of the United Nations.
We are fully aware that Democratic Kampuchea has not
always followed the principles of the Charter either in its
internal affairs or in its dealings with other States. We do
not regard it as an entirely innocent victim. But the
misdeeds of one State do not, in our view, justify the
invasion of its territory by another. My delegation must
therefore add its voice to those calling on the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to withdraw its forces from
Kampuchea without delay and fully to respect the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of that
country.

63. The situation and the sequence of events with which
the Council is concerned today are of great seriousness not
only for Democratic Kampuchea but for the whole SouthEast Asian region. There is uncertainty about details, but
the important features of the problem before the Council
are clear. The issue which has been put before the Council is
nothing less than the sovereignty and the territorial integrity
of Kampuchea itself.
64. Since the Council took up the complaint by the
Government of Democratic Kampuchea much has been
said about violations of human rights. Let me therefore say
one or two words on the subject at the outset. We hold no
brief for the deplorable behaviour of ‘the Pol Pot
Government towards its own population. My Government
has repeatedly voiced its grave concern at the inhumanities
which have taken place in Kampuchea. We have also tried,
with other like-minded countries, to persuade the international community to do something about it. I am therefore not surprised at the remarks on this question made by
the representatives of the Soviet Union and Cuba and
others in the Council during the last two days. But I do
regret that their concern has found only such recent
expression. When the Commission on Human Rights last
year adopted a decision on thii matter’-following
the
submission of a draft resolution by the United Kingdomthe representatives of the Soviet Union and Cuba, among
others, declined to support it. The former Soviet Deputy
Foreign Minister, Mr. Zorin, then said that the matter was
being raised “purely for political ends”. But there it is. I
welcome their recent conversion. It is said that there is joy in
heaven over one sinner that repenteth., One sinner’s
repentance? This is more like a mass baptism of the socialist
bloc. It is immediate, unanimous, enthusiastic even-and, if
I may say so, somewhat suspect as to its permanence. They
will understand, therefore, if I still feel doubtful as to
whether their conversion to the cause of human rights is real
rather than tactical.

59. It is not with any desire to add to the recriminations
which have already marred the earlier parts of this debate
that we have asked to be allowed to speak before the
Council. Events have created instability and danger in the
South-East Asian region. That danger and instability have
to be eliminated for the benefit of all concerned. It is the task
of the Council, and of all of us individually, to defuse the
tensions and to begin working towards a peaceful
settlement. As the New Zealand Minister for Foreign
Affairs said on 9 January in a public statement:
“Such a settlement must be based on the fact that there
are three separate countries in Indo-China, and that they
have to live closely together. There can be no stability
unless the independence of Cambodia is assured, and
unless Cambodia is prepared to co-operate with its
neighbours.”
60. It is to this end that we must work. My Government
will contribute in whatever way it can. We seek good
relations with all countries in the region without exception,
and with the great Powers on the fringes of the region. Thus
we address the Council today not in a spirit of recrimination
but in the hope that from these deliberations new
constructive ways may be found of moving towards a
settlement of the grave problem with which we are faced.

65. Whatever is said about human rights in Kampuchea,
it cannot excuse Viet Nam, whose own human rights record
is deplorable, for violating the territorial’ integrity of
Democratic Kampuchea, an independent State Member of
the United Nations. I have been moved by the accounts
which the Council has heard from Prince Sihanouk, whose
sincerity and love for his country are known to all. The
people of Kampuchea are justifiably proud of their
historical heritage, and Prince Sihanouk has eloquently
pleaded for the right of his small country,to preserve its
territorial integrity. The fact that one who has himself
suffered at the hands of the Government of his country is
nevertheless prepared now to speak out in defence of its
nationhood enhances rather than diminishes the force of his
arguments and the credibility of his position.

61. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): Mr. President,
before I turn to the matter on the agenda I should like to
welcome Jamaica as a member of the Security Council and
to welcome you particularly in your capacity as President
during Jamaica’s first month of membership. It is already
clear that this will be a busy month in the Council. My
delegation are glad to know that the business of the Council
is in the hands of someone with your wide experience of
United Nations affairs. We are also pleased to begin the new
year under the guidance of a representative of a fellow
Commonwealth country.

66. Respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Member States is one of the
comer-stones of the Charter and of the United Nations

62. I should like to take this opportunity too to welcome
Bangladesh, Norway, Portugal and Zambia and to pay a
tribute to the cwperation which we all received over the
past two years from those members of the Council whose

’ Ofjcial Records of the Economic and Sociai Council, 1978.
Supplement No. 4, chap. XXVI, sect. B, decision (XXXIV).
6

system. The countries of Indo-China have for too long been
denied the benefits of peace. It must be the Council’s aim to
ensure that its present deliberations will help to advance the
cause of peace and stability not only for Kampuchea but for
the countries of the region as a whole.
67. Her Majesty’s Government welcomes the united, clear
and firm joint statement issued at Bangkok on 12 and 13
January by the special meeting of the Foreign Ministers of
the Association of South-East Asian Nations /S/13025J, to
which we believe special importance should be attached as
representing the views of the other countries in the area
most directly concerned. Like them, we deplore the armed
intervention against Kampuchea, and, like them, we wish to
see the immediate withdrawal
of foreign forces from
Kampuchean
territory.
Like them also, we attach
importance to the right of the people of Kampuchea to
decide their own future without outside interference. These
concerns reflect fundamental principles of the Charter, and
my delegation will be ready to support action by the
Council to give effect to them.
68. This is the third consecutive day of our discussion of
this issue. I suggested last night that we should meet again
today because I believe it is now urgent that the Council
should reach conclusions. It is already clear from the
statements made and from the reports we have all read what
conclusions have been reached by the overwhelming
majority of,Member States and by world opinion. Two
members of the Council have suggested forms a resolution
might take. Itis now time for the Council to decide how it
will act.
69. Mr. YbUNG
(United States of America): Mr.
President, I would first take this opportunity to welcome
you, as the representative of Jamaica, and the representatives of the other new members of the Council, Bangladesh,
Norway,
Portugal and Zambia. My delegation looks
forward to working with all in the same co-operative spirit
that guided us during the membership in the Council of the
five countries ,which have just completed their terms. We
valued highly the contributions made by the delegations of
Canada, the Federal Republic of Germany, India,
Mauritius and.Venezuela and are confident that the new
members will similarly help us to make the work of this
body increasingly effective.

&so

70. I must
congratulate you, Mr. President, for the
patience, sensitivity and skill you have already shown in
your direction 1of the Council’s work during these first
weeks of the new year. We are fortunate to have in you a
diplomat with’ long experience of United Nations matters.
We count on your wisdom and skill to provide a bridge
between the differing interests and the essential leadership
needed to make the Council fully effective in tackling the
world’s problems.
71. Finally, I should like to pay tribute to Ambassador
von Wechmar of the Federal Republic of Germany for the
able and effective manner in which he presided over our
work during the month of December.
72. The invasion by Viet Nam of Kampuchea presents to
the Council difftcult political and moral questions. The
issue is affected by history, rival claims and Charter
principles. It appears complex because several different
provisions of the Charter are directly relevant to our

deliberations. These are that: the fun&mental principles of
human rights must be respected by all Governments, one
State must not use force against the territory of another
State, a State must not interfere in the affairs of another
State, and, if there is a dispute between States, it must be
settled peaceably.
73. There is little doubt that all these provisions of key
importance to the international community have been
violated. One country has been attacked by another; its
Government has been overthrown. There was no recourse
to the various international mechanisms to assist in the
settlement of international disputes. Within Indo-China,
and particularly within Kampuchea itself, some of the worst
violations of human rights in recorded history have taken
place. In these circumstances, what is the responsibility of
the Council7
74. In answer to that question, my Government believes
we must look at one essential, contemporary fact. The
troops of one country are now occupying the territory of
another and have imposed a new government upon it by
force of arms. That fact leads us to the conclusion that the
solution to the problem we are discussing is clear: Viet Nam
must immediately withdraw
its armed forces from
Kampuchea, must respect that country’s territorial integrity
and must make credible its intention to respect the
territorial integrity of other States in the region It must
respect those principles which have been stated, reiterated
and amplified countless times by every member of the
Council. Viet Nam has that obligation to every member of
the Council and every member of the Organization because
it is a signatory to the Charter. That Vie! Nam is aware of
these obligations is clear from the statements made by its
own Prime Minister during his recent tour of South-East
Asia and quoted only just now by the representative of
Singapore.
75. During the past year, as the situation in Indochina
became more critical, my Government repeatedly drew
attention to the dangers present. We urged both sides to
show restraint. We asked that they should relax cruel
demands on their own people, not only in the name of
decency and human dignity but also for the purpose of
reducing tensions. We encouraged other Governments to
take more seriously the dangers present. On 1 November
1978, we took the carefully considered step of addressing a
letter to the Security Council [S/12911] which underscored
the security risk along the border with Viet Nam and
expressed deep concern over the human rights situation in
Kampuchea itself. In a parallel move with others, we
encouraged the Secretary-General to visit the area to
promote peaceful settlement. Unfortunately our warnings
were not heeded. Viet Nam refused to receive the SecretaryGeneral on an urgent basis,. and a military solution,
carefully prepared over a period of months, was unfolded
last week.
76. Whatever the origin or the character of the so-called
Salvation Front, which now claims to govern Kampuchea,
there can be no question that Viet Nam has conquered its
neighbour. The use of Vietnamese troops, weapons and
supplies, supported by Vietnamese aircraft, permitted the
takeover of much of Kampuchea in a very brief period of
time. The number, reliability and consistency of reports on
this developing situation over the months leave no room for
doubt. The claim of the Salvation Front is that it has the
support of the Cambodian people. The facts are that it now

rules thanks to Vietnamese bayonets and that there has
been no effort to determine the wishes of the people of
Carhbodia.

Nations as a whole. At stake in our deliberations today is
not the security of States in South-East Asia but also the
norms of international behaviour that help to minimize the
chance of war. The international community cannot allow
to pass in silence the acts that have just taken place. To do so
will only encourage Governments in other parts of the
world to conclude that there are no norms, no standards, no
restraints. It will accelerate what is already a disturbing
trend among many Governments of refusing to refer their
disputes to international organizations and of taking action
through military means. Let us therefore assume our
responsibilities as members of the Council.

77. My Government has repeatedly expressed its support
for a stable, peaceful system of independent States in SouthEast Asia. After decades of conflict, the peoples of that
region, particularly
the Kampuchean people, deserve
nothing less. Mankind would be impoverished if a people
who in the past attained glories of civilization and art
virtually unrivaijed in history were now to be submerged by
others. Indo-China must include an independent Kampuchea.

85. The :PRESIDENT: The representative of Viet Nam
has asked to be allowed to speak in exercise of the right of
reply. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

78. Regarding the brutal violations of human rights which
took place under the Pol Pot Government in Kampuchea,
we believe the international community long ago should
have brought the full weight of international condemnation
to bear. We believe the Cambodian people deserve a
Government that will protect the fun&mental
human
rights of all citizens in that country.

86. Mr. HA VAN LAU (Viet Nam) (inrerpretarionj?om
French): Mr. President, first of all I would thank you for
allowing me to exercise my right of reply to the slanderous
allegations against my country made by the representative
of China and Mr.Sihanouk,
who represents the bloodthirsty Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique which has just been
overthrown by the heroic people of Kampuchea. I am also
exercising my right of reply in respect of the unwarranted
allegations of certain representatives who have spoken this
afternoon on the alleged armed intervention by Viet Nam in
Kampuchea.

79. There were legitimate concerns raised by Viet Nam
about Kampuchean activities against Vietnamese citizens
within Kampuchea and along the common border of the
two nations. But Viet Nam’s responsibility as a Member of
the United Nations was to bring its complaint to the United
Nations. Border disputes do not grant one nation the right
to impose a government on another by military force.

87. First, once again I most categorically reject these gross
slanders. As regards the frontier war unleashed against Viet
Nam by the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique, acting on the orders
and with the assistance of the authorities of Peking, on
I1 January last, I proved before the Council [2208rh meezing/, with enough facts to support any statement, that it
was the Peking authorities who had made use of the Pol
Pot-Ieng Sary clique to start the border war against Viet
Nam, for the purpose of weakening Viet Nam and
subjecting it to their policy of hegemony and expansion in
South-East Asia. Just as any other country which found
itself in a similar situation would not have failed to be, Viet
Nam was determined to exercise its right to legitimate selfdefence, recognized by the Charter of the United Nations,
to defend its independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity and to safeguard the traditional friendship
between the peoples of Viet Nam and Kampuchea. Viet
Nam gave obvious proof of moderation and restraint. It
was because of the persistence of the aggressive activities of
the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary tigime and their Peking masters that
we were determined to repel aggression, to punish the
aggressors and to destroy the forces which began the war of
aggression against us, so that our enemies would not be able
to resume their aggressive activities.

80. I wish to express my country’s sympathies to the
Vietnamese people. This new conflict imposes still further
hardships on them. The squandering of national resources
to wage war on a neighbouring country is tragic and
senseless. It is not only the waste of national resources and
the economic dislocation that occurs when resources are
devoted to war, but more importantly, it is the loss of
human resources, as individuals die needlessly in a dispute
which could have been settled by negotiation or mediation.
It may now increase even more the numbers fleeing Viet
Nam because of a sense of personal insecurity or economic
hardship.
81. I also wish to express my sympathies to the
Kampuchean people for the additional horrors and
hardships added to their burden by the Vietnamese attack.
Innocent people there, as always in war, pay an intolerable
price.
82. The peoples of Viet Nam and Cambodia must have
the opportunity to live in peace. They must have the chance
to prosper through enlightened policies geared to
development of their respective resources and the talented
people who live in their region.
83. My Government therefore calls upon all countries.
interested in peace, stability, and an independent State
system within South-East Asia to counsel restraint on the
parties to the conflict, to press urgently for withdrawal of all
foreign forces from Kampuchea, to act to ensure the
integrity of all frontiers in the East Asian region, and to try
to find ways to avoid any expansion of the geographic area
of conflict. My Government stands ready to work
vigorously with,all others to assist in this impoitant task.

88. -4s further proof in support of what 1am saying, I shall
confine myself to mentioning that The Chrisfian Science
Monitor, in its editorial of 11 January, recognized that
Cambodia had been the first to attack Viet Nam and
Cambodian troops had committed an invasion against Viet
Nam. That is sufficiently clear to settle the question of
ascertaining who is the aggressor and who is the victim of
aggression in the problem of Kampuchea.
89. Secondly, I wish yet again to denounce the slanderous
propaganda of the Peking leaders and their henchmen, the
Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique, which would have the world

84. I also wish to address a message to members of the
Council and indeed to the membership of the United
8

.

believe that the fall of the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary regime was due
to the alleged invasion of the Vietnamese Army.

“As of that day, Kampuchea will be an independent
and free country and the Kampuchean people will be
masters of their own country and their own destiny.”

90. In my statement on 11 January, I had occasion to
review the living reality of the last four years of the heroic
struggle of the entire Kampuchean people against the
monstrous regime, abhorred and hated not only by the
people of Cambodia but also by all mankind. I particularly
made -_~.
it clear that the more ferocious the repression
-_-._
the stronger the struggle against it. If in the past world
public opinion was not sufficiently informed of this
struggle, that was because of the closed system of the
infernal Pol Pot-Ieng Sary regime. To deny that would be
unfair to the heroic people of Kampuchea which upholds as
its own the traditions of the Angkor civilization, of
patriotism and of unflagging spirit in the face of oppression
and violence. The recent mass uprising of the entire
Kampuchean people provided the overwhelming force
which, in a relatively short time, overthrew the abhorred Pol
Pot-Ieng Sary dominant clique. Furthermore, it was CBS
which, on 11 January, provided quite conclusive information to the effect that, in the face of the powerful offensive of
the revolutionary forces of the Kampuchean people, 80 per
cent-1 repeat, 80 per cent-of the men in the Pol Pot-Ieng
Sary army had deserted and joined the ranks of the people’s
army. Once again, the truth is that that army of young
people transformed into professional killers, the sole
support of the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary regime, when enlightened
as to the criminal role assigned to them, did not fail to turn
with hatred against their former leaders and become their
executioners.

The People’s Revolutionary

Council further

“ . . . solemnly declared the total abolition of the dictatorial, Fascist, genocidal regime of the reactionary Pol
Pot-Ieng Sat-y clique and the founding of the People’s
Republic of Kampuchea*‘.
93. From all the preceding, I believe that it is quite simple
to draw a conclusion as to who grossly interfered in the
internal affairs of Kampuchea and who is responsible for all
the misery caused to the Kampuchean people during the last
four years as well as for the constant threats to the security
of Kampuchea’s neighbours and to the peace and stability
of the entire South-East Asian region. It is the Peking
authorities with their anti-Vietnamese policy, their greatPower chauvinism and their hegemonic and expansionist
aims in South-East Asia.
94. In this respect, I prefer once again to invite members
of the Council to listen to the words of Mr. Rua Samay, the
Secretary-General of the United Front for the National
Salvation of Kampuchea, as reported by the Agence France
Presse on 11 January:
“Shortly after the May 1975 victory, the Pol Pot-Ieng
Sary clique joined the employ of Chinese expansionism
and hegemonism. Tens of thousands of advisers of all
kinds were sent to Cambodia, taking over the apparatus
of power and the army . Hundreds of thousands of tons
of Chinese arms were delivered, and the Pol Pot-Ieng
Sary clique tried to bring about a cultural revolution
which started by an ongoing purge of the party, the
armed forces, the administration and the population.

91. These are the profound reasons that explain the
striking victory of the Kampuchean people in these past few
days. In this respect, I prefer to invite members of the
Council to listen to the words of Mr.Rua Samay, the
Secretary-General of the United Front for the National
Salvation of Kampuchea. According to information from
the Agence France Presse of 11 January, during a meeting
held at Hanoi on the same day, Mr. Rua Samay accused the
Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique of having embarked “on a
ferocious act of genocide causing the death of close to
3 million people’*. He added:

“The former regime became also the shock troops of
Chinese expansionism by attacking Viet Nam. On 23
December 1978, 19 divisions of Pol Pot’s army were
deployed at the border between the two countries. Three
of them penetrated into Vietnamese territory to attack
the province of Tay Ninh.”

“More than 3.5 million citizens have been chased out
into the countryside and shut up in Chinese-type
communes, which are really concentration camps, where
they died of starvation, thirst, disease and as a result of
torture. The entire country was reduced to nothing. One
would have had to live through that hellish time to understand how that corrupt, dictatorial, Fascist and bloodthirsty regime could have been swept away in little more
than a month.”

95. After all this, it would be vain for the Peking
authorities to attempt obstinately to confer the right of
representation on the very corpse of the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary
clique, which has been revealed by the international press as
being the true intention of the scenario so noisily put on
recently in Peking and which also has as its stage the United
Nations itself. It would therefore be fitting for the Security
Council formally to condemn the Peking authorities for all
their intrigues in the question of Kampuchea.

92. Today, the heroic people of Kampuchea has become
the master of the entire country. As was affirmed by the
People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea in its recent
manifesto, dated 11 January 1979:

96. Before concluding, I should once again like to express
my unshaken confidence that a new era of peace and
stability will now begin in the Indochinese peninsula and
in all of South-East Asia with the appearance of the
People’s Republic of Kampuchea. At the same time, I
should like once again to express the hope that at these
meetings the Council will come to a decision in accordance
with its great responsibilities
to the international
community and to history.

“The powerful uprisings of the Kampuchean people
to save themselves and their country were crowned with
complete victory.. .
“The dictatorial, militarist and nepotistic administration of the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique crumbled totally. . .

The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

9

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite
1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section,
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

may
your

LES

PUBLICATIONS
be

obtained
bookstore

or

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

and
distributors
Nations,
Sales

DES

UNIES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sont
en vente
dans
les librairies
depositaires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
aupres
de votre
libraire
B : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes.
New York ou Geneve.
ICAH

IIOJIYYlUTb

WB~AHZIB

OPrAHWBAl&HH

OLl’bE~UHEHHhIX

et les agences
ou adresses-vous

HAqUA

IiSAaHHR
00raHU3aLW~
06ZeAHHeHXblX
HawR
MomHO
KynnTb
a KnmKnbI~
brarasnnax
w ~~‘BHTCTB~X
eo acex
pattonax
nrnpa.
H~BOAHT~
cnpamw
06 UwaHsmx
B
aamek4
XHUXHOM
Marasnue
win nauiure
no anpecy:
Oprauasauna
06’he~miemibrx
Haunit.
CekqHs
no nponame
nsaaanR.
HLH)-Pfopx
HIIH )Kexeaa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
part-es
Unidas,
Section
de Ventas,

Lltho

ln United

Nations,

New

York

DE

LAS

Naciones
Unidas
e&n
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Price:

$U.S.

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerfas
a su librero
o dirijase

1.50

y casas distria: Naciones

79-70002-November

1981-2,250
