UNITED

eI
.

Distr.
GENERAL

NATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL

S/3829
10 May 1957
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: FRENCH

LETTER DATED 15 MAY 1957 FROM THE REPP.ESENTATIVE OF FRANCE
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OB' THE SECURITY COUNCIL

On the instructions of the Gcvernment of the French Republic, and for the
reasons stated in the attached communique of the Council of Ministers of France
dated 15 May 1957, I have the honour to request you, in your capacity as President
of the Security Council, to call a ~eeting of the Council f~~ Monday, 20 May 1957,
at 3 p.m. to resume consideration of the following question:
"Situation created by the unilateral action of 'lJhe Egyptian Government
in bringing to an end the system of international operation of the
Suez Canal, which was confirmed and completed by the Suez Canal
Convention of 1888",
"Thich appears as item 28 in the statement on matters of which the Security Council
is seized.

(Signed)

57-15581

G. GEORGES-PICOT
Ambassador and Permanent
Representative of France to
the United Nations

/ ...

.~

S/3829

English
Page 2

CONMUNIQ,UE OF THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS OF FRANCE
dated 15 May 1957

liThe French Government has noted with regret the decisions taken by those
users of the Suez Canal who have accepted the direct payment of tolls to Egypt,
without the latter having furnished them the minimum guarantees concerning free
transit through the Canal and the eqUitable distribution of the monies collected.
The French Government points out that it has always, even when its o,m higher
interests have been at stake, paid h~ed to the decisions or recommendations of the
United Nations.
It cannot therefore regard as acceptable, and still less as
final, a solution
of the Canal problem whicll is in flagrant contradiction with
,
the six principles illlanimously approved by the Security Council in October 1956,
as has been recognized by the British Prime Minister and the Secretary of State of
the United States.
In the French Government's opinion, it is inadmissible that two standards in
international relations should thus be established to the detriment of the
democracies and to the benefit of the dictatorships.
Experience has sho,m that
such discrimination encourages reckless action and would ultimately imperil world
peace.
It therefore wishes to make a last appeal to the United Nations whose
authority is now at stake.
It has accordingly decided to seize the Security COlIDcil of the matter as
soon as possible and to request the Council to call upon Egypt to comply with the
six principles of October 195q.
The importance of the ans,ver that is given to France I s appeal far transcends
that of the Suez Canal problem itself.
On its nature 'vill depend the confidence
'vhich the peoples can continue to place in the international orga.nizations to
which they have entrusted responsibility for maintaining peace and ensuring
respect for 1a,v and justice."
