S/2021/583

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 June 2021
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020) and
2533 (2020)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the seventy-third submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), paragraph 6 of resolution 2393 (2017),
paragraph 12 of resolution 2401 (2018), paragraph 6 of resolution 2449 (2018),
paragraph 8 of resolution 2504 (2020) and paragraph 3 of resolution 2533 (2020), in
the last three of which the Council requested the Secretary-General to provide a report
at least every 60 days, on the implementation of the resolutions by all parties to the
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to entities of the
United Nations system and obtained from the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and other relevant sources. Data from entities of the United Nations system
regarding their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the months of April
and May 2021.

II. Major developments
Key points
1.
The available information continued to indicate a high degree of
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) transmission in the Syrian Arab
Republic, far exceeding the officially recorded infection rates. On 21 and
22 April, the first COVID-19 vaccines arrived in the country through the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility, and distribution
began in May.
2.
The economy continued to deteriorate. On 15 April, the Central Bank
of Syria officially devalued the Syrian pound for the first time since July
2020, from 1,256 to 2,512 Syrian pounds against the United States dollar.

21-07681 (E)

210621

*2107681*

S/2021/583

The food security situation in the Syrian Arab Republic remains critical.
Despite some recent improvement, the indicators for April remained far
below the levels observed one year earlier.
3.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) verified 186 incidents, in which at least 150 civilians,
including 15 women and 36 children, were killed and at least 154 civilians,
including 17 women and 57 children, were injured as a result of hostilities
across the Syrian Arab Republic.
4.
Reduced water levels in the Euphrates reached a critical point during
the reporting period, prompting the partial closure of the Tishrin Dam and
electricity blackouts across the north-east of the country. Some 5.4 million
people in the Syrian Arab Republic rely on the Euphrates and its tributaries
for drinking water. In addition, some 3 million people in the north-east rely
on electricity from the Tishrin and Tabaqah Dams, which provide critical
irrigation for crops. Hospitals and other vital infrastructure also depend on
electricity generated by the dams.
5.
At Hawl camp in the north-east, the security situation continued to
deteriorate. At least six murders and four attempted murders have been
reported since the security operation in March and April. In late May, the
de facto authorities in the north-east introduced to humanitarian partners
tentative plans for a reorganization of the camp.
6.
On 20 April, clashes erupted in Qamishli city between progovernment forces and the local security forces. An estimated 15,000 to
20,000 individuals were displaced during the ensuing five days of fighting.
Fourteen civilians were killed, including three children.
Humanitarian update
3.
The overall level of violence in the Idlib de-escalation area remained relatively
low, albeit with daily mutual artillery shelling and clashes between pro-government
forces and non-State armed groups. Most of those incidents were concentrated on
both sides of the front lines near the M4 and M5 highways. An increase in shelling
was recorded in late April and early May, following a reported raid by Hay’at Tahrir
al-Sham, which has been designated a terrorist group by the Security Council, on a
position held by government forces. Aerial bombardments took place in rural Idlib
and Hama, including on alleged locations of groups designated as terrorist groups by
the Security Council. Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham continued its security campaign against
rival groups. Daily shelling, renewed air strikes, infighting between non-State armed
groups and the prevalence of explosive hazards in residential areas and public spaces
continued to endanger civilians.
4.
In northern Aleppo Governorate, low-level mutual shelling and occasional
skirmishes between non-State armed opposition groups and pro-government forces
continued across front lines near Bab. Mutual shelling and skirmishes intensified
along contact lines in Afrin, I‘zaz and Tall Rif‘at in Aleppo Governorate, with reports
of civilian casualties. Shortages of potable and agricultural water continued to be
reported in Bab city and the surrounding areas, affecting some 185,000 people. The
United Nations continued to advocate for a resumption of water supply to Bab from
the Ayn al-Bayda station.
5.
Multiple parties suffered attacks by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
cells. Reports indicate that there were dozens of casualties in areas across eastern
rural Homs, Hama, Raqqah and Dayr al-Zawr Governorates. ISIL elements reportedly
2/20

21-07681

S/2021/583

kidnapped a large number of civilians and military personnel from rural Hama.
Government and pro-government forces carried out counter-ISIL operations west of
the Euphrates and, separately, the Syrian Democratic Forces continued their counterISIL operations east of the Euphrates. Throughout the reporting period, intensive air
strikes were carried out on alleged ISIL targets west of the Euphrates and in the Syrian
desert. Targeted assassinations and attacks by unknown perpetrators against local
tribal leaders and notables continued to be reported, including in Dayr al -Zawr.
6.
The situation in the south-west of the Syrian Arab Republic remained tense, with
ongoing attacks and assassinations against civilians, government forces and fighters
reconciled from former armed opposition groups. All actors maintained a heightened
security posture, with tensions increasing across Dar‘a Governorate. In Suwayda’
Governorate, kidnappings and armed disputes flared up, only some of which were
resolved by local leaders. In Umm Batinah, in Qunaytirah Governorate, following an
agreement, 140 individuals from 35 families of local dignitaries and former members
of non-State armed opposition groups were transferred to non-government-controlled
areas in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic. The group included women,
children and elderly persons. Initially, the convoy was not allowed to enter Bab city
and remained stranded at the Abu al-Zandayn crossing point for two days, reportedly
pending coordination between relevant parties. On 22 May, access was granted and
the convoy was authorized to pass through I‘zaz and Afrin districts to reach Idlib
Governorate, where the people were accommodated in a newly constructed camp.
7.
The available information continued to indicate a high degree of COVID-19
transmission in the Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting period, far exceeding
the officially announced infection rates. At the end of May, 24,495 cases, including
1,770 deaths, had been reported by the Ministry of Health. Another 23,541 cases,
including 670 deaths, have been reported in areas outside of government control in
the north-west since the onset of the pandemic. In addition, 17,857 cases, including
729 deaths, were reported in areas outside of government control in the north-east.
The first COVID-19 vaccines received through the COVAX Facility arrived in the
country on 21 and 22 April, comprising 256,800 doses. Of those, 53,800 doses were
delivered through the United Nations cross-border operation to the north-west of the
country, with distribution beginning on 1 May. Of the 203,000 doses sent to
Damascus, 17,500 were sent to the north-east (13,320 for Hasakah Governorate and
4,180 for Dayr al-Zawr Governorate). Distribution of those doses began on 17 May.
Vaccines distributed through the COVAX Facility are expected to cover only 20 per
cent of the total population of the country. Some Member States have also reportedly
provided additional vaccines to the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic.
8.
The economic crisis continued to affect civilians across the country. On
15 April, the Central Bank of Syria officially devalued the Syrian pound from a rate
of 1,256 to 2,512 Syrian pounds against the United States dollar. That was the first
devaluation of the national currency since July 2020 and the third devaluation since
November 2019. The value of the currency on the informal market stabilized at
around 3,000 Syrian pounds against the United States dollar in April, after dipping to
a record low of 4,700 against the United States dollar in mid-March. While food
security indicators showed some month-on-month improvement between March and
April, the overall situation in the Syrian Arab Republic remains critical. Surveys
suggest that inadequate food consumption (poor and borderline consumption
combined) remained nearly 50 per cent higher than in April 2020. More than two in
five households report not having sufficient, or sufficiently nutritious, food. Nearly
half of Syrian families surveyed (48 per cent) in April reported that adults ate less so
that children could eat – an increase of one third since April 2020.
9.
The fuel shortage also worsened across the Syrian Arab Republic. On 16 April,
the Ministry of Internal Trade and Consumer Protection increased the price of
21-07681

3/20

S/2021/583

95-octane petrol from 2,000 Syrian pounds to 2,500 Syrian pounds per litre. That was
the second increase in official fuel prices within one month. The price increase and
continued shortages had consequences across the country, including for activities
critical to agriculture, such as irrigation, underground water extraction and
transportation. If diesel shortages persist, expected harvest operations in May and
June 2021 will be negatively affected. Fuel shortages have also had an impact on
humanitarian operations, with monitoring missions unable to deploy without the
necessary fuel.
10. In the north-east of the country, water levels in the Euphrates reached a critical
point during the reporting period. Water has reportedly been flowing at reduced levels
since January 2021. On 20 May, the de facto authorities in the north-east reported that
the Tishrin Dam was taking in only around 180 m 3 of water per second, well below
the 500 m 3 required to keep the dam operational. The low water flow prompted the
partial closure of the dam; only two of the six hydroelectric turbines were operational,
which caused electricity blackouts across the north-east of the country. Water from
the Tabaqah Dam was used as an emergency backup. By the end of May, however,
water levels at that dam were 80 per cent depleted. Engineers warned of an imminent
shutdown of the dam if water levels did not increase. Some 5.4 million people rely
on the Euphrates and its tributaries for drinking water. About 200 water stations draw
on electricity from the Tishrin and Tabaqah Dams to pump, treat and deliver water.
Some 3 million people in the north-east, as well as hospitals and other vital
infrastructure, rely on electricity from the dams.
11. Low water levels have further reduced anticipated agricultural output. Belowaverage rainfall in the north-east, which produces around 60 per cent of the country’s
wheat and barley, has already resulted in significant crop failures for rain-fed wheat
and barley fields. The remaining wheat production in those areas is reliant on
irrigation from the Euphrates. Drought conditions have a disproportionate impact on
women and girls: some 70 per cent of people working in farming are women, of whom
around 25 per cent are heads of their households. Insufficient water for irrigation
jeopardizes their crops and, in turn, their income, putting vulnerable families at risk
of sliding further into poverty. Women and girls can also be exposed to different risks,
including gender-based violence and poor health conditions due to a shortage of clean
water.
12. At Uluk water station, pumping remained limited during the reporting period.
Water levels were insufficient to reach most of the population ordinarily served by
the station, including Hasakah city and Hawl camp. Water-pumping from Uluk
resumed on 24 April, after a 12-day interruption due to a fire at the Darbasiyah
electrical substation. Water flow to Hasakah and Tall Tamr subdistricts, however,
remains insufficient, as the station continues to operate at reduced capacity. The
electricity supply to the water station also remains insufficient, and that has affected
the amount of water that can be pumped. Furthermore, between 10 May and the end
of the reporting period, technicians from the Hasakah water and electrici ty
directorates were not able to gain access to the water station.
13. Clashes between pro-government forces and the local security forces erupted in
Qamishli city between 20 and 25 April. The violence resulted in the displacement of
up to 20,000 people and the death of 14 civilians, including 3 children. Many civilians
sustained injuries in the crossfire. Humanitarian shipments were also affected;
30 United Nations trucks en route to warehouses south of Qamishli city were stopped
at checkpoints outside of the city. On 26 April, a ceasefire was brokered, allowing
displaced persons to return and trucks to enter the city. Mutual shelling and skirmishes
nevertheless continued across contact lines around Ayn Isa in Raqqah Governorate
and Tall Tamr and Ra’s al-Ayn in Hasakah Governorate.

4/20

21-07681

S/2021/583

14. Some 60,400 people, including 31,000 children under 12 years of age, remained
at Hawl camp during the reporting period. The overall total includes around 8,800
third-country nationals. The security situation at the camp continued to deteriorate,
despite a large security operation in March and April. At least six murders and four
attempted murders were reported in the ensuing weeks. On 27 May, the de facto
authorities introduced to some humanitarian partners plans for a reorgani zation of the
camp. Humanitarian actors have raised concerns about provisions in the plan for
protection, access to basic services and measures to uphold the camp’s civilian nature.
Those consultations are set to continue in June.
15. The United Nations remained without humanitarian access to the 12,000 people
living in Rukban. Residents of the Rukban area continue to live in dire conditions,
with limited access to food, water, health care and other basic services. Residents
remained unable to access the United Nations clinic on the Jordanian side of the
border since its full closure as part of COVID-19 preventive measures, in March 2020.
Access to medical treatment in areas under the control of the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic continued to be facilitated by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and
coordinated by the United Nations. The United Nations continued to advocate for
immediate humanitarian access and assistance to reach those who remained at the
camp and continued its efforts to support voluntary departures. On 8 April, the United
Nations received written approval from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to use the
Al-Dweir reception centre as a quarantine space for voluntary departures from
Rukban. In April and May, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), in
partnership with the Ministry of Health in Damascus, assisted 25 children who had
left the camp spontaneously to seek medical attention. Discussions around the roll out of an intention survey for residents of Rukban, to be conducted from Jord an, are
ongoing.
Update on overall developments
16. The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria continued to engage with
representatives of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, the opposition Syrian
Negotiations Committee and the Co-Chairs of the Syrian Constitutional Committee,
as well as members of the middle third, in preparation for a potential sixth session of
the small body of the Constitutional Committee. As the Special Envoy noted in his
briefing to members of the Security Council on 26 May 2021, a sixth round must be
built on assurances that it will adhere to and implement the terms of reference and
core rules of procedure of the Constitutional Committee. It must also restore and build
trust and confidence in order to produce results and progress on the Committee’s
mandate to prepare and draft a constitutional reform for popular approval.
17. In pursuit of a sustainable and credible Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political
process in line with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), the Special Envoy
continued to engage regional and international interlocutors. In those engagements,
the Special Envoy continued to highlight the full remit of resolution 2254 (2015),
including the importance of attaining a nationwide ceasefire, renewed efforts to
combat groups designated as terrorist groups by the Security Council, in full
compliance with international humanitarian law, unblocking progress on detainees,
abductees and missing persons, ensuring unimpeded humanitarian access and
avoiding and mitigating any humanitarian effects of sanctions that could exacerbate
the plight of ordinary Syrians. He emphasized the importance of steps towards a safe,
calm and neutral environment, including precise, realistic packages of mutual and
reciprocal steps to be taken towards re-establishing trust between the parties to the
conflict. He noted the holding of a presidential election in May under the auspices of
the current Constitution of the Syrian Arab Republic, which was not part of the
political process called for in resolution 2254 (2015).
21-07681

5/20

S/2021/583

18. The Special Envoy continued to engage with the Syrian Women’s Advisory
Board. In separate consultations, members of the Civil Society Support Room
reiterated that civilians continued to bear the brunt of the conflict and stressed the
importance of progress on the political track in order to attain meani ngful
improvements in the lives of all Syrians. Civil society representatives continued to
raise the issue of the economic plight of Syrians and the need for real progress with
regard to detainees, abductees and missing persons.
Protection
19. Civilians across the Syrian Arab Republic continued to suffer the direct and
indirect consequences of armed conflict and violence. OHCHR verified 186 incidents,
in which at least 150 civilians, including 15 women and 36 children, were killed and
at least 154 civilians, including 17 women and 57 children, were injured as a result
of hostilities across the country. These included incidents involving ground-based
strikes, improvised explosive devices, explosive remnants of war, armed clashes and
targeted killings at the hands of various parties to the conflict or by unidentified
perpetrators. The majority of civilian deaths (51 per cent) were documented in
government-controlled areas and were caused by attacks with improvised explosive
devices and by explosions of remnants of war, as well as targeted killings. In the light
of the patterns observed, it appears that parties to the conflict have failed to respect
key principles under international humanitarian law, including the obligation to
distinguish civilians from fighters and civilian objects from military objectives; to
refrain from indiscriminate attacks; to respect proportionality in attack; and to take
constant care to spare civilians and civilian objects in the conduct of military
operations.
20. In non-government-held parts of the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic,
OHCHR documented at least nine incidents, in which 14 civilians were killed. The
total includes seven civilians, including two women, one boy and two girls, killed as
a result of a ground-based strike.
21. On 18 May, following the decision of the de facto authorities in the north -east
of the country to increase the prices of fuel and cooking gas, dozens of protests took
place. Protesters were met with excessive use of force by members of the Syr ian
Democratic Forces, which resulted in the death of nine civilians, including one girl.
At least seven others were arrested in house raids following the protests.
22. In Dar‘a, despite a cessation of hostilities following the re-establishment of
government control in July 2018, OHCHR continued to document incidents of
targeted killings of civilians and of fighters reconciled from former armed opposition
groups. The majority of such attacks have been carried out by unidentified
perpetrators.
23. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) recorded an increase in reported
cases of child and early marriage in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic. The
economic crisis, along with the compounding impact of COVID-19, overcrowded
households in displacement shelters and a perceived need among families to protect
their daughters, has exacerbated the occurrence of this form of gender-based violence.
24. Civilians at Hawl camp continued to suffer from threats to their safety.
Protection concerns include family separation, restricted access to humanitarian
assistance and restrictions on freedom of movement that, in some cases, may amount
to deprivation of liberty. Levels of violence have increased significantly in recent
months and have continued despite a large security operation in March and April (see
para. 14). OHCHR verified at least six incidents, in which at least six civilians,
including three women, were killed by unidentified perpetrators during the reporting
period.
6/20

21-07681

S/2021/583

25. Parties to the conflict continued to detain individuals arbitrarily in areas under
their control. In the majority of cases recorded by OHCHR, detainees were denied
information about the reasons for their detention and other due process rights. The
families of detainees were denied information concerning the detainees’ whereabouts
or their fate, raising concerns that, in some cases, such detentions may constitute
enforced disappearance. In areas under the control of the Government, OHCHR
continued to document cases of detainees who died in custody, allegedly of natural
causes. In many such cases, individuals appear to have been subjected to enforced
disappearance, and their detention by the Government did not become known until
their deaths were acknowledged. The bodies are rarely returned to their families.
Family members are also denied the opportunity to question the stated cause of death
or to learn the whereabouts of the bodies of the deceased.
26. Parties to the conflict continued to systematically intimidate and harass
civilians, including those working in the media and health services. Such tactics
included targeted killings, abductions, deprivation of liberty, ill-treatment, torture,
enforced disappearances, looting and confiscation of property. The whereabouts and
fate of many of those deprived of their liberty remain unknown.
27. During the reporting period, the country task force on monitoring and reporting
verified one incident of hostilities in January causing damage to educational facilities.
On 20 January 2021, in Duwaylah village, Harim district, Idlib Governorate, air
strikes hit a two-storey school building. The air strikes killed several children and
injured many others. Additional incidents in May are yet to be verified as part of the
United Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism.
28. The Surveillance System for attacks on health care of the World Health
Organization (WHO) reported two incidents affecting health care. Additional
incidents are yet to be verified as part of the WHO Surveillance System.
Humanitarian response
29. Humanitarian assistance by United Nations agencies and their partners
continued throughout the Syrian Arab Republic (see table 1). Assistance included
World Food Programme (WFP) food assistance for 4.6 million people in April and
4.7 million people in May, across all 14 governorates. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) supported 128 operational
community/satellite centres and 120 mobile units across the country, providing
integrated services to persons of concern. UNICEF provided self-learning materials
to 137,457 children (including 70,103 girls) in cross-line areas of Raqqah and Dayr
al-Zawr. Additional support was provided for mine risk education for 92,365 children
and caregivers in April, including 45,454 girls and 3,390 women. Explosive ordnance
risk education teams trained by the Mine Action Service delivered awareness sessions
to more than 8,500 civilians, promoting safe behaviour in communities most affected
by explosive ordnance contamination. The United Nations continued to support the
COVID-19 response across the Syrian Arab Republic, including by enhancing
surveillance and diagnostic capacity, procuring vital medical supplies and equipment,
supporting clinical readiness, protecting the delivery of essential health-care services,
supporting protective measures in schools, promoting vaccine acceptance and
supporting the roll-out of vaccinations.

21-07681

7/20

S/2021/583

Table 1
Average number of people reached each month by the United Nations and other organizations
through all modalities throughout the Syrian Arab Republic: April and May 2021
Organization

Average number of
people reached monthly

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

48 400

International Organization for Migration

72 500

Mine Action Service

9 930

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

199 000

United Nations Children’s Fund a

757 700

United Nations Population Fund

221 300

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

130 500

World Food Programme

4 630 000

World Health Organization

688 300

a

Data for the month of April only.

30. From inside the Syrian Arab Republic, assistance provided by United Nations
agencies included the delivery by WFP of food assistance for 3.4 million people in
April and 3.4 million people in May. UNHCR reached 217,600 people with
protection, shelter and core relief items. The Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations (FAO) reached 96,800 people through regular programming. In
April, under a joint UNFPA-WFP project, 68,234 pregnant and lactating women were
provided with monthly e-vouchers to purchase hygiene items based on their needs.
UNFPA delivered life-saving services relating to reproductive health and genderbased violence to 442,800 people. WHO supported the Ministry of Health in
conducting a national immunization week from 4 to 13 April 2021, reaching 7 8,810
children who had dropped out of routine immunization. The Mine Action Service
reached 9,100 people through regular programming and surveyed more than
70 hectares in western Ghutah, Rif Dimashq. More than 50 hectares of that area were
confirmed as hazardous, and 57 items of explosive ordnance were located and
marked. In Hasakah, Aleppo and Rif Dimashq Governorates, UNICEF supported
access to safe water in April for 275,487 people in camps for internally displaced
persons, collective shelters and host communities. Sodium hypochlorite was also
delivered in order to improve the public water supply for around 13.6 million people
across the country. Through its partners, UNICEF supported 115,000 people with
access to improved sanitation in Rif Dimashq and Suwayda’ in April. The United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
provided cash assistance for 261,000 Palestine refugees, of whom 82 per cent were
in Damascus and Rif Dimashq.
31. Among the cross-border humanitarian assistance delivered into the north-west
of the Syrian Arab Republic in April and May, WFP delivered food assistance for
1.1 million people in April and 1.3 million people in May. UNICEF delivered crossborder assistance to 676,400 people in the north-west in April and May. UNHCR
assisted 139,000 people. UNFPA provided assistance in the form of health and
protection programming to 69,400 people. The International Organization for
Migration (IOM) brought multisectoral assistance to 145,100 people. WHO pro vided
COVID-19 testing and vaccines (53,800 doses), as well as medical supplies
representing 193,500 treatments (see figure I and table 2).

8/20

21-07681

S/2021/583

Figure I
Number of beneficiaries targeted by the United Nations and its partners
through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, by cluster: April and May 2021
(monthly average)
(Thousands)

2,084

207
Nutrition

59

-

Non-food Education
items/shelter

394

191
Water,
sanitation
and hygiene

Food

Health

Table 2
Number of beneficiaries targeted through cross-border deliveries, by sector and by district:
April and May 2021 (monthly average)

Governorate

District

Early
recovery/
livelihood

Aleppo

Afrin

–

–

282 805

–

705

–

–

Aleppo

Bab

–

–

–

–

5 000

–

5 000

Aleppo

I‘zaz

–

–

180 758

–

13 483

–

5 750

Aleppo

Jarabulus

–

–

–

–

–

–

3 000

Aleppo

Jabal Sim‘an

–

–

85 720

–

–

–

–

Idlib

Harim

–

–

1 386 678

393 722

22 477

206 541

168 000

Idlib

Idlib

–

–

148 220

–

17 000

–

8 750

a

Education

Food a

Health

Non-food
items/
shelter

Nutrition

Water,
sanitation
and hygiene

Numbers reflect the assistance dispatched to warehouse locations before actual delivery as part of the
pre-positioning effort.

32. The Russian Federation sent informational bulletins to the United Nations from
the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides and Refugee Migration Monitoring,
which outlined the provision of bilateral relief assistance. Other Member States also
continued to provide bilateral and other forms of humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian access
33. The provision of humanitarian assistance requires timely, safe, sustained and
unimpeded access by the United Nations and all humanitarian partners to people in
need across the Syrian Arab Republic. Principled humanitarian action depends on the
ability to independently assess needs and deliver assistance and to monitor and
evaluate impact independently, including by engaging regularly and directly with
affected people. The access landscape in the country is complex, with different
geographical areas and different types of services requiring the use of different
operating modalities. More than 1,800 United Nations staff members are based in the
country, with more than 600 deployed in humanitarian hubs outside Damascus, in
21-07681

9/20

S/2021/583

Aleppo, Dayr al-Zawr, Hama, Homs, Ladhiqiyah, Qamishli, Suwayda’ and Tartus. A
further 3,610 UNRWA staff members are deployed across the country. This
decentralized presence contributes to greater access and proximity to affected
populations. Across the Syrian Arab Republic, humanitarian aid is distributed and
implemented primarily by national actors, including non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent.
34. United Nations agencies were not able to conduct several approved and planned
missions owing to fuel shortages across the country and an increase in the number of
COVID-19 cases in the country, especially in April. In April, a group of international
NGOs based in Damascus warned about the impact of sanctions on humanitarian
operations as a result of overcompliance with the measures put in place, including in
the financial sector. Such practices have reportedly contributed to serious banking
challenges.
35. Every year the United Nations supports students in grades 9 and 12 in taking
their national examinations. In 2021, the exams started on 31 May and will continue
until 22 June. The United Nations facilitated the crossing of students from areas
outside of government control to areas under government control to enable them to
take exams based on the accredited curriculum. As at 31 May, out of the 9,334
students (in grades 9 and 12) and 2,640 companions projected to be received in 55
accommodation centres, 6,015 (5,789 students and 226 companions) had been
received in 39 accommodation centres in Aleppo (4,776), Raqqah (669), Hama (147),
Dayr al-Zawr (158) and Rif Dimashq (265). The crossing points between Idlib and
Hama did not open, forcing 15 children to travel to Hama through Aleppo using
unofficial crossing points. Many students from the north-west reportedly decided not
to sit their exams in areas under government control out of fear of harassment,
conscription and/or arrest. The United Nations called upon Member States with
influence to ensure that parties to the conflict committed to providing the necessary
protection guarantees and allowing the safe and unhindered passage of students and
families wishing to cross the front lines to take the national exams.
Access limitations related to the pandemic
36. Overall, and notwithstanding the occasional restrictions on travel noted in
paragraph 34, preventive measures relating to COVID-19 were no longer considered
a significant impediment to humanitarian response activities, with humanitarian
actors adapting programming to new operational realities, as well as with facilitating
measures by relevant authorities.
Access in government-controlled areas
37. In government-controlled areas, communities and enclaves that remained
difficult to reach owing to administrative and security approvals included
Shaffuniyah, Mayda‘a and Kafr Batna in eastern Ghutah and Bayt Jinn and Mazra‘at
Bayt Jinn in western Rif Dimashq. In the south of the Syrian Arab Republic, insecurity
and administrative restrictions continued to prevent sustained access to areas formerly
controlled by non-State armed groups, in particular in the Dar‘a al-Balad
neighbourhood in Dar‘a city and in parts of western Dar‘a and Qunaytirah.
38. United Nations personnel and third-party contractors continued to travel to field
locations along with national NGOs and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to conduct
assessment, monitoring, logistics and administrative support missions. In April and
May, 1,722 regular programmatic movements took place with programme or blanket

10/20

21-07681

S/2021/583

approvals. That represented a decrease of 29 per cent compared with February and
March, when 2,424 such missions took place (see table 3). 1
Table 3
Total number of missions conducted with programme or blanket approvals a from within the
Syrian Arab Republic by United Nations agencies and third parties/facilitators, by type:
April and May 2021
Type of mission

Blanket approval

Programme approval

Total number

Assessment missions

16

2

18

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

591

28

619

1 031

22

1 053

27

5

32

1 665

57

1 722

Monitoring missions
Security, logistics and administrative support missions
Total
a

Missions conducted with programme or blanket approvals do not require specific approval from the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs.
Note: The total number of missions conducted with programme or blanket approvals does not include the missions
conducted by WHO third-party monitors during May 2021.

Figure II
Total number of missions conducted with programme or blanket approvals from within the Syrian Arab
Republic by United Nations agencies and third parties/facilitators, by governorate: April and May 2021
450
400
350
300
250
200

397

150

277
213

100

204

188
118

50

96

81

0

44

31

27

24

11

11

Blanket Approval

__________________
1

21-07681

United Nations personnel and third-party contractors operating at humanitarian hubs outside of
Damascus obtain “blanket approvals” to carry out movements as part of their regular programming.
These enable regular access and reduce bureaucratic requirements.
11/20

S/2021/583

39. For missions requiring specific approval by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the
United Nations submitted 185 new requests, of which 93 (50 per cent) were approved
(see table 4). This represents a decrease by 20 percentage points from the previous
reporting period. It is also lower than the average over the previous 12 months, during
which an average of 60 per cent of requests were approved.
Table 4
Missions from within the Syrian Arab Republic requiring specific approval by the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs: April and May 2021
Type of request

Number requested

Number approved

Percentage approved

Assessment missions

24

7

29

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

31

14

45

Monitoring missions

74

42

57

Security, logistics and administrative support missions

36

10

28

Explosive ordnance assessment missions

20

20

100

185

93

50

Total

Note: Missions by United Nations personnel departing from Damascus or travelling cross -line generally require
specific approval from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Access in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic
40. In the north-east, the United Nations maintained regular and sustained
humanitarian access in most parts of Hasakah Governorate and some parts of Raqqah
Governorate. Other areas, including Manbij and Ayn al-Arab, remained difficult for
the United Nations and its partners to reach from Damascus, owing to the lack of
agreement between parties in control. The last United Nations cross-line convoy to
Manbij was deployed in March 2019. During the reporting period, 591 missions were
conducted in Hasakah, Raqqah and Dayr al-Zawr, of which 568 were conducted by
third-party monitors and facilitators, 18 by United Nations personnel with blanket
approvals to deploy, and 5 by United Nations personnel that required specific
approval by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
41. Efforts continued towards the delivery of sufficient and sustained medical
assistance to areas in the north-east outside of government control. In April and May,
WHO delivered seven cross-line shipments, three airlifts and four road convoys,
carrying 139,140 kg of aid representing 348,167 treatments and supplies for 10,500
trauma cases. Those shipments included COVID-19 vaccines, which were airlifted to
Qamishli city in Hasakah Governorate on 3 May 2021. Around 84 per cent of the
shipments were designated for health facilities. WHO reported no major operational or
logistical challenges in those deliveries. While the United Nations has continued to
scale up deliveries to the north-east across lines of control, they meet only a modest
proportion of the total needs. Humanitarian organizations in the north-east continued to
report limited functionality and capacity on the part of health-care facilities, a lack of
adequately trained medical staff and imminent stockouts of medical supplies, including
critical medicines, such as insulin and cardiovascular and antibacterial medicines.
Overall, the situation has worsened since the expiration of the Security Council
authorization for the use of the Ya‘rubiyah border crossing by the United Nations.

12/20

21-07681

S/2021/583

Access in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic
42. United Nations agencies and humanitarian partners continued to address the
logistical and operational challenges resulting from the reduction to one authorized
border crossing following the adoption of Security Council resolution 2533 (2020).
All United Nations humanitarian assistance into the north-west of the Syrian Arab
Republic continues to be routed through the Bab al-Hawa crossing, and 8,343 trucks
carrying humanitarian supplies have used that crossing point since Council resolution
2533 (2020) came into effect.
43. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations as mandated under Security Council resolutions 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020) and
2533 (2020). The Monitoring Mechanism monitored and confirmed the humanitarian
nature of 20 consignments consisting of 2,007 trucks that crossed into the country
from Turkey, all through the Bab al-Hawa crossing. That brought the total number of
trucks monitored since the beginning of operations to 48,356 (38,384 through Bab
al-Hawa, 5,268 through Bab al-Salam, 4,595 through Ramtha and 109 through
Ya‘rubiyah). There were no concerns or questions regarding the humanitarian nature
of those consignments. For every shipment that crossed the border, the United Nations
provided 48-hour advance notice to the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic,
including information on the humanitarian goods to be delivered, the number of
trucks, the United Nations owner and the destination (district). The Mechanism
continued to benefit from the excellent cooperation of the Government of Turkey.
44. Humanitarians continued to pursue an all-modalities approach to respond to
rising needs in the north-west. The United Nations continued engagement with the
parties concerned regarding the dispatch of a cross-line mission into the north-west
from inside the Syrian Arab Republic. A revised concept of operations was presented
to the relevant parties in March. Agreement had not been reached between all relevant
parties on the operational details of the proposed mission by the end of the reporting
period. Consultations continued in order to address their reservations, including on
the issue of how aid would be distributed following the arrival of the convoy.
Access in the south of the Syrian Arab Republic
45. The most recent United Nations humanitarian convoy to reach Rukban from
within the Syrian Arab Republic was undertaken in September 2019. Access by
commercial trucks, using informal routes, has been sporadic. Since the decision b y
the Government of Jordan in March 2020 to close the border as a preventive measure
to contain the spread of COVID-19, people from Rukban who require medical care
have been unable to gain access to the United Nations clinic on the Jordanian side of
the border. Critical health cases continued to be referred to Damascus, in coordination
with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, but those who left for treatment have not been
allowed to return to the Rukban area. UNFPA estimates that 2,500 women in Rukban
are of reproductive age and in need of critical life-saving protection and reproductive
health services. It is estimated that an average of 300 women in the area are pregnant
at any given time. Increased risks of early marriage and pregnancy, with related
complications, make access to medical services critically urgent.
46. During the reporting period, 244 missions were conducted in Suwayda’, Dar‘a
and Qunaytirah. Of those, 239 were conducted by third-party monitors and
facilitators, 3 were conducted by United Nations personnel with blanket approval and
2 were conducted by United Nations personnel requiring specific approval by the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

21-07681

13/20

S/2021/583

Visas and registrations
47. The United Nations continued to work with the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to allow for the timely provision of visas to staff (see table 5).
Table 5
Requests for United Nations visas: April and May 2021
Number
requested

Number
approved

Number rejected

Number pending

Visas requested during reporting period

72

18

3

50

Renewals requested during reporting period

145

97

0

46

Visas pending from before reporting period

66

25

0

38

Renewals pending from before reporting period

51

47

0

4

Type of request

Note: The United Nations withdrew one visa request and two visa renewal requests submitted during the reporting
period and three visa requests pending from before the reporting period. The number of pending visa requests
and visa renewal requests shown in rows 3 and 4 covers the period from Februar y 2020 to March 2021.

48. A total of 41 international NGOs are registered with the Government to operate
in the country.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
49. The United Nations and NGOs continued to implement programmes in areas
affected by frequent armed clashes, air strikes and regular exchanges of indirect
artillery fire and other types of attacks by or among parties to the conflict.
Humanitarian relief personnel also operate in areas highly contaminated with
unexploded ordnance, explosive remnants of war and landmines.
50. Since the beginning of the conflict, hundreds of humanitarian workers have
reportedly been killed, including 22 staff members of the United Nations and of the
entities of the United Nations system, 20 of whom were staff members of UNRWA;
66 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; and 8 staff
members and volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. Many staff members
of international and national NGOs have also been killed.
51. During the reporting period, at least two humanitarian workers were killed. On
17 April, two NGO volunteers were killed in an armed attack on their way back from
a humanitarian assistance project in Dayr al-Zawr.
52. A total of 16 staff members of agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system (all from UNRWA) were detained, presumed detained or missing at the end of
the reporting period.

III. Observations
53. Syrians in all parts of the country continue to struggle with the devastating
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the sharp deterioration in the economic
situation. In the context of these extremely challenging conditions, I am particularly
concerned about the continuous impact of hostilities and violence, including attacks
that are directed against civilians across the Syrian Arab Republic that have caused
civilian suffering and displacement. Such attacks directed against civilians, including
those in which improvised explosive devices are utilized in residential areas, in camps
for internally displaced persons and in busy markets, are prohibited under
international humanitarian law. I continue to call on all parties to the conflict to ensure
14/20

21-07681

S/2021/583

the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
54. The attacks on 21 March, including artillery fire that killed and injured civilians
and damaged the Atarib Surgical Hospital, as well as the attacks on 12 June on Shifa’
Hospital in Afrin city, including artillery shelling and missiles that killed and inju red
civilians, including health-care workers, are of deep concern. I reiterate that attacks
that hit civilian objects, such as hospitals, must be investigated. Impunity must end,
and there must be accountability for crimes perpetrated in the Syrian Arab Re public.
It is incumbent on all parties to the conflict, as well as on the international community,
to ensure that those who perpetrate serious violations of international humanitarian
law are held accountable.
55. I welcome the first delivery of 256,800 doses of COVID-19 vaccine received
through the COVAX Facility. However, that is only sufficient to cover approximately
0.5 per cent of the Syrian population. It is critical to continue and expand the timely
delivery of COVID-19 vaccines to the Syrian Arab Republic using all access
modalities.
56. When it comes to delivering life-saving aid to people in need across the country,
all channels should be made, and kept, available. Despite the massive United Nations
system response in the Syrian Arab Republic and across the region, more
humanitarian access is required to reach those most in need. Intensified cross-line and
cross-border deliveries are essential to reach everyone in need, everywhere, and I
reiterate my call to the Security Council to achieve consensus on this crucial matter.
The situation continues to deteriorate in the meantime. In the north-west of the
country, the number of people in need increased by over 20 per cent in 2021. A failure
to extend the United Nations cross-border authorization would disrupt life-saving aid
to millions of people in desperate need, increasing civilian suffering in the north-west
to levels not seen in 10 years of conflict. It would also disrupt the United Nations
COVID-19 vaccine distribution plans for the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic,
and the level of support across all sectors would be immediately affected as the critical
aid provided by the United Nations cannot be replaced. A large-scale United Nationssupported cross-border response for an additional 12 months remains essential to save
lives. With more crossings, and more funds, the United Nations could do more to help
the rising number of people in need. This remains the case for both the north -west
and the north-east.
57. The United Nations will spare no effort to improve access to all civilians in need
across the north-west using all possible means, including through cross-line
operations from within the Syrian Arab Republic. Consultations will continue with
all parties to undertake such operations as soon as possible. Under current conditions,
cross-line convoys could provide a vital complement to the essential lifeline provided
from across the border. However, even if deployed regularly, cross-line convoys could
not replicate the size and scope of the cross-border operations.
58. In the north-east, humanitarian needs remain high. The situation has worsened
since last year, following the removal of Ya‘rubiyah as a Security Council -authorized
United Nations crossing. While the United Nations has continued t o scale up
deliveries to the north-east across lines of control, those deliveries meet only a modest
proportion of the total needs. Many facilities remain short of staff, supplies and
equipment. Overall, aid of all types reaches the north-east of the Syrian Arab
Republic, but it remains insufficient. This includes Hawl camp, where almost 40,000
children remain in unsafe and deteriorating conditions. I urge all countries with
nationals at Hawl camp to rapidly and safely allow for their voluntary repatriation ,
which is particularly urgent for children and their families, in line with international
law and standards.
21-07681

15/20

S/2021/583

59. In March 2020, I called for the waiving of sanctions that may impede access to
essential health supplies, COVID-19-related medical support, or food, in the Syrian
Arab Republic. It is encouraging that a technical dialogue between relevant Member
States and humanitarian actors about sanctions and humanitarian operations in the
Syrian Arab Republic is under way. I hope that the relevant parties ca n find ways to
address the challenges that several humanitarian actors in the country face in ensuring
adequate and reliable access to financial services.
60. The Special Envoy continues his efforts towards the unilateral release of persons
arbitrarily deprived of their liberty at a scale that is commensurate with the scope of
this issue, in particular with regard to women, children, the elderly and the sick, who
are especially vulnerable during the COVID-19 pandemic. The majority of those
persons are being held by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. I call upon
the Government and other parties to account for the fate and whereabouts of those
whom they are detaining and to allow humanitarian and human rights agencies access
to all places of detention. All persons in detention should be promptly informed of
any charges against them. Persons facing prosecution should be afforded all minimum
fair trial guarantees. They should be promptly brought before a judge and immediately
released if their deprivation of liberty is arbitrary. Detaining authorities should carry
out prompt, effective, thorough and transparent investigations of deaths in custody
and, if it is found that such deaths resulted from criminal acts, the perpetrators should
be brought to justice. Families of persons who have died in custody should be
informed and receive full and adequate reparations within a reasonable period in cases
of wrongful death. Respect for these principles would also build confidence, both
within society and between the parties and international stakeholders. A failure to
address arbitrary deprivation of liberty would leave credible justice, true
reconciliation and sustainable peace elusive.
61. The deteriorating economic situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, in addit ion to
the socioeconomic impact of the pandemic, has further deepened the suffering of all
Syrians. Several peaceful protests have been organized, both in areas within and
outside the control of the Government. In Hasakah, peaceful protesters were faced
with unnecessary and disproportionate use of force, and some were arrested merely
for taking part in the protests.
62. I remind all relevant parties that only in exceptional cases may an assembly be
dispersed. According to international human rights standards, the use of lethal force
by law enforcement officials is an extreme measure, which should be resorted to only
when it is strictly unavoidable in order to protect life or prevent serious injury from
an imminent threat. In addition, arrest or detention for the legitimate exercise of the
right to freedom of expression or peaceful assembly is considered arbitrary.
63. Continued impunity for serious violations and abuses of human rights and
international humanitarian law remains of grave concern. Perpetrators of such
violations and abuses must be held accountable. I remind all States, in particular those
with direct influence over parties to the conflict, that they are bound to take proactive
steps to ensure respect for international humanitarian law, including as it relates to
the protection of civilians. I call upon all parties to the conflict, in particular the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as all States, civil society and the
United Nations system, to cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the
Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, in particular by providing relevant
information and documentation. Accountability for serious violations and abuses of
human rights and international humanitarian law is both a legal requirement and
central to achieving sustainable peace in the Syrian Arab Republic. I reiterate my call
for the situation in the country to be referred to the International Criminal Court.
16/20

21-07681

S/2021/583

64. In view of the ongoing serious concerns repeatedly raised with regard to the
protection of civilians and other human rights concerns in the Syrian Arab Republic,
I continue to strongly urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, in line with
Human Rights Council resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22, to cooperate with the special
procedures of the Human Rights Council and with OHCHR, including through the
establishment of a field presence with the mandate to protect and promote human
rights.
65. Ongoing military activity across the country remains an enduring and
unacceptable reality. I continue to urge all stakeholders to achieve a nationwide
ceasefire, in line with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). The absence of a
nationwide ceasefire is an impediment to a sustainable and credible Syrian -led and
Syrian-owned political process in line with resolution 2254 (2015). I continue to
support my Special Envoy’s efforts to remind international and regional stakeholders
of the importance of constructive international diplomacy on the Syrian Arab
Republic. The Syrian parties and all of the key players with the influence and
authority to promote progress towards peace in the Syrian Arab Republic should agree
on mutual and reciprocal steps to be taken. The plight of civilians obliges all
concerned to take concrete steps towards a sustainable peace for the Syrian people,
who have endured unimaginable suffering for far too long.

21-07681

17/20

S/2021/583

Annex
Reported incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights: April and
May 2021 *
Idlib Governorate
• On 7 April, a humanitarian worker was reportedly arrested near the village of
Turmanin in northern rural Idlib. The humanitarian worker continues to be
detained.
• On 8 April, seven civilians, including two women, one boy and two girls, were
killed and two boys and one girl were injured when a reported ground-based
strike hit a car in the town of Najiyah in western rural Idlib.
• On 25 April, a civilian was injured as a result of a reported ground-based strike
in the village of Kafr Yadin in western rural Idlib.
• On 3 May, three civilians, including two women, were killed and six civilians,
including one woman, two boys and two girls, were injured in a reported
explosion of a weapons depot near the Furussiyah camp for internally displaced
persons in Fu‘ah village in Idlib. The explosion damaged at least 50 tents in the
camp.
• On 11 May, a civilian was killed and another was injured in reported crossfire
in Dana in northern rural Idlib.
• On 12 May, five civilians, including one girl, were injured as a result of a
reported air strike near Kinaddah village in western rural Idlib.
Aleppo Governorate
• On 12 April, two boys were killed by a reported landmine near the village of
Judi Mazin in Afrin district in north-western rural Aleppo.
• On 13 April, a civilian was killed in reported crossfire in the village of Maydanki
in Afrin district in north-western rural Aleppo.
• On 24 April, one girl was injured when a reported hand grenade detonated in
Afrin city in north-western rural Aleppo.
• On 25 April, one boy was killed as a result of reported sniper fire outside Bab
city in eastern rural Aleppo.
• On 27 April, one boy was killed and 14 civilians, including one woman and
three boys, were injured in two reported improvised explosive device attacks in
the city of Jarabulus in eastern rural Aleppo.
• On 5 May, five children, including four girls, from the same family were injured
as a result of a reported vehicle-borne improvised explosive device that
detonated in Afrin city in north-western rural Aleppo.

* The list of incidents exemplifies human rights issues of concern raised in the report. Owing to
the changing patterns of conflict and the loss of networks of credible and/or reliable sources in
many conflict-affected areas, however, verifying incidents is increasingly difficult. The list,
which contains only those incidents that were reported to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and that have been verified according to its methodology,
should not be considered comprehensive.
18/20

21-07681

S/2021/583

• On 6 May, three civilians, including one boy, were injured when a reported
magnetic improvised explosive device attached to an armed group vehicle
detonated inside the Bab al-Salam Qadim camp for internally displaced persons,
near the city of I‘zaz in northern rural Aleppo.
• On 8 May, a woman and a boy were killed and five other civilians, including
two women and one boy, were injured when a reported ground -based strike hit
Atarib city in western rural Aleppo.
• On 10 May, three civilians were injured after a reported roadside improvised
explosive device detonated near their vehicle on the road between the village of
Tall al-Aghbar and the camp for internally displaced persons in Zaghra al -Jadid
in eastern rural Aleppo.
• On 10 May, two civilians were injured by a reported magnetic improvised
explosive device attached to a motorbike that detonated between the Buthuth
road and I‘zaz in northern rural Aleppo.
Hasakah Governorate
• On 22 April, a man was killed and his son was injured by a reported
indiscriminate exchange of small arms fire between armed forces in the
neighbourhood of Hellok in the city of Qamishli. On the same day, a boy was
killed in reported crossfire in the Zuhur neighbourhood of the city of Qamishli
in north-eastern Hasakah.
• On 23 April, a boy was killed in reported crossfire in Qamishli city in northeastern Hasakah.
• On 8 May, an Iraqi refugee was reportedly found shot dead at Hawl camp in
eastern rural Hasakah.
• On 12 May, an Iraqi refugee was reportedly shot dead at Hawl camp in eastern
rural Hasakah.
• On 18 May, seven civilians, including one girl, were reportedly killed while
participating in a peaceful demonstration in the city of Shaddadah in southern
rural Hasakah. On the same day, two more civilians were reportedly killed while
participating in peaceful demonstrations in Hasakah.
Hama Governorate
• On 19 April, a man was killed and another was injured as a result of a reported
drone strike that hit the village of Khirbat al-Naqus in Hama.
• On 22 April, a girl was killed and two boys were injured when a landmine
reportedly detonated near the village of Abu Hubaylat in eastern rural Hama.
Homs Governorate
• On 18 May, a civilian was killed in reported small arms fire at a tent u sed for
presidential election campaigning in the village of Farhaniyah in the Talbisah
area in northern rural Homs.
Rif Dimashq Governorate
• On 2 May, the families of 27 civilians, including two boys, from the town of
Kanakir in the western Ghutah area in Rif Dimashq Governorate, lost contact
with them after they were arrested. The families have no information about their
fate or whereabouts.

21-07681

19/20

S/2021/583

Dar‘a Governorate
• On 2 April, a civilian and his son were killed and three boys from his famil y
were injured as a result of a suspected magnetic improvised explosive device
that detonated in the city of Jasim in northern rural Dar‘a.
• On 22 April, a civilian was killed in a reported drive-by shooting in the village
of Tall Shihab in western rural Dar‘a.
• On 8 May, a civilian and his three daughters were killed after a reported
landmine detonated near the town of Malihat al-Atash in eastern rural Dar‘a.
• On 9 May, a civilian was killed in a reported drive-by shooting in the town of
Sahwat al-Qamh in eastern rural Dar‘a.
• On 22 May, a civilian was killed and three other civilians, including two women
and one boy from his family, were injured as a result of a reported roadside
improvised explosive device that detonated in the town of Jallayn in western
rural Dar‘a.
• On 23 May, one boy and one girl were injured as a result of a reported roadside
improvised explosive device that detonated on the road between the cities of
Nawa and Shaykh Miskin in western rural Dar‘a.
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 23 April, a civilian was killed as a result of a reported indiscriminate
shooting in the city of Dhiban in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 3 May, two boys were killed and another boy was injured when reported
unexploded ordnance detonated in the village of Hatla in eastern rural Dayr
al-Zawr.
• On 19 May, a girl and a woman were injured in reported crossfire in the village
of Hasin in northern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 22 May, three civilians were reportedly killed by unidentified pe rpetrators
in a drive-by shooting in the city of Busayrah in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
Qunaytirah Governorate
• On 23 April, a suspected magnetic improvised explosive device attached to a
vehicle detonated in the town of Suwaysah in southern rural Qunaytirah, killing
two children and injuring a boy.
Raqqah Governorate
• On 16 April, two men were killed and another four were reportedly injured in
Judaydat Kahit village in eastern rural Raqqah.

20/20

21-07681
