A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/209
27 January 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 99 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/54/587/Add.2)]
54/209. Follow-up to the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements
(Habitat II)
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 52/192 of 18 December 1997 on the follow-up to the United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and the future role of the Commission on Human Settlements
and 53/180 of 15 December 1998 on the special session of the General Assembly for an overall review and
appraisal of the implementation of the Habitat Agenda,1
Noting that the work programme for the biennium 2000-2001 approved by the Commission on Human
Settlements at its seventeenth session,2 in line with resolution 52/192, is organized according to the structure
of the Habitat Agenda,
Noting also that the two subprogrammes of the work programme for the biennium 2000-2001
correspond to the goals of the Habitat Agenda of adequate shelter for all and sustainable human settlements
development in an urbanizing world,

1

Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3-14 June 1996
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.IV.6), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.

2

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/54/8), annex I,
sect. A.2, resolution 17/20.
00 25437

/...

A/RES/54/209
Page 2

Recognizing that the overall thrust of the new strategic vision for the United Nations Centre for Human
Settlements (Habitat) and its emphasis on two global campaigns, concerning secure tenure and urban
governance, are strategic points of entry for effective implementation of the Habitat Agenda,
Reaffirming the role of the Centre as focal point for the implementation of the Habitat Agenda and the
need for the Centre adequately to perform this role through the active mobilization and broadening of its
network of United Nations, governmental and non-governmental partners,
Stressing the need to provide strategic support to the efforts of local authorities and partners from civil
society in the global, regional and local implementation of the Habitat Agenda,
1. Calls upon all relevant United Nations organizations and specialized agencies to take initiatives
and continue with their specific actions towards the implementation of the Habitat Agenda;1
2. Also calls upon relevant United Nations organizations and specialized agencies that have not yet
done so to identify specific initiatives and actions to be undertaken in preparation for the special session of
the General Assembly for an overall review and appraisal of the implementation of the Habitat Agenda;
3. Invites the United Nations coordinator system to strengthen its support to the implementation of
the Habitat Agenda through, inter alia, assistance in the implementation of national local plans of action
based on the full involvement of local authorities and partners from civil society;
4. Calls upon all Member States to initiate preparations for reporting on in-country implementation
of the Habitat Agenda, in line with the recommendations by the Commission on Human Settlements as
described in its resolution 17/1 of 14 May 1999,3 with a view to contributing fully to the preparatory process
for the special session of the General Assembly to be held in the year 2001 for an overall review and
appraisal of the implementation of the Habitat Agenda, including the strengthening and activation, wherever
necessary, of national coordination mechanisms, inclusive of local authorities and civil society partners,
along the models pioneered at the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II);
5. Invites all Member States in a position to do so to provide financial resources for the preparatory
process for the special session, in particular to enable least developed countries and their national civilsociety partners to prepare adequately for, and be fully involved in, the preparatory process and the special
session itself.
87th plenary meeting
22 December 1999

3

Ibid., sect. A.1.
