S/PV.8950 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8950th meeting

Wednesday, 19 January 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Juul. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Norway)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Macaj
Mrs. Espeschit Maia
Mr. Tian Bingxu
Ms. Feriaud
Ms. Oye
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Setia
Mr. Cahalane
Ms. Nthoki
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Mr. Frolov
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Mansfield
Mr. Turner

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by a
compilation of annexes (S/2022/39) containing the statements submitted by interested
non-members of the Council.

22-23450 (E)
*2223450*

S/PV.8950 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Arrmanatha Nasir, Vice-Chair of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People.
Mr. Nasir: At the outset, and on behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, I would like to congratulate
Norway on its able leadership of the Security Council
this month. We are grateful this meeting is taking place
at the ministerial level.
We would once more like to call the attention of
the Council to the critical situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and
highlight the need for a swift and just resolution of
the question of Palestine, on the basis of international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions. On
7 December Ms. Michelle Bachelet, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, briefed
our Committee on the human rights situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory, describing it as
disastrous, with severe violations, some of them
killings and arbitrary detentions — including of
children — as well as restrictions on fundamental
freedoms and discrimination affecting millions of
Palestinians. On 10 November, human rights experts
expressed alarm at the rising incidence of violence
directed by Israeli settlers at Palestinians in the occupied
Palestinian territory, alongside growing tensions related
to Israel’s ongoing settlement expansion in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, threatening the
contiguity and viability of the Palestinian State. The
Committee remains concerned about the resulting
increase in injuries and fatalities, with six Palestinians
reportedly killed and 1,138 others injured between
19 October 2021 and 14 January 2022. There are also
deeply disturbing reports of new rules of engagement
for Israeli security forces regarding the use of live
ammunition in the West Bank, which could lead to an
even larger number of injuries and fatalities among
Palestinian civilians.
Palestinian families are facing expulsion from homes
they have lived in for decades and across generations
in the Sheikh Jarrah and Silwan neighbourhoods of
occupied East Jerusalem. According to the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, since
October 2021 232 Palestinian-owned homes and
structures have been demolished across the occupied
2/14

19/01/2022

West Bank, including East Jerusalem, displacing 283
people and affecting 5,329 women, children and men.
The Committee calls on Israel to respect its obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and to cease forthwith the demolition
and seizure of Palestinian property throughout the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
The economic situation in the State of Palestine
also continues to be seriously worrying. In November
2021 Ms. Lynne Hastings, the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator for
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, highlighted the
urgent need to address the continuing economic and
fiscal crisis facing the Palestinian Authority and the
Palestinian people. For that reason, the Committee
supports the $510 million humanitarian response plan
launched by the United Nations Resident Coordinator
for the Occupied Palestinian Territory in support of
1.6 million of the most vulnerable people in Gaza and
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, during 2022.
At the November 2021 Advisory Commission
meeting, Mr. Philippe Lazzarini, Commissioner
General of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, also highlighted
the drop in the resources available since 2013, despite
the growing humanitarian needs of Palestinian refugees.
The welcome return of the United States as a partner
and donor to the Agency has been offset, however, by
reduced funding from other large donors and a lack of
new sources of funding. The Committee reiterates its
call to the international community to ensure that the
Agency has sufficient and reliable funding so that it
can deliver its crucial services to more than 5.8 million
Palestinian refugees and maintain its vital contribution
to regional stability.
The Palestinians living in Gaza need humanitarian
relief and economic assistance urgently if they are to
have dignified lives and a sustainable future. Since the
deadly escalation in the Gaza Strip last May, the needs
remain acute. Hundreds of families remain displaced,
and thousands of homes and structures require
reconstruction and repair. Let me reiterate, however,
that Gaza requires not only economic support for
reconstruction but also a complete lifting of the illegal
Israeli blockade, in line with resolution 1860 (2009), as
well as the legitimate Palestinian Government’s return
to Gaza. Gaza remains an integral part of the Palestinian
territory that has been occupied since 1967 and must be
22-23450

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8950 (Resumption 1)

part of an independent, sovereign Palestinian State. As
much as we agree on the need to focus on improving
Palestinians’ livelihoods, the Committee ultimately
believes that it cannot really happen without a political
horizon that can ensure justice for the Palestinian people
and their exercise of their rights, including the right
to self-determination, as well as bringing a definitive
end to the occupation and establishing an independent
Palestinian State.

Committee stands ready to assist in the process and
garner the support needed to advance it.

Palestinian civil-society organizations continue
to face restrictions on their freedom of expression,
assembly and association. The bureau of the Committee
has joined the Secretary-General, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
European Union and many international human rights
organizations in publicly expressing deep concern
about Israel’s decision on 22 October to designate
six human rights and humanitarian Palestinian civilsociety organizations as terrorist entities. Some of those
organizations are long-standing, reliable partners of the
Committee, and of the United Nations, in advocating
for the protection and promotion of the human rights
of the Palestinian people. At an event organized by
the Committee on 7 December, representatives from
Palestinian and Israeli civil society called on Member
States to hold Israel accountable for its actions and to
continue providing a platform for the voices that the
Government of Israel is trying to suppress. The Israeli
authorities have yet to make public any substantive
evidence against those Palestinian organizations.
We reiterate that civil-society organizations must be
allowed to work unhindered in the implementation of
their mandates.

As we listened to the briefings, we reflected on the
fact that 75 years have passed since the United Nations
accepted the responsibility of finding a solution to the
Palestine issue. After three quarters of a century, there
is still no solution. For all intents and purposes, the only
thing that has changed is our attitude to the Palestinian
question. We no longer debate a political solution
to this enduring conflict. We speak of peace only in
theory. The Security Council has lost its ambition. As
we saw last spring, the conflict comes to the fore only
when there is an escalation. Messages urging restraint
have replaced the calls for lasting peace. That is not
good enough. The normalization of the occupation is
simply unacceptable.

The Committee calls for the implementation of
the provisions in resolution 2334 (2016), as well as
of all the relevant United Nations resolutions and the
internationally agreed parameters, in order to justly
and sustainably resolve the question of Palestine. We
are grateful to Norway for convening this open debate,
and in that connection we hope that a ministerial
meeting of the Middle East Quartet will soon relaunch
the peace process. The current course of action must
be diverted and redressed without delay, with the aim
of ending the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and
implementing a just solution based on international law
and the relevant United Nations resolutions that enables
the two States of Israel and Palestine to live side by side
in peace and security along the pre-1967 borders, with
Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian State. The

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Keçeli (Turkey): We thank the President for
convening this open debate and welcome the briefings
by Special Coordinator Wennesland and the civilsociety representatives.

We condemn all unilateral steps, including arbitrary
arrests, illegal settlements, forced evictions, the
demolition of houses and attempts to change the status
quo of Jerusalem and Haram Al-Sharif. Such actions
are detrimental to the prospects for a two-State solution.
We note the Israeli Government’s decision to halt the
plans for illegal settlements in Atarot and postpone the
construction of an illegal settlement in the West Bank’s
Area E-1 to an unknown date. These are indeed steps
in the right direction. Sadly, Israel’s decision to list
six Palestinian civil-society organizations as terrorist
entities is a prime example of taking one step forward
and three steps back. It constitutes yet another violation
of the fundamental rights of the Palestinian people, and
we expect it to be revoked immediately.
We firmly believe that the intra-Palestinian
reconciliation process is integral to seeding peace in the
region. Turkey will continue to support unity among the
Palestinian parties and urges other Member States to
do the same. Furthermore, the international community
should support the Palestinian economy. To that end,
we thank Norway for hosting the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee meeting last November. However, that alone
is not enough. Millions of Palestinian refugees rely on
the life-saving assistance of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near

22-234503/14

S/PV.8950 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

East (UNRWA). It is essential to ensure that the Agency
can continue to provide its services in a sustainable,
uninterrupted manner. Turkey will continue to support
UNRWA’s vital work both financially and politically.
The lives of children on both sides of the border are
equally important and the side they are born on should
not matter. They should have an equal opportunity to
fulfil their potential. No child’s future should be stolen
because of an accident of birth. The Palestine-Israel
conflict is not a frozen conflict, nor should it be treated
as one. Turkey will continue to support a two-State
solution leading to the establishment of an independent,
sovereign and contiguous State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
Returning to the path of peace negotiations is a
priority. To that end, the work of the Quartet must be
revitalized, and we must work for a two-State solution.
We hope that today’s open debate rouses those who
have grown tired of the Palestinian question, because
we can assure them that the people of Palestine are far
more tired than any of us and deserve better than what
we have done for them so far.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Alateek (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on Norway’s leadership of the Security
Council this month and to wish your delegation every
success. I also wish the incoming members of the
Council all the best during their terms.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia stresses its
commitment to the constants that make up the
question of Palestine, that is, ending the occupation,
establishing an independent Palestinian State with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital and guaranteeing the
right of return for Palestinian refugees. We also stress
that achieving a comprehensive and lasting peace in
the Middle East is a strategic option for ending one
of the longest and most complex historical conflicts
that the modern world has seen. It must be done on the
basis of a two-State solution and in accordance with
the international terms of reference and the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative, which guarantee the establishment of
a Palestinian State along the 4 June 1967 borders, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, along with ensuring
the return of refugees and an end to Israel’s occupation
of all Arab territories, including the Arab Syrian Golan
and Lebanese territories.
4/14

19/01/2022

The occupation authorities, which are still using
fraud and desecration as part of their approach,
continue to violate international resolutions and
norms in occupied Palestine, committing the most
heinous crimes of injustice and aggression against
the Palestinian people. The stark violation of the
Al-Ibrahimi Mosque in Hebron by the President of the
Israeli entity is only one example. The time has come for
the international community and the Security Council
to assume their responsibility for championing the
Palestinian people and settling the Palestinian question
by finally ensuring the rights and aspirations of the
Palestinian people to establish their own independent
State as guaranteed them by international resolutions,
and firmly confronting Israel’s ongoing practices
and violations of international law and the relevant
Council resolutions.
Day after day, the Iran-supported terrorist Houthi
militia demonstrates its disregard for the aspirations of
our brother people of Yemen and their country’s stability
and emphasizes its subversive role in threatening
international peace and security, as shown by its
continuing threats to international navigation and its
use of civilian facilities and Yemeni ports to undermine
regional security and attack civilians in Saudi Arabia
and our sister country the United Arab Emirates. In a
recent and cowardly assault, the Houthi militia attacked
Abu Dhabi International Airport and hijacked the
United Arab Emirates ship Rawabi. My country fully
supports the United Arab Emirates against any threats
to its security and stability. It is important to address the
danger caused by this terrorist group and its continued
threat to stability in the region and the wider world.
My country stresses its right to take every possible
measure, based on its obligations and international law
in order to respond to the activities and terrorist acts of
this Iran-supported terrorist militia.
Saudi Arabia stands by its efforts to resolve
the conflict in Yemen. We call on the international
community and the Security Council to take decisive
measures against the terrorist militia that is obstructing
every effort to reach a peaceful and comprehensive
political solution sponsored by the United Nations
in line with Security Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2216 (2015), the Initiative of the Gulf
Cooperation Council and the outcome of the national
dialogue. We stress that the lack of decisive steps to
combat this militia has emboldened them to inflict
harm on the Yemeni people and destabilize the security
22-23450

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and stability of the region and has a huge impact on
international peace and security.
Saudi Arabia supports our brother people of
Lebanon and urges Lebanon’s authorities to prioritize
their people’s welfare, meet their aspirations for
security, stability and well-being and end the terrorist
organization Hizbullah’s control over their State.
The President: I would again like to remind
speakers that we strongly encourage all participants to
wear a mask even when speaking. I now give the floor
to the representative of Jordan.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to once again congratulate you, Madam President,
on Norway’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, and to thank you for
holding this meeting. I welcome the five newly elected
members of the Security Council for 2022 to 2023.
We look forward to working with all parties within
and outside the Security Council to achieve a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.
We condemn the Houthi attack on our sister country
the United Arab Emirates, and we stand in full solidarity
with it in every step it takes to protect its security and
defend itself. I would also like to welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the State of Palestine.
The Security Council is meeting again today to
discuss the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, at a time when we urgently need
to take effective steps to find a political solution in
order to achieve a just and comprehensive peace, based
on a two-State solution, leading to the establishment of
an independent and sovereign Palestinian State along
the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. The alternative would be a continuation of the
occupation, entrenched by constant violations of the
rights of the Palestinian people and illegal steps that
undermine every opportunity for peace. The region
will not know peace until the occupation and the
current unsustainable status quo come to an end. We
must therefore intensify efforts to end the deadlock
in the peace process, support confidence-building
measures and prevent any escalation or violations
that undermine the prospects for peace, including
illegal and illegitimate Israeli settlement activities, the
confiscation of land, the demolition of houses and the
displacement of Palestinians from their homes.

S/PV. 8950 (Resumption 1)

Jordan condemns today’s forced displacement and
eviction of a Palestinian family from their home in the
Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood in the early-morning
hours. It is yet another clear violation of international
law and international humanitarian law. We stress that
according to international law, Israel, the occupying
Power in East Jerusalem, must protect the rights of
Palestinians in their homes. Israel cannot implement
its own laws in occupied Jerusalem. It must implement
the international law pertaining to occupation, which
is a very clear provision of the Hague Convention. It
is also important to provide all the necessary support
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and its mandate
until a just and comprehensive solution is reached that
addresses all final-status issues and preserves the rights
of Palestinians in accordance with the resolutions of
international legitimacy, foremost of which is General
Assembly resolution 194 (III), in order to guarantee
Palestinian refugees the right of return and the right
to compensation.
At a time when we must intensify our efforts to reach
the political solution, we neeed to achieve a just peace,
we must also work to find an economic solution to end
the suffering of the Palestinian people. In that regard,
we stress the need for the international community
to support the Palestinian National Authority so
that it can meet its obligations and responsibilities
towards the Palestinian people. It is also essential to
eliminate all the obstacles hindering the growth of
the Palestinian economy and open the door to trade
and investment opportunities. I want to stress that an
economic solution will create a political environment
that is not a substitute for a two-State solution but that
can enable its achievement. In that regard, I would
like to thank Norway for its efforts to support the
Palestinian economy through its chairmanship of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians.
The continuing settlement building and its
expansion are violations of international law and various
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016), and they undermine the prospects for peace
and a two-State solution. The international community
should firmly reject settlement activities and stress
that they are illegal, null and void. Settlements cannot
change the legal status of the Palestinian territories,
because those territories are occupied. Likewise, the
continuing violations of the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque/

22-234505/14

S/PV.8950 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

19/01/2022

Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the obstruction of the efforts
of the Jordanian Islamic Endowment Department in
Al-Quds — the only party authorized to manage all the
affairs of the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque — are a violation
of Israel’s legal obligations as the occupying Power.
Such provocation leads to escalations of the kind we
witnessed in May 2021 or that are perhaps even more
destructive. The international community must adopt a
firm position and take the steps necessary to stop such
violations and provocations in order to protect peace
and prevent any recurrence of the cycle of violence.
Jordan will continue to protect the Islamic and
Christian holy sites in Al-Quds Al-Sharif and preserve
its Arab, Islamic and Christian identity as well as their
legal and historical status. Under the direct guidance
of the custodian of those holy sites, His Majesty King
Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, we spare no effort in
that regard.

obstruction of Security Council action on the issue has
enabled Israel’s impunity and hindered the Council’s
ability to discharge its responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security as mandated by the
Charter of the United Nations.

In conclusion, the international community must
work together to restore hope in the peace process,
prevent any frustrations or exacerbation of the conflict,
meet the aspirations of the region and its peoples for
genuine peace and enable efforts to be focused on
development and building a future full of opportunities
and achievements. The Middle East Quartet has a
fundamental role to play in those efforts.

We reiterate our rejection of the so-called deal
of the century, which ignores the concept of a twoState solution historically supported by the United
Nations, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the
League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and other international actors. The
unilateral decision of the United States Government to
recognize Jerusalem as Israel’s capital and to establish
its diplomatic representation there, disregarding its
historical status, as well as its decision to recognize
Israel’s sovereignty over the Syrian Golan, constitutes
a serious violation of the Charter, international law
and the relevant Security Council resolutions. The
current United States Administration has not reversed
those decisions, pushing the possibility of a negotiated
solution further out of reach.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
Norway’s assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month.
We endorse the statement made by the Vice-Chair
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.
The Security Council has still not acted, in
accordance with resolution 2334 (2016), to end the
Israeli military aggression and occupation of the
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Over
74 years, Israel has consolidated its policies on the
annexation of the occupied Palestinian territories and
increased its illegal colonization activities, including
through the construction and expansion of settlements,
punitive demolitions, the forced displacement of
hundreds of civilians, the blockade of the Gaza Strip
and plans to annex the Palestinian territories in
the Jordan Valley and other parts of the West Bank
and East Jerusalem. The United States’ repeated
6/14

We reaffirm our full support for a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The Palestinian people must exercise their
right to self-determination and to an independent and
sovereign State based on the pre-1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, that guarantees the right
of return for refugees. We reaffirm our unwavering
solidarity with the people and the Government of
Palestine. We also express our support for the State
of Palestine’s entry to the United Nations as a full
member and President Abbas’s call for convening an
international peace conference.

We call for Israel’s full and unconditional
withdrawal from the Syrian Golan and all occupied
Arab territories. We demand an end to external
interference in Syria and full respect for its sovereignty
and territorial integrity, and we also support efforts to
find a peaceful and negotiated solution to the situation
imposed on that sister nation.
The United States’ aggressive, unilateral and
unjustified actions in the Middle East continue to
severely infringe on the legitimate interests of the
Arab nations and provoke dangerous escalations in
the region. We reiterate the call for an immediate and
unconditional end to the arbitrary and illegal unilateral
coercive measures imposed on sovereign nations. We
also reaffirm our support for the Joint Comprehensive
22-23450

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Plan of Action with Iran, and for the inalienable right of
States to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
In the face of continued violations of international
law, including the use and threat of use of force in
international relations, as well as acts of aggression
against sovereign States and interference in their internal
affairs, Cuba will continue to support multilateralism,
peace and full respect for the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to welcome the
presence in this open debate of my brother Mr. Riad
Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates
of Palestine.
My delegation would like to express its
astonishment that Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, insisted
on including no information in his briefing today
about Israel’s settlement activities and other illegal
practices in the occupied Syrian Golan while also
ignoring Israel’s repeated aggressions against Syria’s
sovereign territories, most recently the commercial
port of Latakia, which resulted in significant material
losses. My delegation had sent several letters to the
Secretary-General and to Mr. Wennesland directly
to brief them on developments in the situation in the
occupied Syrian Golan and to draw their attention to
the repeated serious Israeli attacks on the security and
stability of Syria and the region. However, today’s
briefing by the Special Coordinator was disappointing,
as it lacked objectivity and balance and did not address
these aspects of his mandate.
On 26 December 2021, in yet another dangerous
new escalation, the Head of the Israeli Government
took the provocative step of holding a cabinet meeting
in the occupied Syrian Golan at which he approved a
$317 million plan to double the number of settlers in
the occupied Syrian Golan and construct thousands of
housing units in two new settlements, to be named Asif
and Matar. That is a flagrant violation of international
law, the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and all
the relevant United Nations resolutions, especially
resolution 497 (1981), and represents yet another failed
attempt to perpetuate and prolong the occupation and
obliterate the Syrian identity of the occupied Golan.
The Syrian Arab Republic strongly condemns the grave

S/PV. 8950 (Resumption 1)

provocations and flagrant violations committed by the
Israeli occupation authorities in the Syrian Golan,
which include confiscations of land and property, the
imposition of demographic changes and the looting of
natural resources.
The Syrian Arab Republic reiterates its established
right to a full recovery of the Syrian Golan, occupied
since 4 June 1967, by every possible means under
international law. That is an eternal right that is not
governed by any statute of limitations. We stress that
all decisions and measures taken so far by Israel,
the occupying Power, with the aim of changing the
natural and demographic character of the Golan or
imposing its laws and administration on it under any
pretext, are null and void and have no legal effect
under international law or the relevant United Nations
resolutions, in particular resolution 497 (1981). That
resolution considers Israel’s decision to impose its laws,
jurisdiction and administration on the occupied Syrian
Golan as null, void and without legal effect. The Syrian
Arab Republic calls on Member States to refrain from
recognizing any illegal status resulting from Israel’s
illegitimate practices in the occupied Syrian Golan, and
to condemn and seek an end to them.
The continued Israeli attacks on Syria’s sovereignty,
which have recently been hysterically repeated,
represent a flagrant violation of the 1974 Disengagement
of Forces Agreement and the United Nations resolutions
pertaining to the occupied Syrian Golan. They are
clear evidence that Israel supports terrorists and fuels
the war in Syria and constitute another escalation that
threatens peace and security in the Middle East. The
Syrian Arab Republic emphasizes that Israel’s reckless
and provocative behaviour and aggressive practices
would never have reached this level had it not been
for the protection and cover-up for its violations that
successive United States Administrations provided to
Israel, the occupying Power. We call on the Security
Council to end its silence, uphold its responsibilities
under the Charter of the United Nations effectively
and immediately and implement its mandate to
maintain international peace and security, which would
deter the Israeli occupation force from continuing
its violations, ensuring accountability for its rogue
behaviour and impunity. It would also compel Israel to
end its occupation of the Syrian Golan and to withdraw
completely from it to the line of 4 June 1967, pursuant
to various Security Council and General Assembly

22-234507/14

S/PV.8950 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

19/01/2022

resolutions as well as the relevant international terms
of reference.

continues to be concerning and warrants the highest
level of attention.

The Syrian Arab Republic strongly condemns
Israel’s settlement policies in the occupied Palestinian
territories, especially in the West Bank and Jerusalem,
the most recent of which happened today in the
Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood. We remain steadfastly
committed to supporting the inalienable rights of our
brother people of Palestine. We stand with them in their
legitimate struggle to defend their land and holy sites
and to recover their occupied territories and all their
legitimate rights, especially the right to establish their
own independent State on their territory, with Jerusalem
as its capital, while being granted full membership in
the United Nations, as well as the right of Palestinian
refugees to return to their homeland, in line with
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, notably resolution 194 (III) of 1948.

We are saddened by the fact that the Palestine
issue remains the longest-standing issue on the
Security Council’s agenda and that despite many
efforts and resolutions, the people of Palestine have
yet to realize their inalienable right to independence
and self-determination. We deplore the continued
violations by Israel, the occupying Power, including
demolitions, evictions, violence and policies that have
deprived Palestinians of their legitimate rights. We
have urged the Council on many occasions to uphold
its responsibility and act decisively to address the core
of the problem, which is the Israeli occupation that has
gone on for more than half a century. I am here today to
reiterate that call and to highlight three points.

Before concluding, I would like to refer to the
statement made earlier today by the observer of the
European Union (EU). The statement included a
repetition of the same hostile positions on the situation
in Syria, even though this has nothing to do with the
topic of today’s meeting. The statement was a clear
example of political blindness, with many biased points.
Despite the fact that the statement claimed to respect
our sovereignty, the EU representative found no place
in it to condemn Israel’s continued aggression against
Syria’s sovereignty. There was no call for an end to
Israeli settlement activities in the Golan, which run
counter to the resolutions of international legitimacy,
despite the speaker’s call for respecting them. Can there
be a more glaring example of political hypocrisy and
double standards?
Perhaps the most hypocritical event today occurred
earlier, when the representative of Israel called for
condemning a defenceless people who defy occupation
with stones. He urged the world to pay no attention to
his authorities’ repeated, decades-long attacks with
missiles, heavy weapons and live ammunition on the
Palestinians, Syrians and Lebanese.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
conveying my appreciation to Norway for holding this
open debate of the Security Council at the ministerial
level. The fact is that the reality on the ground
8/14

First, we have repeatedly heard about the ongoing
aggression, provocations and violations perpetrated by
Israel. The Security Council must put a stop to them.
Security Council resolution 2334 (2016) clearly states
that settlement activities constitute a flagrant violation
of international law. They also undermine the prospects
for a just peace. As we continue to witness this, the
Security Council must resolve to bring it to an end,
including by ensuring Israel’s accountability for its
actions. It is the only way to dispel the perceptions
of impunity.
Secondly, the Security Council must ensure that
Palestinian civilian populations are protected. It must
take concrete steps to ensure the safety of the Palestinian
people and to safeguard the status quo of the holy sites.
It is also imperative to continue to ensure unimpeded
humanitarian assistance and reconstruction efforts in
Gaza. Indonesia calls for the complete lifting of the
Israeli blockade of Gaza, which has resulted in a grave
humanitarian situation and the continued suffering of
Palestinians. We also urge the international community
to support the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East with sustainable
and predictable funding.
Lastly and most importantly, the Council must
support and actively revive the stalled peace process
under the auspices of the Middle East Quartet in
order to achieve a just, comprehensive and durable
resolution, based on a two-State solution and in line
with internationally agreed parameters. It is high time
for the Security Council to take action to restore and
ensure a political horizon for this long-standing crisis.
22-23450

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I hope that this meeting, held at a high level, will result
in such concrete action.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Indonesia’s
unwavering commitment and support for the people
and the State of Palestine. We stand ready to support
the Palestinian people and all efforts to achieve a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to this issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Abd Aziz (Malaysia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this open debate.
The situation on the ground in Palestine remains
deeply concerning. In 2021, 345 Palestinians were
killed, including 86 children. Israel’s illegal settlements,
home demolitions, evictions and forced transfers have
also continued unabated. Last year 902 homes were
destroyed and 1,203 Palestinians were displaced, the
highest figures since 2016. So far in 2022 Israel has
demolished 35 structures, displacing 53 Palestinians
in violation of international legal obligations. Those
numbers are appalling. Malaysia is also extremely
concerned about the increase in violent attacks by
Israeli settlers. As the occupying Power, Israel has
an obligation under international law to protect
Palestinians and their property from violent attacks.
Continued inaction on the part of the international
community has emboldened the occupying Power
and the settlers. Malaysia calls on the international
community, particularly the Security Council itself, to
act by ensuring accountability for the perpetrators.
Israel’s systematic and continued oppression
of Palestinians, and its discriminatory policies, are
tantamount to crimes of apartheid. Its continued attacks
on civil-society organizations reporting on human
rights violations in the occupied Palestinian territory
are an affront to international law, international human
rights law and peace. The international community must
protect and continue to support human rights defenders
in carrying out their important work of protecting the
rights of the Palestinian people living under military
occupation. Israel must be made to fully comply with
all its obligations as prescribed by the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
Malaysia maintains its firm position that only a
negotiated political solution based on internationally
agreed parameters, international law and the relevant

S/PV. 8950 (Resumption 1)

United Nations resolutions can lead to durable peace.
In that context, Malaysia urges the Security Council,
especially the Middle East Quartet, to relaunch and
create the necessary conditions for peace talks between
the relevant parties. Malaysia’s resolute support and full
solidarity with the Palestinian people in their realization
of their inalienable rights to self-determination and
freedom will never waver.
Let me conclude by reiterating Malaysia’s urgent
call to the Council to discharge its primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security and
make full use of the tools at its disposal to address this
long-standing conflict and end the occupation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the delegation of Norway for convening today’s
open debate.
Argentina continues to believe that the only
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is through
negotiations between the two sides aimed at reaching
agreement on the final-status issues identified in the
Oslo Accords — Jerusalem, refugees, settlements,
borders and security measures. My delegation supports
a peaceful, definitive and comprehensive settlement
of the Palestinian question on the basis of a twoState solution within the 1967 borders, the agreement
of the parties in the negotiation process and the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council.
We affirm our support to the Palestinian
people’s inalienable right to self-determination and
an independent and viable State recognized by all
nations, as well as the right of the State of Israel to live
in peace alongside its neighbours, within secure and
internationally recognized borders. We also reiterate
our concern about the persistent and continuing growth
of illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories and urge Israel to cease expanding them.
The Security Council has recognized the gravity of
the situation in its resolution 2334 (2016), which we
fully endorse.
Argentina also condemns the indiscriminate firing
of rockets from Gaza against civilians in Israel, as well
as all violent actions by Hamas and other armed groups.
Palestinian leaders must address Israel’s security
concerns in good faith. In that context, we recognize

22-234509/14

S/PV.8950 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israel’s right to self-defence, while emphasizing that
its actions must be consistent with its obligations
under international humanitarian law, particularly the
principles of distinction and proportionality.
With regard to the situation in East Jerusalem,
Argentina affirms Jerusalem’s special status, in
accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
including Security Council resolution 478 (1980). We
therefore reject all unilateral attempts to modify that
status, particularly with regard to the Old City, which
has special significance for the three great monotheistic
religions. My country believes that the Holy City should
be a place of gathering and peace and that Jews, Muslims
and Christians should be guaranteed free access to the
holy sites. Any attempt to deny or relativize the historic
ties and profound significance of those places for any
of those three religions is totally unacceptable and does
not contribute to the goal of finding a solution to the
conflict but rather strengthens prejudices and foments
distrust between the parties. Argentina considers
Jerusalem one of the final-status issues that must be
defined by the parties in bilateral negotiations.
My country spoke out on several occasions during
the escalation of violence in May 2021, with the specific
goal of achieving an immediate end to the hostilities
and a ceasefire to stop the attacks on civilians, which
had resulted in dozens of victims. Thanks to the
international community’s efforts, a truce was reached
after 11 days of violence.

19/01/2022

resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the principle
of land for peace.
In conclusion, Argentina once again urges
Palestinians and Israelis to act in good faith and
resume peace talks, with flexibility and in accordance
with international law and the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council, in the
quest for an agreement on the pending issues relating to
the final status of Palestine in all its aspects.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the opportunity to participate in this open
debate and thank the briefers for their interventions this
morning. We also welcome the presence of Mr. Riad
Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates
of Palestine, and of the delegation of Israel.
Chile believes firmly that this region needs
and deserves peace, and we therefore reiterate our
conviction that the solution to the situation in the
Middle East, in particular the Palestinian question, lies
in the establishment of two free, autonomous, sovereign
and independent States able to live in peace within safe
and internationally recognized borders, in accordance
with the United Nations decisions and resolutions that
should serve as the basis for a direct agreement between
the parties.

In view of the financial difficulties facing the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), Argentina wishes
to reiterate its full support for the work of the Agency,
which is helping to prevent further deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory. We also affirm the need for the international
community to make appropriate efforts to secure the
funds needed to ensure that UNRWA’s services can
continue uninterrupted.

Chile has always affirmed the importance of
helping to reaching a peaceful solution as a priority
of its foreign policy and has consistently expressed its
support for a just and lasting solution for the Middle
East. Our commitment to peace goes back many years,
to the early twentieth century, when what is now the
largest Palestinian community outside the Middle East
began arriving in Chile and integrating into every level
of our society. Chile also shares strong historical and
brotherly ties with Israel and a dynamic and active
Jewish community is a key part of our country.

Concerning the Syrian Golan, Argentina maintains
a principled position regarding the illegality of the
acquisition of territory by force and respect for the
territorial integrity of States. We firmly believe in the
principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes, and
therefore consider it important to seek a negotiated
solution to the conflict between Syria and Israel in order
to put an end to the occupation of the Golan Heights as
soon as possible, in accordance with Security Council

We emphasize the importance of respecting
international law and the principles of the Charter of the

10/14

In 2011 Chile recognized the State of Palestine,
and we believe that strengthening its capacities can
create the conditions for greater institutionalization of
the State. We believe that the holding of local elections
in the West Bank in December was a step in the right
direction and trust that the second round of elections
will be held in March as scheduled.

22-23450

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

United Nations. We therefore call for dialogue to enable
Israel and Palestine to achieve prosperity, harmony and
security for their citizens. We believe in both nations
and in the international community’s responsibility for
supporting them in achieving that long-overdue goal.
We all know that the cycles of violence and
instability in the Middle East affect the entire
international community. For that reason, nearly three
decades after the Oslo Accords — and we would like
to take this opportunity to remind the Council of
Norway’s commendable role in that process — we urge
the parties to choose a path of reconciliation, set aside
radical elements and extremist discourse and, of course,
reaffirm respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law. That requires the political will to put
an end to illegal settlements, unilateral acts of war such
as the indiscriminate firing of rockets that endanger
the lives of innocent civilians, and disproportionate
military responses. Chile condemns any action that
threatens life, international peace and the right to live
in peace and security.
In conclusion, Chile would like to express its wish
for a resumption of peace talks so that Jewish and
Palestinian youth can look to the future with confidence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Norway and thank her for presiding over this
meeting. I also welcome Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of our sister State of Palestine. In
addition, I want to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
thorough briefing.
Based on the established principles and values
that have shaped our cultural identity as a country that
values tolerance, coexistence and respect for others, and
that encourages peace and harmony among the peoples
of the world and upholds international conventions and
laws, Bahrain stresses the importance of supporting
peaceful ways to resolve disputes and conflicts, with
a view to eliminating causes of tension and enabling
the international community to work more effectively
and on a basis of integrated policies in order to address
the problems that have brought about suffering in the
Middle East. We believe in the importance of efforts
on the part of the international community to develop a
comprehensive vision for addressing the challenges on

S/PV. 8950 (Resumption 1)

the security, political and economic fronts. Improving
the humanitarian situation starts with efforts to achieve
peace and create conditions of security and stability for
every country in the region, particularly considering
that today the Middle East is facing unprecedented
challenges that demand more active cooperation among
all stakeholders if it is to achieve lasting peace and
fulfil its potential through close cooperation across
all areas of common interest. We emphasize the
importance of intensifying international efforts related
to the peace process in the Middle East and resuming
negotiations between the Palestinians and Israelis
aimed at resolving the Palestinian question on the basis
of a two-State solution and the relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy.
Bahrain stands firm against the Houthi militia’s
continuing terrorist attacks targeting civilians,
infrastructure and vital facilities and undermining
security and stability in the region. In that context,
we have condemned their terrorist attacks on the
territory of our sister Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
some of which resulted in civilian casualties. We
also strongly condemn the Houthi aggression against
civilian installations in Abu Dhabi, in the United Arab
Emirates, which left three civilians dead and several
people injured, as well as the hijacking of a civilian
cargo ship that flies the flag of our sister nation of
the United Arab Emirates. We consider those Houthi
attacks on civilian installations and people to be war
crimes, as they constitute acts of aggression and a
flagrant violation of all international laws against the
two countries. We support Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates in taking every measure necessary
to preserve their stability and security as well as the
safety of their citizens and residents. Bahrain calls on
the international community to take firm steps against
this militia, whose criminal acts demonstrate that it is
a terrorist organization that gravely threatens security
and stability in the region and the entire world.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain reiterates
the importance of intensifying efforts to establish the
foundations of peace and security in the region on a
basis of good neighbourliness, in order to develop the
common interests of the countries of the Middle East
with a view to achieving security, peace and prosperity
for their peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.

22-2345011/14

S/PV.8950 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to stress Japan’s commitment to supporting a twoState solution based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions and internationally agreed parameters.
Discussing the outstanding issues and building trust
among the parties are the necessary first steps to
achieving that solution. In that regard, Japan takes a
positive view of meetings between Palestine and Israel,
such as that in the final week of 2021 between President
Abbas of Palestine and Mr. Benjamin Gantz, Minister of
Defence of Israel. On the other hand, in recent months
we have witnessed violent exchanges between Israelis
and Palestinians in the West Bank, and the settlement
activities in the West Bank, as well as those reported
in the Golan Heights, remain a serious concern.
Those acts jeopardize efforts to build trust among the
parties and could lead to re-escalation. Japan calls
on all parties to halt any activities that would hinder
progress towards the realization of a two-State solution
and reiterates that a solution can be achieved only
through negotiations and mutual trust, not violence.
Japan also encourages all Palestinian stakeholders to
start constructive discussions as soon as possible on
realizing intra-Palestinian reconciliation, including
through the renunciation of violence by Hamas and
other Palestinian militants.
Japan is committed to continuing its support to the
people of Palestine as long as the humanitarian and
socioeconomic challenges in Palestine remain. Last
month we decided to extend $2.85 million in fresh grant
aid to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
for its activities in Syria, Lebanon and Jordan. That
is in addition to our $40.8 million contribution to
UNRWA for 2021. On top of that, Japan is finalizing its
supplementary budget processes to extend $15.2 million
to the Agency. We call for further international efforts,
particularly on the part of the countries in the region,
to support UNRWA, which continues to face chronic
financial difficulties.
Lastly, I would like to remind the Council of two
initiatives that Japan has long promoted. The first is
the Corridor for Peace and Prosperity, which aims
to catalyse regional investment cooperation with
the Palestinian Authority, Israel and Jordan, and the
second is the Conference on Cooperation among East
Asian Countries for Palestinian Development, whose
aim is to mobilize the experience and resources of East
12/14

19/01/2022

Asian countries for the development of Palestinians’
institutional and human resources.
Let me conclude by expressing Japan’s determination
to spare no effort to achieve a two-State solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to congratulate you, Madam President,
and to wish you a happy new year, as well as wishing
the Council members every success in their tasks. I
would also like to take this opportunity to welcome
Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
State of Palestine, and his participation in this meeting.
I once again congratulate Albania, Brazil, Gabon,
Ghana and the United Arab Emirates on beginning their
non-permanent membership in the Security Council.
I would also like to express Kuwait’s appreciation
for the significant efforts made by Norway and its
permanent delegation during their presidency of the
Council for the month of January. We wish you and your
permanent delegation every success for the remaining
meetings this month, Madam President.
The State of Kuwait condemns and denounces
the terrorist attacks last Monday that targeted civilian
areas and installations in our sister State of the United
Arab Emirates. The Houthi militia launched drones in
a flagrant violation of international law, international
humanitarian law and all humanitarian values and
norms, and represents a serious threat to the security
and stability of the region. We stress in that regard
Kuwait’s support for the United Arab Emirates, as well
as our support for any measures it may take to maintain
its security and stability. We express our condolences
for this act of terrorist aggression to the victims and
their families and wish the injured a speedy recovery.
The State of Kuwait has been eager to participate in
today’s open debate, despite the enormous challenges
and complicated circumstances the world is currently
facing as a result of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We are here today because we consider the Palestinian
question to be a central issue for the Arab and Muslim
nations. I have listened attentively to the statements by
Member States and to all our briefers, including the
valuable insights from Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. In
that regard, I would like to reiterate our support for
Mr. Wennesland’s efforts and for all the international
22-23450

19/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

attempts to calm the situation, restore stability in
the occupied Palestinian territories and ensure the
provision and delivery of humanitarian assistance to
the Palestinian people affected by Israeli crimes and
acts of aggression.
It is extremely regrettable that we are starting the
new year where we left off last year, with Israel, the
occupying Power, continuing its aggressive policies
towards the defenceless Palestinian people and
pursuing its plans to annex more Palestinian territories
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. Council briefings
and recent United Nations reports have confirmed the
expansion of settlement activities in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. The Israeli authorities
continue to issue permits to build hundreds of new
housing units in the illegal settlements in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. The reports have also warned
of high numbers of violent acts by settlers against the
Palestinian people, including the elderly, women and
children, as well as the confiscation of their property and
lands and the destruction of their homes, without any
accountability for those crimes. The reports emphasize
the urgent need to counter those acts in order to avoid
another devastating round of violence and human
suffering such as we witnessed in May 2021. Last year
was the deadliest for the Palestinian people since 2014,
with 324 Palestinians killed, 850 homes destroyed and
more than 1,000 people displaced. We have not seen
such numbers since 2016.
Those Israeli plans and crimes, which have been
condemned by the international community, not only
harm the prospects for resuming negotiations but, as
everyone knows, seek to Judaize the city of Jerusalem
and undermine the possibility of a two-State solution
and Palestinians’ ability to establish a contiguous,
viable, sustainable, independent and sovereign
Palestinian State. Kuwait once again condemns those
Israeli plans and violations and emphasizes the special
status of the city of Jerusalem. Any measures aimed at
changing the demographic nature of the city are null
and void. We need to see an end to such illegal Israeli
practices, which violate human rights law, international
law and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. We urge
Israel to implement all the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
It is important to note that our participation in
today’s open debate is not merely for the purpose of
recalling the list of Israeli violations of international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. We

S/PV. 8950 (Resumption 1)

also want to reaffirm our belief in the importance of
multilateralism within the United Nations and the vital
role that the Council plays in maintaining international
peace and security and supporting international efforts
to resume negotiations and the peace process. The State
of Kuwait, whose foreign policy is focused on upholding
the Charter of the United Nations and the basic
principles of international law, reaffirms its principled
and firm position in support of the Palestinian people’s
choice to exercise their legitimate rights. We call for
reviving the peace process based on the resolutions of
international legitimacy, and we urge all international
stakeholders, including the Middle East Quartet, to
take practical steps to launch credible negotiations
within an agreed timetable to address all final-status
issues and establish an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State on Palestinian occupied territories,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, along the 4 June
1967 borders, in accordance with international law, the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the principle of
land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative. We once
again emphasize that we value all international efforts
to resume the peace process and seek an end to this
protracted conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Sithole (South Africa): My delegation
expresses its appreciation to Norway for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, especially since it
enables the participation of the wider United Nations
membership in engaging on this pertinent matter.
We would like to focus today on three points. The
first is the issue of crimes against humanity, apartheidlike policies and persecution. The second is the fact that
the only viable answer to the Palestinian question is a
two-State solution whereby Israelis and Palestinians
live side by side in harmony, and the third is about
adherence to the rule of law and the resolutions of the
Security Council.
The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
remains of grave concern to South Africa. There is
overwhelming evidence to support the fact that the
State of Israel, the occupying Power, enforces a set
of laws that treat Israelis and Palestinians differently
in all aspects of life. The systemic subjugation that
Palestinian men, women, children and the elderly
endure under Israeli occupation is inhumane and

22-2345013/14

S/PV.8950 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in stark violation of fundamental human rights and
internationally adopted norms and principles. We
cannot stand silently by and bear witness to this reality,
which is regularly cited as evidence of an apartheid-like
system by the United Nations Special Rapporteurs on
the situation of human rights in the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, as well as prominent international
civil-society organizations.
South Africa maintains that international efforts
must be geared to restoring the dignity of all who live
on the land. That can be achieved only through the
realization of a two-State solution that is supported by
the United Nations and the parties concerned. The Oslo
Accords were a stepping stone towards establishing a
formal peace treaty between both sides that could end
decades of conflict. However, a two-State solution
remains the only path to ensuring that Palestinians and
Israelis can both realize their legitimate aspirations
and live side by side in peaceful and secure States,
based on the 1967 borders, and with Jerusalem as the
capital of both States. However, a two-State solution
can be achieved only if both parties engage in bona fide
negotiations and place the interests of all who live on
the land above all other objectives. At the risk of stating
the obvious, the intent to control a people through
illegal occupation violates the very letter and spirit of
living peacefully side by side.
The Security Council has convened extensively
to discuss the situation in Palestine over the past
seven decades. Israel’s continued disregard for the

14/14

19/01/2022

decisions of the Council reflects a blatant disregard
for multilateralism as it is enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. We continue to raise a pragmatic
concern: how long will we bear witness to the State
of Israel’s flagrant violations of Security Council
resolutions without taking any action? Today we want
to state in no uncertain terms that the failure to act in
response to Israeli violations perpetuates the argument
that some Council members are not even-handed
when it comes to this matter, which undermines the
Council’s credibility.
The Security Council has taken action on
resolutions in other cases where its resolutions are
violated, as it is mandated to do. The voice of the
Council must be congruent and consistent if the Council
wishes to maintain its integrity and appear impartial
in discharging its mandate efficiently. It is therefore
imperative for the Council to hold all those who violate
Security Council resolutions accountable without fear
or favour.
In conclusion, as Members of the United Nations, we
are tasked with the responsibility to oppose oppression.
Our morality compels us to use our voice in these
international platforms to fight oppression wherever
it attempts to creep into the fabric of any society
and plague it with tyranny, domination, autocracy,
segregation, denial of basic human rights, destruction
and disregard for international law.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

22-23450
