59

Resolutions adopted on the reporte of the Second Committee

2811 (XXVI). Financial contributions to the
United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly,
Considering the need for a fundamental and speedy
strengthening of operational activities for development
of the United Nations system in such a manner as to
enable the United Nations Development Programme
to carry, by 1976, a total programme of at least
$1,000 million,
Considering further the need for a substantial increase in the financial resources of the United Nations
Development Programme so as to enable it to utilize
as fully as possible its improved capacity,
Bearing in mind that planning estimates and procedures of the United Nations Development Programme
will take into account, ínter alía, the rate of growth
of delivery capacity already existing in the system in
terms of field programmes,
Endorses Econornic and Social Council resolution
1615 (LI) of 26 July 1971.
2017th plenary meeting,
14 December 1971.
2812 (XXVI).

United Nations Capital Development Fund

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2186 (XXI) of 13 December 1966, 2321 (XXII) of 15 December 1967 and
2525 (XXIV) of 5 December 1969,
Recalling further its resolution 2690 (XXV) of
11 December 1970, in which it decided to continue
the provisional arrangements for the operation of the
United Nations Capital Development Fund and requested the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme to consider, taking into
account the observations made by Member States, all
possibilities for reaching the objectives of the Fund,
Stressing the urgent need to rnake the Fund fully
operational as soon as possible, within the framework
of the expanded United Nations activities in the field
of development assistance,
Mindful of the fact that the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade, contained in General Assembly resolution 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, calls for the
opening up of new avenues of international co-operation for development,
Regretting that it was not possible for the Goveming Council of the United Nations Development Programme at its eleventh and twelfth sessions to achieve
positive results on the subject,21
1. Reaffirms its resolution 2690 (XXV) and urges
Member States to continue the search for practica!
means of implementing the objectives of the United
Nations Capital Development Fund;
2. Expresses the hope that the report to be presented by the Adrninistrator to the Goveming Council
of the United Nations Development Prograrnme at its
thirteenth session will make possible, on the basis of
suggestions received from Member States, the begin21 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/4954 and Corr.1 ),
chap. VIII, and ibid., Supplement No. 6A (E/5043/Rev.1),
chap. IX.

ning of the effective operation of the United Nations
Capital Development Fund;
3. Decides to preserve the original functions of
the United Nations Capital Developrnent Fund until
31 Decernber 1972, in accordance with the measures
set forth in paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution 2321 (XXII);
4. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member States to contribute separately, at the sarne pledging
conference, to the United Nations Developrnent Programme and to the United Nations Capital Development Fund;
5. Appeals to Member States, and in particular to
developed countries, to provide substantial contributions
to the United Nations Capital Developrnent Fund so
as to make it fully operational and more effective.
2017th plenary meeting,
14 December 1971.
2813 (XXVI). Enlar~ement of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development
Programme

The General Assembly,
H aving considered the reports of the Goveming
Council of the United Nations Development Prograrnme, in particular the report on its twelfth session, 22
Bearing in mind its resolution 2626 (XXV) of
24 October 1970 containing the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
Realizing the important role that the United Nations
Developrnent Prograrnme has to play in the achievernent of the goa1s, objectives and policy measures of
the Intemational Developrnent Strategy,
Recalling its resolution 2688 (XXV) of 11 December 1970 on the capacity of the United Nations development systern,
Recalling further its resolution 2029 (XX) of 22
November 1965 consolidating the Special Fund and
the Expanded Programrne of Technical Assistance in
the United Nations Developrnent Programrne, particularly the annex thereto concerning the composition
of the Goveming Council of the United Nations
Developrnent Programrne, which was to consist of
thirty-seven members,
Convinced that a strengthened and expanded United
N ations Developrnent Prograrnrne and the prospect of
its handling, by 1975, resources double that of present
resources necessitate the increased participation of
Mernber States in the work of the Governing Council,
Convinced further that a larger mernbership of the
Governing Council would mak:e the Council more
representative of both developed and developing
countries,
Aware that since the United Nations Developrnent
Prograrnme was established in 1965 a number of new
States have been admitted to membership in the United
Nations,
1. Decides to enlarge the mernbership of the Goveming Council of the United Nations Developrnent
Programme to forty-eight mernbers to be elected from
arnong States Mernbers of the United Nations or
rnembers of specialized agencies or of the Intema22 / bid.,

Supplement No. 6A (E/5043/Rev.1 ).
