S/PV.7895

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7895th meeting

Thursday, 9 March 2017, 11.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rycroft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Kandeel
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Klein
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in Burundi
Report of the Secretary-General on Burundi (S/2017/165)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-06234 (E)
*1706234*

S/PV.7895

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
Report of the Secretary-General on Burundi
(S/2017/165)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Burundi to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jamal
Benomar, Special Adviser to the Secretary-General;
His Excellency Mr. Benjamin William Mkapa, East
African Community Facilitator of the Inter-Burundi
Dialogue and Former President of Tanzania; and His
Excellency Mr. Jürg Lauber, Permanent Representative
of Switzerland to the United Nations, in his capacity
as the Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Mr. Mkapa will be joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Entebbe.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/165, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Burundi.
I now give the floor to Mr. Benomar.
Mr. Benomar: I am grateful for the opportunity
to present the Secretary-General’s report on Burundi
(S/2017/165). This is the first written report pursuant to
resolution 2303 (2016), and it provides a comprehensive
picture of the situation in the country. The report is
very factual and those facts speak for themselves.
First of all, the human rights situation remains
extremely worrying, and has in fact been worsening.
During the reporting period, the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
documented allegations of serious human rights
violations and abuses, including extrajudicial killings,
arbitrary arrests and detentions, forced disappearances,
cases of torture and ill-treatment, allegations of illegal
places of detention, and restrictions on freedom of
2/8

09/03/2017

association, expression and movement. OHCHR noted
an increase in allegations of enforced disappearances,
with more than 210 allegations received from October
2016 to January 2017 alone. Many Burundians live in
fear as a result of widespread repression and increasing
intimidation by the Imbonerakure, the ruling party’s
youth militia. Members of opposition political parties
and perceived opponents reportedly continue to be
victims of arbitrary arrest, detention, ill-treatment and
enforced disappearance.
Secondly, the humanitarian situation continues
to deteriorate. In 2016, the number of people in
need of humanitarian assistance reached 3 million,
or 26 per cent of the population. There has been a
fourfold increase in the number of people who are food
insecure. According to the World Health Organization,
8.2 million Burundians, or 75 per cent of the country,
were affected by malaria in 2016. Since the beginning
of the crisis, almost 390,000 Burundians have fled the
country. We commend the neighbouring countries for
their generosity in hosting these refugees. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
projects that the number of refugees will reach 500,000
by the end of the year.
The third key message of the report is that the
political impasse in the country continues. Nearly two
years have passed since the beginning of the political
crisis in Burundi, which was sparked by President
Pierre Nkurunziza’s decision to run for a third term
in office. Since then, the political impasse has only
deepened. Political space has been narrowed further
through repression.
I commend the mediator, President Museveni,
and the facilitator, former President Mkapa, for their
leadership and stand firmly behind their efforts. It is
disappointing that despite their dedicated engagement,
there has been no significant progress in the dialogue
process led by the East African Community (EAC).
The latest round of talks in Arusha was boycotted by
the Government. Until today, the two sides have not sat
around the same table.
The United Nations will continue to provide its
full support to facilitator Mkapa. In this context, the
establishment of a joint technical working group marks
a positive enhancement of the collaboration among
the EAC, the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations. Yet, no progress will be achieved without all
Burundian stakeholders committing in good faith to
17-06234

09/03/2017

The situation in Burundi

an inclusive dialogue process without preconditions.
The full political weight of the region and international
community is needed to achieve progress.
While the EAC-led dialogue has not advanced
as hoped, the internal dialogue process led by the
Government-established
Commission
Nationale
de Dialogue Inter-Burundais (CNDI) is close to
completion. The interim report of the CNDI reaches a
number of sweeping conclusions that have the potential
to undermine the Arusha Agreement, including that the
majority of citizens demand an end to presidential term
limits and are in favour of amending the Constitution.
Opposition leaders and civil society groups have raised
concerns that the CNDI process is not inclusive, that it
is controlled by the Government and that its objective is
to produce a predetermined political outcome.
In that context, the report highlights the risks
associated with the prospect of constitutional reform
and the potential abolition of presidential term limits
under the current circumstances. While Burundians
have the sovereign right to amend their Constitution,
in accordance with their own laws, it was President
Nkurunziza’s decision to seek a disputed third term of
office that triggered the country’s most severe crisis
since it emerged from a bloody civil war more than a
decade ago.
Burundi is still suffering from the electoral crisis
of 2015 and continues to face multifaceted challenges,
including ongoing serious human rights violations and
abuses, mass displacement of people and economic
degradation. Any attempt to seek constitutional
amendments to allow the President to stand for another
term in office would, in the current political climate,
intensify the crisis and undermine collective efforts to
find a sustainable solution to the current situation.
The report also provides an update on the
implementation of resolution 2303 (2016), which the
Council adopted on 29 July 2016. Unfortunately, there
has been no progress in thiat regard. On the contrary,
the period since the adoption has seen a continuous
deterioration in the Government’s relations with the
international community.
As detailed in the report, the Government has
categorically refused to allow for the implementation of
all key aspects of resolution 2303 (2016). That includes
the deployment of the United Nations police component,
enhanced human-rights monitoring, the strengthening
of the Office of the Special Adviser and cooperation

S/PV.7895

with African Union observers. The Government has
also decided to withdraw from the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court, suspend cooperation
and collaboration with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and has refused
to cooperate with the Commission of Inquiry mandated
by the Human Rights Council.
Reduced cooperation with the United Nations
system is undermining efforts to find a peaceful solution
to the crisis and to assist a population in growing need.
We have tried our utmost to constructively engage with
the Government and support the people of Burundi
in their search for peace and stability. We engaged
quietly, refrained from public criticism and encouraged
modest, small steps to build confidence between the
parties. Despite that moderate approach, the doors to
engagement and cooperation have been largely shut by
the authorities.
The report of the Secretary-General calls on the
Burundian leadership to fulfil its moral obligation
and political responsibility to return the country to the
path of peace. I am convinced that most Burundians,
including many in the Government and the ruling party,
do not want to continue on the track of international
isolationism, violence and repression.The international
community must do its part to support those who seek
a peaceful resolution of the crisis. The United Nations
will always remain committed to helping the people
of Burundi, and we look to the Council for further
guidance on the way forward.
The President: I thank Mr. Benomar for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mkapa.
Mr. Mkapa: I wish to begin by congratulating you,
Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of March. I am indebted to the Council
for giving me this opportunity to update it on my work
as Facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue.
Let me start by saying that, after the Heads of
State of the East African Community appointed me
Facilitator in order to contribute to the efforts of the
mediator, President Museveni, to reach a peaceful
solution to the crisis in Burundi, I have seen myself
as someone who helps the parties to this crisis to get
together and reach common ground peacefully. I was
told that there should be no conditionalities with regard
to who I meet, and that the objective was to reach a
sustainable and peaceful solution. It was quite clear in

17-062343/8

S/PV.7895

The situation in Burundi

my mind that the task of facilitation was not the task
of conferencing. I have therefore not been leading a
constitutional conference on Burundi. Instead, I have
been trying to facilitate a process in which the political
parties are brought together with a view to ensuring
that they can resume the spirit and the dictates of
the Arusha Agreement — to which all of them are
signatory — and the Constitution — which they all
adopted together — so that we can avoid any further
failures in the future.
I have encountered the following problems. On
the one hand, the Government and the parties that are
perceived as being supportive of the Government agree
that the Arusha Agreement and the Constitution must
serve as the basis for any solution. However, they say
that much of that has already been achieved because the
Constitution is being implemented fully and the spirit of
the Agreement is being pursued. On the other hand, it is
the view of the political opposition — both the internal
and the external groups — that the Government has
usurped the political space in which to undertake the
political work in and governance of the country. That
is the situation.
The other point that has emerged from the
consultations is that each side claims to be the custodian
of the Arusha Agreement and the Constitution. The
tendency is to see the members of the other side as the
criminals, and therefore as the ones that should receive
the wrath of the State or the power of the international
community. We see, therefore, that this is a situation in
which the two parties are almost irreconcilable.
I tried to talk to each of the major political parties
over four different sessions. I did not call a meeting. We
did not meet in the same place. We did not meet in the
same room, let alone sit at the same table. However, I
met with the political parties. I met with representatives
of civil society organizations, youth and women’s
organizations. I met with religious leaders, separately,
and listened to them. Believe me when I say that I was
lectured beyond imagination. One would have thought
I was the culprit in the matter. However, I listened to
them because I wanted to know what difficulties stood
in the way of reaching an agreement.
After the first meeting, I asked them to reflect
further. I met with them a second time in Arusha. There
were some who did not want to come to Arusha in the
first instance because they thought that would prejudice
the impending discussions or that we were suggesting
4/8

09/03/2017

the Arusha Agreement had been abandoned. But there
are those who say that we must meet in Arusha to
reaffirm the spirit of the Agreement. As such, I called
them. Some of them came, others did not.
The third time I met them in Bujumbura, the capital.
Again, I spoke to all of them separately, and listened to
them in order to see whether they had reflected further
on the situation they had outlined to me. Finally,
having listened to all these groups, I decided to go to
the political parties that I thought would be decisive in
the implementation of any agreement reached — that is,
the major political parties, both internal and external.
Also, I took in political leaders or political actors of
consequence and influence. That group included
three former Presidents, former Assembly and Senate
Presidents, former party leaders and so on. I called them
to Arusha for the last time, which was last month, in the
hope that I could get them to talk to each other at least.
To facilitate that, I outlined the four principal areas
that, in my view, constitute major areas of discussion.
First was the political situation in the country: what
are the political obstacles that are pulling them apart?
Secondly, what were the constitutional obstacles
that were pulling them apart? Thirdly, what were the
economic and humanitarian positions that were keeping
them apart? And, finally, I asked, what are the security
issues? The security issues are particularly relevant to
the external opposition, who felt that they could not go
back for fear of their lives or for fear that they would
not be able to operate politically in safety.
This time I asked them to give me their maximum
demands and their minimum requirements, in writing.
That is what I did this past month. They have done
so. But before that, I had asked the Government of
Burundi, through the Chairman of the East African
Community (EAC) Summit, the President of Tanzania,
my own President; through the mediator; and through
the President of Kenya, President Uhuru Kenyatta, to
talk to the Government of Burundi, in order to suspend
the arrest warrants against some of these political actors
of substance and influence, so that they could come to
Arusha and be part of the consultations.
Unfortunately, the Government did not take this
request very well at all. The Government delegation
did not show up and Arusha, and they told me why:
because, they said, they do not want to meet these people
who are under arrest warrants, and although I had said
that it would not include anyone who could be directly
associated with the attempted coup of 2015, they said,
17-06234

09/03/2017

The situation in Burundi

S/PV.7895

no, this is enough to keep us away from Arusha, so they
did not come.

but also in financing this process. I hope that it will
continue to support us in that effort.

But what gave me solace was that the ruling party
came to Arusha this time. I gave them the documents,
and they gave their responses in writing. In substance,
the parties are still very far apart. They both affirm
the Arusha Agreement and the Constitution arising
therefrom, but each one claims to be the exclusive
implementer of the Arusha agreement, that the
others have abandoned it and they are the ones who
are legitimate. Clearly, they are so far apart that it is
difficult to bring them together.

I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity. I
am prepared to listen to and answer any questions that
may be posed to me.

What I decided, therefore, was that, while I was
looking at the recommendations and the written
responses to the questions I had raised, I would ask the
Heads of State for an emergency summit meeting to give
impetus to the two sides, so that they could now really
think seriously about getting together and discussing
these issues. I reported back to the Chairman of the
East African Community Summit and to the Mediator,
and I told them that now, in order to get anything done,
they really had to get together and push both sides to
seriously get down to the basic issues and to reach out
to each other and see if they can find common ground.
I have done so, but they said, well, the next summit
is only three weeks away, so we cannot have an
immediate special summit. I am hoping, therefore, that
at the next summit, which will be in three weeks’ time,
I will be able to raise these issues and argue the case
for direct political intervention with both sides to make
them be agreeable to getting round that same table.
This is what I hope to do.
Meanwhile, my team and I are analysing, with the
help of the United Nations and the African Union — that
is a technical team — those responses and try to distil
or synthesize a common position that could break this
impasse. I still believe that it can be done; I still believe
that the neighbours can have influence; I still believe
that we really have no option except to continue being
engaged, because Burundi is our neighbour, and one
cannot choose one’s neighbouring country. It is there,
and therefore we have to be part of the efforts to find a
solution to the crisis. That is where we are.
I wish to take this opportunity to thank Ambassador
Fall and Ambassador Benomar and the African Union
and the United Nations for their support. I wish also to
thank the European Union, because it has been very
instrumental not only in helping us to continue talking,

The President: I thank Mr. Mkapa very much for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lauber.
Mr. Lauber: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on the activities of the
Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The following statement has been approved in
consultation with the 54 members of the configuration,
including the country concerned, Burundi. The full
version has been shared with the members of the
Security Council.
In their most recent meetings, the members of the
configuration heard reports by various United Nations
entities, all of which underscored that the situation in
Burundi requires sustained attention and support from
international partners:
We heard reports by human rights monitoring
mechanisms on the situation of public security and
human rights, including on acts of violence and
violations of human rights, as well as on pressure on
civil-society organizations and human rights defenders.
We were briefed by United Nations Special
Adviser Jamal Benomar on the ongoing political
impasse, including the lack of confidence between the
Government and the opposition, on the situation of the
media, as well as on national, regional and international
efforts to find a political settlement of the crisis. We
also learned from the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and the United Nations country team
about the deteriorating socioeconomic situation.
Regarding the socioeconomic situation, the then
United Nations Resident Coordinator in Burundi,
Mr. Paolo Lembo, and I convened Burundi’s main
multilateral partners on 7 and 8 November 2016 near
Geneva for a socioeconomic consultation. The World
Bank, the African Development Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, the United Nations country team and
the European Union participated in those consultations.
is

The participants shared the view that Burundi
currently experiencing severe macroeconomic

17-062345/8

S/PV.7895

The situation in Burundi

difficulties, which are reflected in a negative growth
of the gross domestic product in 2015 and 2016. Food
insecurity affects a much larger part of Burundi than in
2015, and consumer prices are on the rise.
Participants identified food security and agriculture,
health and education as the sectors that are most
seriously affected by the current situation. Besides
these sectors, the need for broader macroeconomic
engagement in Burundi was emphasized, since
decreasing fiscal revenues, partly related to decreased
investments and direct budgetary support, put the
national budget under pressure.
In view of these economic indicators, Burundi’s
partners showed continued readiness to address
the needs of the population and to prevent a further
deterioration of the socioeconomic situation.
While recognizing the importance of the
contribution of Burundi in African Union and United
Nations peacekeeping operations, members of the
configuration expressed concerns about the signals of
disengagement sent from the Government of Burundi
to their regional and international partners, for instance
by suspending the cooperation with the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights.
We welcome the fact that the Government of
Burundi transmitted, on 24 February, to the Office of
the High Commissioner in Geneva a draft agreement
between the Republic of Burundi and the United
Nations concerning the establishment of an office of
the High Commissioner in Burundi.
Nevertheless, I am personally afraid that, faced
with the current situation, the international partners
may decide to disengage vis-à-vis the Government and
the people of Burundi.
Peacebuilding in Burundi requires a long-term
vision and sustained efforts. Abandoning Burundi
now would mean wasting past efforts and putting the
country and its people at risk of recurring conflict.
While the primary responsibility for the well-being
of the Burundian people lies with the Government of
Burundi, the international partners must maintain their
support for the current efforts aimed at reaching a
peaceful settlement of the crisis in Burundi.
I would therefore like to invite Burundi’s regional
and international partners, in particular the relevant
parts of the United Nations system, to maintain
and, where possible, step up their support in the
6/8

09/03/2017

areas of peace and security, human rights, political
reconciliation and institution-building, as well as with
regard to humanitarian aid, socioeconomic development
and preparations for credible, peaceful and democratic
elections in 2020.
At the same time, I invite the Government of Burundi
to recognize its partners’ goodwill and to facilitate the
efforts of the EAC, the AU and the United Nations in
engaging with Burundi to advance the inter-Burundian
dialogue and to strengthen the cooperation with both
the AU and the United Nations. I welcome any efforts
at reconciliation within Burundi, as well as ongoing
dialogue inside and outside the country, in particular
the efforts of the EAC Facilitator. In that regard, I wish
to reassure President Mkapa of the continued support
of the Burundi configuration of the Commission for
his work.
I am planning to travel to Burundi from 27 to
31 March in order to get a first-hand impression of the
situation on the ground, meet with the Government
opposition and civil society, pursue the socioeconomic
dialogue and brief the Government on my continuous
conversation with Burundi’s partners. I see the
continuation of the socioeconomic dialogue not only
as an opportunity to address the socioeconomic
challenges, but also as a means to increase confidence
between the Government and its international partners.
I will keep the Security Council informed about my
visit to Burundi and about the configuration’s further
engagement, as per established practice.
The President: I thank Mr. Lauber for his briefing,
as well as all three briefers for their respective briefings
and for adhering to the time limit.
The representative of Uruguay has asked for the
floor to make a statement.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me, first of all, to express my gratitude for the briefings
by the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jamal Benomar; the former President of the United
Republic of Tanzania, Mr. Benjamin William Mkapa,
in his capacity as East African Community Facilitator
of the inter-Burundian dialogue; and Ambassador Jürg
Lauber, in his capacity as the Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Uruguay is concerned about the situation in
Burundi, which has not yet recovered from the
electoral crisis of 2015 and continues to face numerous
17-06234

09/03/2017

The situation in Burundi

challenges, in particular serious and persistent human
rights abuses and violations, economic deterioration
and the mass displacement of the population. In that
regard, we urge all Burundian parties concerned to put
their country’s interests above their own and commit
in good faith and without preconditions to a genuine
inclusive and credible dialogue based on respecting
the Arusha Agreement. It is worth repeating, time and
again, that dialogue is the only way to resolve political
differences in a peaceful way.
For more than two decades, the United Nations
has been working closely with Burundi in search of
a more solid and stable future for the country. We
are concerned that, for various reasons, cooperation
between Burundi and the United Nations is currently not
at its optimum level, particularly after the suspension of
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and other difficulties
experienced with the Office of the Special Adviser in
the country.
We believe that it is imperative to restore mutual
trust between the Government of Burundi and the
United Nations system, which will allow efforts for
the development and stability of the country and the
well-being of its population. In that vein, we call for a
renewed commitment between the United Nations and
Burundi shaped by concrete actions such as the signing
of a status-of-mission agreement with the United
Nations, allowing the Office of the Special Adviser
to operate freely, and the conclusion of the agreement
for the resumption of activities of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
in Burundi.
Lastly, I should like to say that, if we do not act
decisively and immediately through an inclusive
dialogue, the suffering of the population will intensify
and we will run risk of unravelling more than a decade’s
work of peacebuilding in the country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burundi.
Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): As
this is this first time that I take the floor under your
presidency, Sir, on behalf of my delegation, I would
like to express my sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
I also wish to welcome the presence of Mr. Benjamin
William Mkapa, East African Community Facilitator
of the inter-Burundi dialogue and former President of

S/PV.7895

Tanzania, to whom we renew our trust and full support.
I should also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his first report (S/2017/165) on the situation in Burundi,
even though my delegation is not in agreement with
some of its assertions and shortcomings.
Among other things, the report refers to what he
called the intention of the current President to seek
a so-called fourth term of office, thereby forgetting
that constitutional matters fall exclusively under
the sovereignty of States Members and that of their
peoples. My delegation would like to recall that the
current President is exercising his second term of office
in accordance with the judgment of the Constitutional
Court of the Republic of Burundi delivered on
4 May 2015 and that of the Court of the East African
Community delivered on 19 July 2015, which both
confirmed the legality of the candidacy of President
Pierre Nkurunziza in 2015. Moreover, my delegation
believes that referring to a fourth term of office that the
President has not announced is indicative of the double
standards of which Burundi has been a victim since
2005, because no such concern has ever been raised by
another United Nations authority with regard to cases of
fourth, fifth, sixth or even seventh terms of office that
have been seen almost everywhere else in the world.
In paragraph 20, the report also recklessly uses
the word “militia” to characterize the youth group
affiliated with the ruling party. The choice of that word
is inappropriate because it is falls outside the lexicon
that has already been agreed in the Security Council.
Dating from resolution 2248 (2015), and extending to
resolutions 2303 (2016) and 2279 (2016), the Council
has never used that heavily charged word, preferring on
each occasion to use careful and balanced language to
designate young people affiliated with political parties
without singling out a specific group of young people
according to certain criteria.
Furthermore, the report refers to cases of forced
disappearances in Burundi. It should be recalled here
that that phenomenon is a global threat from which
no nation, unfortunately, is spared. The statistic of
more than 200 cases in connection with that allegation
was cited without supporting evidence or serious
investigations, and did not take into account the cases
of young people who have fled the country to undergo
paramilitary training in a neighbouring country and
who have been intentionally declared missing. Of
the more than 150 young people handed over by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to the Government

17-062347/8

S/PV.7895

The situation in Burundi

of Burundi, some of them were on the list of missing
persons. Caution, therefore, must be exercised before
levelling such an allegation.
I will not go into the details of the report, as the
time allotted to me is too short. Everyone has received
a comprehensive document that contains our comments
and observations in connection with the report. I will
now quickly skip to the political, security and human
rights situation in Burundi.
On the political level, the Commission nationale
de dialogue interburundais continues as normal both at
home and abroad. At the external level, we commend
the outstanding work of the Facilitator of inter-Burundi
dialogue, His Excellency Mr. Benjamin William Mkapa,
who just organized the fourth dialogue session in
Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, which took place
from 16 to 19 February. We reiterate our confidence
in, and support for, his work. The Government of
Burundi remains committed in a spirit of good faith to
that process in an inclusive manner, with the exception,
of course, of the coup leaders of 13 May 2015, who
today are on the run and under the protection of certain
United Nations States Members.
From the security perspective, while we recognize
the several challenges that continue to require our
attention, the situation on the ground is apparent,
which no one can deny. The overall security situation
throughout the country is good.
With regard to human rights and imprisonments,
several hundred prisoners have been released since
2015. In 2017, 2,500 prisoners benefited from a
presidential pardon granted at the end of 2016. Among
those, 2,246 have already rejoined their families.
With regard to freedom of expression, 20 public
and private local radio stations, 4 community radio

8/8

09/03/2017

stations, 7 radio stations broadcasting on the territory
of Burundi, 2 local news agencies, 24 public and
private periodicals, 17 Internet sites and 12 associations
and professional bodies of the press are operational. In
addition to these private radio stations, international
radio stations include Radio France Internationale, the
Voice of America and Deutsche Welle.
As regards the freedoms of assembly, opinion,
association and religion, the Government has already
approved more than 6,500 non-profit associations, of
which more than 100 have been approved since January
2016. Fifteen non-profit organizations that had been
under investigation since the failed coup d’état of May
13 2015 were authorized to reopen.
With regard to cooperation between the United
Nations and Burundi, my Government’s great concern
is to strengthen and perpetuate our relations with the
United Nations. In order to ensure the presence of the
United Nations in the field of human rights, a draft
cooperation agreement with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights is under discussion
between the two parties. The Office of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General is also functioning.
We eagerly await the appointment of another United
Nations official to lead the Burundi dossier and expedite
the signature of the framework for cooperation between
Burundi and the Office.
We commend the fruitful cooperation with
the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, led by the Ambassador of Switzerland,
my colleague Jürg Lauber.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

17-06234
