S/2011/682

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 November 2011
Original: English

Letter dated 3 November 2011 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), I have the honour to
transmit the fortieth report on the implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina, covering the period from 21 April to 15 October 2011, which I
received from the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the report to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

11-57500 (E) 091111

*1157500*

S/2011/682

Annex
Letter dated 2 November 2011 from the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina addressed to the Secretary-General
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), in which the Council
requested the Secretary-General to submit to it reports from the High Representative
in accordance with annex 10 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Conclusions of the London Peace Implementation
Conference of 8 and 9 December 1995, I herewith present to you the fortieth report
of the High Representative. I would ask for this report to be distributed to the
members of the Security Council for their consideration.
This is my sixth report to the Secretary-General since assuming the post of
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and European Union Special
Representative on 26 March 2009. The present report covers the period from
21 April to 15 October 2011.
Should you or any Council member require any information beyond what is
provided in the attached report or have any questions regarding its contents, I would
be pleased to provide you with it.
(Signed) Valentin Inzko

2

11-57500

S/2011/682

Enclosure
Fortieth report of the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina
21 April-15 October 2011

Summary
This report covers the period from 21 April to 15 October 2011. On 1 September,
I formally turned over my duties as European Union Special Representative to Peter
Sørensen, with whom I am cooperating closely. The consolidation of the European
Union presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina represents a welcome step forward by the
European Union to assume greater responsibility in guiding the reform process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in relation to the country’s accession to the European
Union. It also means that I will now be able to focus my energies solely on my
mandate under annex 10 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace, including
addressing ongoing challenges to the Agreement.
More than one year after the general elections of October 2010, Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains without a new State-level government, a fact which both
reflected and contributed to the ongoing deterioration of the political situation during
the reporting period. In the absence of agreement on a 2011 budget, the State
institutions have been funded under a restricted temporary financing mechanism
since January. In this context, international credit-rating agencies downgraded the
country’s outlook, specifically citing the negative political situation. In its annual
progress report on Bosnia and Herzegovina, the European Commission also noted the
country’s political problems.a On the economic front, registered unemployment at the
end of June 2011 was estimated at approximately 43 per cent of the workforce, while
foreign direct investments in the first half of 2011 decreased by 19.5 per cent over
the same period in 2010.
During the reporting period, legal and political actions from Republika Srpska
challenging Bosnia and Herzegovina State-level institutions, competencies and laws,
and the authority of the High Representative under the General Framework
Agreement and relevant resolutions of the Security Council have continued, as have
other activities running contrary to the Agreement, in particular in relation to
annexes 2, 4 and 10. As I outlined in my briefing to the Security Council on 9 May
2011, the Republika Srpska National Assembly adopted conclusions in April and a
decision to hold a referendum on the decisions of the High Representative, including
those establishing the Bosnia and Herzegovina Court and Prosecutor’s Office, which
formally disregard and/or reject the principles established under annex 10 and annex
4 of the Agreement, and thereby constitute a breach of the Dayton Agreement.
Although the Republika Srpska National Assembly’s adoption on 13 April of a
referendum decision was repealed on 1 June, the controversial conclusions of the
same date — many of which have not been explicitly repealed and remain
problematic — have continued to influence Republika Srpska policies vis-à-vis the
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the High Representative.

11-57500

3

S/2011/682

The use of inflammatory nationalistic rhetoric continued, including further
statements by officials of the Republika Srpska in support of State dissolution and
chauvinistic comments directed against other ethnic groups. In this regard, I would
like to express my deep concern about recent public statements that challenge the
statehood of Bosnia and Herzegovina by characterizing the country as a “state union”
[drzavna zajednica], ignoring also the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina was
admitted to the United Nations as a Member State on 22 May 1992, together with
Croatia and Slovenia. These statements undermining the constitutional arrangements
provided for under the General Framework Agreement need to be taken seriously,
especially in the light of other actions directly challenging the Agreement as set out
in this and previous reports.
While the arrest on 26 May of General Ratko Mladic and his transfer on 31 May
to the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in The Hague brought good
news, political leaders in the Republika Srpska continued to challenge the rulings of
the Tribunal and the International Court of Justice that qualified the massacre of
Bosniaks who had sought refuge in the United Nations-protected area of Srebrenica
in July 1995 as genocide.
Some Federation politicians have also used unwelcome rhetoric, and some
leaders of HDZ BiH and HDZ 1990 continue to press for a third entity with a Croat
majority and have revived the Croat National Council. The two leading Croat parties
in Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to question the legality and legitimacy of the
incumbent Federation government, demanding that it be reshuffled to include them,
as the “sole legitimate representatives of the Croat people”. In the Federation, some
Bosniak political leaders escalated their rhetoric in response to statements by the
Republika Srpska leadership and warned of possible conflict, were there to be an
attempt to divide the country. The former Federation President, now a delegate in the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly, also made offensive statements,
appearing to question the suitability of prosecutors from ethnically mixed marriages
to carry out their functions.
In spite of tensions and controversy surrounding its formation, the Federation
government has functioned well during the reporting period. Three seats in the
entity’s Constitutional Court remain vacant, preventing the court from ruling on vital
national interest cases submitted to it, thereby affecting the protection of constituent
peoples in the Federation. In addition, the Federation continues to be burdened by a
large, expensive and multilayered government apparatus.
None of the outstanding items among the five objectives and two conditions
necessary for the closure of the Office of the High Representative was fulfilled during
this reporting period. Owing to the continuing stalemate over government formation
following the elections of 3 October 2010, the old Council of Ministers continues in a
caretaker capacity. This stalemate has had a negative impact on the ability to address
long-needed reforms, including those needed for progress in Euro-Atlantic
integration.

4

11-57500

S/2011/682

Through its continued presence, the European Union military mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina has continued to reassure citizens that the country remains safe and
secure despite the difficult political situation. The High Representative supports the
extension of the executive mandate under annexes 1 and 2 of the General Framework
Agreement.
a

11-57500

“Overall, little progress was made by Bosnia and Herzegovina in improving the functionality and
efficiency of all levels of government. One year after the general elections, a State-level Council of
Ministers remains to be appointed. The political representatives lack a shared vision on the
direction to be taken by the country. An effective coordination mechanism between the State, the
Entities and Brcko District remains to be established as a matter of urgency regarding EU matters
and the harmonisation of EU related legislation.” (Commission Staff Working Paper, Bosnia and
Herzegovina 2011 Progress Report.)

5

S/2011/682

I. Introduction
1.
This is my sixth report to the Secretary-General since assuming the post of
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. It provides a narrative description
of progress made towards attaining the goals outlined in previous reports, registers
factual developments, logs relevant citations relating to the reporting period, and
provides my assessment of mandate implementation in key areas, including the
objectives and conditions which must be met before the Office of the High
Representative can close. I have focused my efforts on facilitating progress in these
areas, in line with my primary responsibility to uphold the civilian aspects of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace, while also facilitating progress towards
Euro-Atlantic integration. Regrettably, a substantial part of my efforts has been
dedicated to addressing negative developments, in particular actions taken that
challenge the Agreement and undermine the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

II. Political update
General political environment
2.
The overall political environment was marked by stagnation, due in large part
to the inability of the six largest political parties to form a State-level government.
Opposition from the entities — in particular the Republika Srpska — continued to
prevent the adoption of an adequate State-level budget for 2011. Consequently, State
institutions have operated under restricted temporary financing since 1 January
2011, which has limited their capacity as well as their ability to meet their
obligations.
3.
A ray of hope emerged in September when the leaders of six parties (SDP,
SNSD, SDA, SDS, HDZ BiH and HDZ 1990) finally began to engage in serious
negotiations on government formation and the adoption of reforms to unlock
progress towards European Union and NATO membership. The apparent readiness
on the part of party leaders to consider backing off from maximalist positions in the
direction of compromise solutions was a welcome change, but has so far not
delivered concrete results.
Decisions of the High Representative during the reporting period
4.
In the wake of the arrest and transfer of General Ratko Mladic to the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, I lifted all Tribunal-related
decisions enacted by my predecessors on 10 June. These included bans on
58 individuals, orders blocking the accounts of 34 individuals, and a requirement of
the SDS party to provide the Office of the High Representative with monthly
financial reports.
Five objectives and two conditions for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative
5.
The Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities made no substantive progress during
the reporting period towards meeting the State property objective. As noted in my
previous report, I suspended the application of the Law on the Status of State
Property Situated in the Territory of Republika Srpska and under the Disposal Ban
(Republika Srpska State Property Law) pending a review of its constitutionality

6

11-57500

S/2011/682

before the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court. On 15 July, the
Constitutional Court announced that it will convene a public hearing in November
regarding the Republika Srpska State Property Law, which was challenged in
January by the Deputy Chair of the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Peoples.
6.
On 22 August, the Bosniak member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency
submitted a request to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court to review
the constitutionality of the Republika Srpska Law on Cadastre. As noted in my
previous report, the Republika Srpska Law on Cadastre has been the subject of some
public criticism and continuing legal challenges since its adoption by the Republika
Srpska National Assembly in February. The application alleges, inter alia, that the
law allows the Republika Srpska to usurp the property rights of State institutions
and non-resident owners. On 23 September the Constitutional Court adopted a
decision on an interim measure suspending the law pending the final decision of the
Court. In response, on 26 September, the Republika Srpska government adopted the
Decree on the Maintenance of Immovable Property Records and Rights to
Immovable Property, which directs the Republika Srpska authorities to continue
registering property rights pursuant to various Republika Srpska laws, including the
Law on Cadastre, and thereby circumvents the Constitutional Court’s interim
measure. This puts the decree in direct violation of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitution, which states that decisions of the Constitutional Court are final and
binding.
7.
On 6 October, the Bosniak member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency
applied anew to the Constitutional Court, alleging that the above-mentioned decree
violates the Court’s decision suspending the Republika Srpska Law on Cadastre.
However, on the same day, the Republika Srpska government proposed new
legislation — the Republika Srpska Law on Survey and Cadastre — which
eliminates many of the controversial provisions under challenge before the
Constitutional Court and, upon entry into force, would supersede the controversial
Law on Cadastre. The Republika Srpska National Assembly adopted the new
legislation in urgent procedure on 13 October, but it remains to be seen whether its
entry into force will be halted or delayed in the Republika Srpska Council of
Peoples by a Bosniak objection on grounds of vital national interest. The new law,
following its entry into force, could lead to a decision of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court to terminate proceedings challenging the
Republika Srpska Law on Cadastre.
8.
The Bosnia and Herzegovina Commission for State Property met twice during
the reporting period, but did not discuss draft legislation or sustainable
apportionment of State property. Substantive discussion on these issues has been
effectively suspended until the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court rules
on the pending challenge to the constitutionality of the Republika Srpska State
Property Law. The Commission has focused on granting exemptions from the
temporary prohibition on transfers of State property. In its letter of 29 September,
the Commission formally requested that I amend my Order of 5 January to allow the
Commission to grant exemptions to the temporary ban on ownership transfers of
State property situated in Republika Srpska. I have not amended my Order; and
while exemptions from the State property transfer ban remain permissible at other
levels of authority in Bosnia and Herzegovina, no exemptions were granted during
the reporting period.

11-57500

7

S/2011/682

9.
Various parties have discussed aspects of an agreement addressing the defence
property objective, but the discussions have thus far proved inconclusive.
10. Neither the Brcko District Supervisor nor I are able yet to conclude that all
obligations under the Brcko Final Award have been fulfilled. Republika Srpska
authorities continue to send ambiguous, and potentially problematic, signals
regarding various commitments under the Brcko Final Award, including the question
of the territorial boundaries of the Brcko District. This also raises questions about
its compliance with obligations under annex 4 and annex 2 to the General
Framework Agreement. The Office of the High Representative continues to seek a
dialogue with Republika Srpska officials to resolve outstanding issues related to the
territorial and other obligations stemming from the Final Award and other legal acts.
To date, the Republika Srpska authorities have declined to provide assurances that
they will fully honour annex 2 and all aspects of the Brcko Final Award. The
Federation provided such assurances early in 2011.
11. Some other entity obligations to the Brcko District are not yet fully met,
including resolution of the issue of entity citizenship and voting rights for residents
of the District. On a more positive note, a sound legal basis for the supply of
electricity to the District could be complete once permanent licences and tariffs for
supply are in place.
12. Given Brcko District’s strategic position, any future disagreement over
implementation of the Final Award would potentially have negative consequences
for the stability of the Brcko District and Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Office of the
High Representative will continue, therefore, to take steps to ensure that both
entities fully comply with their commitments under the Final Award. The Office will
also continue to monitor whether the institutions inside Brcko District are
functioning effectively and apparently permanently, as required by the Final Award
as a precondition to the closure of the Arbitral Tribunal.
State-level institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional reform
13. There was some limited progress in the area of constitutional reform during
the reporting period in the context of the implementation of the 2009 ruling by the
European Court of Human Rights in the Sejdic-Finci case. 1 On 10 October, the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly established an Interim Joint
Committee to agree amendments to implement the Court’s ruling. 2 The Committee
has met three times and agreed on its method of work. However, the views of the
political parties on how to implement the ruling remain far apart.

__________________
1 On 22 December 2009, the European Court of Human Rights issued a judgement in the case

of Sejdić and Finci vs. Bosnia and Herzegovina, which found portions of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitution to be discriminatory, in that citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina who
do not declare themselves as one of the three constituent peoples (Bosniaks, Croats or Serbs) are
not eligible to stand for elections to the House of Peoples or the Presidency.
2 The deadline set by the Parliamentary Assembly to prepare amendments to the Constitution is
30 November 2011, while the deadline for amendments to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election
Law is 31 December.

8

11-57500

S/2011/682

Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
14. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency continued to meet during the
reporting period, holding five regular sessions and six urgent sessions. Cooperation
within the Presidency has improved compared to the previous composition, although
disagreements continue. Such disagreements were witnessed during the presentation
of my previous semi-annual report to the Security Council on 9 May, and also in
disagreements between Bosniak and Croat members on whether Bosnia and
Herzegovina should endorse an independent investigation into illegal organ
trafficking in Kosovo under the auspices of the Security Council. In both cases, the
Presidency failed to formulate a joint position.
15. The Presidency extended the mandate for Bosnia and Herzegovina armed
forces members in the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan. It also
adopted a decision on recognition of the Interim National Council of Libya and a
decision establishing diplomatic relations with South Sudan.
16. The Presidency looked into the matter of large quantities of explosives that
went missing during the process of destroying surplus weapons and ammunition. It
concluded that the missing explosives had not been destroyed as ordered by the
Presidency, but were the subject of illegal trade between two named companies, and
assigned the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Defence to address the matter.
17. During the reporting period, the Presidency continued to emphasize regional
cooperation, participating in numerous regional visits including a trilateral meeting
of the Heads of State of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Turkey on 26 April in
Karadjordjevo, Serbia. On 14 October, the Chair of the Presidency attended the
twenty-second session of the Igman Initiative to promote regional dialogue, in
Belgrade.
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina
18. In June, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency nominated a candidate from
SDP to the Chair of the Council of Ministers, but his candidacy failed to secure the
necessary parliamentary support to form a government. Consequently, the Council of
Ministers continued work in a caretaker capacity, adopting and sending into
parliamentary procedure only a handful of laws and amendments to existing
legislation, as well as enacting a number of appointments. On 30 September, the
Council of Ministers adopted a revised proposal for the distribution of €96.2 million
of financial assistance under the European Commission Instrument for Pre-Accession
Assistance, thereby securing funds that had been put at risk by a dispute between the
entities.
19. On 5 October, a dispute between the Council of Ministers and the
Communications Regulatory Agency culminated in a decision by the Council of
Ministers to suspend further meetings until the matter was resolved. I intervened on
the matter in order to facilitate a resolution to the dispute. The Council of Ministers
returned to work on 10 October.
Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina
20. Months of unsuccessful negotiations and delays in the appointment of
delegates from cantonal assemblies to the Federation House of Peoples delayed both
the inauguration of the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives and the

11-57500

9

S/2011/682

appointment of Bosniak and Croat delegates to the Bosnia and Herzegovina House
of Peoples until 9 June. This delayed the formation of other working bodies of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly and the election of parliamentary
delegations. 3 As a consequence of this significant delay in the formation of the
Parliamentary Assembly and ongoing political disputes within the parliament, very
little legislation has been adopted since the elections of October 2010. One year
after the elections, the Parliamentary Assembly has adopted only 10 laws, amending
existing legislation.
Republika Srpska
21. Republika Srpska continues to combine legal and political actions challenging
the State-level institutions, competencies and laws of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
the authority of the High Representative under the General Framework Agreement
and relevant resolutions of the Security Council, while some of its officials make
statements challenging the statehood of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
22. High-ranking Republika Srpska officials continue to use provocative,
antagonistic rhetoric aimed at the State and the Bosniaks. Most recently, the
Republika Srpska President asserted that the Bosniak people can only build their
identity by destroying that of others. 4 These statements drew the ire of Bosniak
politicians, including the Bosniak member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency, who in an open letter alluded to the possibility of future conflict should
there be an attempt to divide the country. 5
Aftermath of the decision on a referendum and conclusions of the Republika
Srpska National Assembly
23. Under strong international pressure, the Republika Srpska National Assembly
voted on 1 June to repeal its decision of 13 April to hold a referendum, 6 while
adopting a series of conclusions intended to further interpret, amend and supplement
the conclusions of 13 April. The repeal of the referendum was justified by referring
to a need to respect the verbal agreement reached between the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and the President of
Republika Srpska, by which the Republika Srpska authorities would repeal the
referendum decision and review the conclusions of 13 April and the European Union
would open a structured dialogue on justice. While the new conclusions explain why
a referendum is not needed for the time being, they do not affect the entity’s claim
__________________
3 The inauguration of the House of Representatives was completed on 20 May 2011 and that of

the House of Peoples on 9 June, while all working bodies were appointed at the end of June.
4 “The Bosniaks are a people that exist only in Bosnia-Herzegovina and only declared themselves

a people sometime around 1993 … stubbornly trying to prove their national identity, which they
can only do by destroying the nationality of others — primarily, of the other constituent ethnic
groups of Bosnia”. (Republika Srpska President Milorad Dodik, 14 October 2011.)
5 “[T]rue patriots will defend the territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina at any moment
… Srebrenica, Bratunac, Kozarac, Brčko, Višegrad, Foča, Trebinje and other places where
Bosniaks perished will never be outside the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina.” (Bosniak
member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency, Bakir Izetbegovic, 18 October 2011.)
6 The proposed referendum question had been the following: “Do you support the laws imposed
by the High Representative of the International Community in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
particularly those pertaining to the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Prosecutor’s Office
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and their unconstitutional verification in the Parliamentary
Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina?”

10

11-57500

S/2011/682

that it can organize future referenda on matters that fall within the jurisdiction of
Bosnia and Herzegovina or international organizations, including on the judiciary.
24. Despite the withdrawal of the planned referendum and the promise to review
the conclusions of 13 April, those conclusions remain in force and were not altered
by the conclusions of 1 June. They appear to be shaping the policies of the
Republika Srpska authorities. For example, in June the National Assembly
appointed a judge from Republika Srpska to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court without prior consultation with that body, as the rules of the
Court require. This move seems to reflect the Republika Srpska policy — as
contained in the conclusions of 13 April — to dispute the rules of the Constitutional
Court. 7 In addition, at its June session, the National Assembly adopted a new Draft
Law on Courts of Republika Srpska containing provisions that directly attack
judicial independence, subjugate the judiciary to the executive, and undermine the
responsibilities of the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. 8
25. While the immediate threat of a referendum was removed, officials of the
Republika Srpska continued to assert in the media the right of that entity to call a
referendum, including on secession. 9 Officials from Serbia also spoke about a
hypothetical Republika Srpska referendum on secession, also in the context of
comments on the future of Kosovo. 10
Removal of the Bosnia and Herzegovina flag from Republika Srpska
government building
26. The flag of Bosnia and Herzegovina was removed from in front of the
Republika Srpska government building on 10 May and replaced solely by the
Republika Srpska flag.

__________________
7 Conclusion 22 of the 29 individual conclusions that were adopted together specifies that:

“The Republika Srpska National Assembly states that it is unacceptable for any Bosnia and
Herzegovina judicial body to expand its competencies through its Book of Procedures.”
8 Conclusion 20 specifies that: “The Republika Srpska National Assembly demands that the Law
on the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council of Bosnia and Herzegovina be amended and
harmonized with the Bosnia and Herzegovina constitutional order and that every level of
government in Bosnia and Herzegovina have its own High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council.”
9 “I am ready for it [Republika Srpska independence] to happen after me, that isn’t a problem, but
I think that it will happen. I am convinced that it will happen, because it is impossible to build a
country in which there is not any consensus, in which there is not any respect, in which there
exists a desire for outvoting”. (Republika Srpska President Milorad Dodik, 1 June.)
10 “If tomorrow, Republika Srpska decides in a referendum to take a decision about secession,
what will they be? An independent state, or will they take a decision about joining Serbia and a
common life with Serbia?” These remarks followed those of the President of Serbia, Boris
Tadic, at a press conference on 5 May that were widely carried in Serbia’s media, in which he
stated that: “Preservation of the integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina is an issue that is also
linked with the preservation of Kosovo.” The Foreign Minister of Serbia, Vuk Jeremic, told the
Belgrade television station B92 on 22 April that “I don’t see why our support for democratically
made decisions of the institutions of Republika Srpska — which are in harmony with the laws
and constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina — represents a problem for anyone”.

11-57500

11

S/2011/682

Adoption by the Republika Srpska National Assembly of controversial police
officials law
27. On 20 July, the Republika Srpska National Assembly adopted amendments to
the Republika Srpska Law on Police Officials, despite written notification from the
Office of the High Representative that certain provisions appear to call into question
the compliance of Bosnia and Herzegovina with the letter of April 2007 from the
President of the Security Council on persons denied certification. Both the European
Union Police Mission and the Office of the High Representative had also raised
other concerns about the amendments in writing. Specifically, the Police Mission
said that several amendments may be inconsistent with the core principle of a
professional, reliable and efficient police organization that is transparent and
accountable. However, at a meeting on 21 September with the Office of the High
Representative, the Republika Srpska Ministry of the Interior signalled willingness
to demonstrate its continued compliance with the presidential letter, which was
followed by another positive meeting in October.
Constitutional amendment to increase number of deputy speakers in the Republika
Srpska National Assembly
28. The Republika Srpska National Assembly adopted in June a constitutional
amendment increasing the number of deputy speakers in the Assembly. Whereas
previously there had been two deputy speakers, there will be from two to four. The
constitutional amendment was a welcome step introduced to ensure ethnic balance
among the speaker and deputy speakers.
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Government formation crisis
29. Following the formation of a new Federation government on 17 March by the
“Platform” Coalition of parties (SDP, SDA, HSP, NSRzB), tensions remain between
this group of parties and HDZ BiH and HDZ 1990. 11 The HDZ parties were left out
of the Federation government after rejecting a compromise package on government
formation proposed by the international community. The HDZ parties declared for
principled reasons their intention at that time to enter into opposition in the
Federation. The March crisis in government formation had been precipitated by the
refusal of the HDZ bloc parties in some cantons to appoint delegates to the
Federation House of Peoples for several months after the constitutionally mandated
deadlines had passed. The election of all delegates to the Federation House of
Peoples was completed only in May, about a half a year after the deadline had
passed. Tensions between these two blocs of parties were also reflected in some
cantons within the Federation, and the HDZ parties continued to refer to the current
Federation government as illegitimate.
Revival of Croat National Assembly
30. The extra-institutional Croat National Assembly convened on 19 April in
Mostar and has served largely as a platform for HDZ BiH and HDZ 1990. It was
convened to express Croat dissatisfaction over the newly appointed Federation
__________________
11 Details regarding the formation of the Federation government are available in the thirty-ninth

report of the High Representative (see S/2011/283).

12

11-57500

S/2011/682

government, which — according to the Croat National Assembly — lacked
legitimately elected Croats. At that meeting, the Croat National Assembly adopted a
resolution demanding constitutional reform, including the option of a federal unit
(third entity) with a Croat majority. On 5 May, the Presidency of the Croat National
Assembly formed bodies charged with “coordinating the interests of the Croat
people”. At its session on 20 September, the Assembly called on the governments of
cantons with Croat majorities not to accept and to challenge certain decisions by the
allegedly “illegal” and “unconstitutional” Federation government. The President of
HDZ 1990 subsequently clarified that the Presidency of the Croat National
Assembly had ordered its members, who are also cantonal officials, to respect the
Constitution, while challenging all government decisions — which they a priori
deemed illegal — through the courts. Nevertheless, these events raise concerns
about the risk of parallel governing structures eventually emerging. It is also worth
noting that the Croat National Assembly decided to establish its presence abroad by
establishing representative offices in major capitals.
Cantonal governments
31. Three of the 10 cantons in the Federation have yet to form governments. In the
Herzegovina-Neretva and Central Bosnia Cantons, SDP, SDA and HDZ BiH seem to
have come close to agreeing on terms that would make coalition governments
possible, although final agreement has remained elusive. In July, I intervened to
ensure respect for the constitutional order in the Central Bosnia Canton, after a new
government took office, despite the fact that vital national interest had been invoked
by the Croat caucus and the Federation Constitutional Court had not ruled on the
matter. After my intervention the acting government returned to office and I believe
this has also played a role in creating space for negotiations on a new government
which are now well advanced. This is just one of many examples of how I have used
the authority of my mandate to overcome disputes and to facilitate outcomes that are
fully in accordance with the General Framework Agreement.
32. The third canton that remains without a government is Canton 10, where there
is little sign of progress in reaching a political agreement, owing in large part to a
dispute between HDZ BiH and HDZ 1990. Livno, the capital of Canton 10, has also
been the scene of a dispute over the reconstruction of a mosque, which has the
potential to raise inter-ethnic tensions in that town.
33. A court decision is pending for Posavina Canton, where the new government
does function but the Bosniak caucus in the Assembly has submitted a vital national
interest complaint over the fact that the new government is mono-ethnic and does
not mirror the 1991 census. A similar situation exists in West Herzegovina Canton,
where the Assembly decided to ignore the existence of Bosniak and Serb delegates,
electing the Speaker of the Assembly in disregard of the required legal procedures.
Adoption of draft genocide denial law by the Federation House of Representatives
34. On 28 September, the Federation House of Representatives adopted a draft
amendment to the Federation Criminal Code that would criminalize the denial of
genocide. The draft amendment still has to undergo several steps before full
adoption by the parliament. It envisages imprisonment of three months to three
years in cases of denial of genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and other

11-57500

13

S/2011/682

crimes under international law. A similar initiative was proposed at the State level in
August 2009, but was rejected.
Response of Federation Parliament to referendum decision of the Republika Srpska
National Assembly
35. The Federation House of Representatives and House of Peoples held a special
joint session on 27 April in order to define the Federation’s position in relation to
the referendum decision of 13 April of the Republika Srpska National Assembly and
adopted a document entitled “Declaration on European and NATO Commitment”. In
presenting the document, the Speaker of the Federation House of Representatives
said that “[w]e underline that the Federation and the Republika Srpska have the
same status, i.e., that they are merely two entities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, while
the state of Bosnia and Herzegovina carries sovereignty, territorial integrity and
international status”.

III. Public administration
36. Numerous senior civil service appointments remain long overdue at the State
level. 12 The Office of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Public Administration Reform
Coordinator reported to the Council of Ministers that the Public Administration
Reform Strategy and its action plans have been revised and the implementation rate
is now approximately 50 per cent.
37. Notwithstanding the 2010 rulings of the Federation Constitutional Court that
certain articles of the Federation Law on Ministries and the entity’s Law on Civil
Service are not in compliance with the Federation Constitution, the Law on Civil
Service has yet to be harmonized with the Constitutional Court Decision.

IV. Entrenching the rule of law
National Justice Sector Reform Strategy
38. At the sixth Ministerial Conference on the implementation of the Justice
Sector Reform Strategy in Bosnia and Herzegovina for the period from 2008 to
2012, convened on 26 July 2011, stakeholders supported the initial
recommendations of the first session of the European Union structured dialogue. At
that session, the European Commission had highlighted that the Justice Sector
Reform Strategy addressed many issues that are relevant to the future European
integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and called upon all parties to reinforce their
coordination and cooperation in implementing the Strategy. The participation of the
entities’ Ministries of Justice in implementing the Strategy remains inadequate.
39. In terms of implementation of the Justice Sector Reform Strategy, the overall
breakdown includes a total of 204 activities (within 61 programmes) that should
__________________
12 Including the appointment of a new Head of the Communications Regulatory Agency (more than

three years overdue), members of the Communications Regulatory Agency Council (a year and a
half overdue), and the General Manager of the Company for the Transmission of Electric Power
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (one year overdue). The Acting Head of the Indirect Tax Authority
has been appointed on a temporary basis twice, in violation of applicable laws.

14

11-57500

S/2011/682

have been implemented between January 2009 and June 2011. Of these, 45.1 per
cent were fully implemented, 31.9 per cent partially implemented and 23 per cent
not implemented. However, these numbers are misleading as most of the claimed
successes were either of lesser importance or were actually achieved by the High
Judicial and Prosecutorial Council.
40. The Ministerial Conference noted that answers to the European Union
structured dialogue questionnaire would be compiled in one document, but that it
was agreed that the document would include separate positions of the Republika
Srpska, relating to State-level judicial institutions and the High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council. This reflects the Republika Srpska position that the State-level
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and therefore also the State-level Prosecutor’s
Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina, are unconstitutional, and that the Court’s present
jurisdiction is unconstitutional. The Republika Srpska continues to present this
position, in spite of two rulings by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court
(2002 and 2009), confirming the constitutionality of the Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its jurisdiction. The Republika Srpska position is that the judicial
council should be split from the prosecutorial council, and that such councils should
be established at the entity level. The position seeking to re-establish entity level
councils disregards the Agreement on Transfer of Certain Entities’ Responsibilities
through Establishment of the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, signed in March 2004 by the Republika Srpska government, the
Federation government and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers.
War Crimes Prosecution Strategy
41. Implementation of the War Crimes Prosecution Strategy remains slow, fuelling
public criticism of insufficient progress in prosecuting war crimes. On the positive
side, a database has been established, and categorization and determination at which
level — State or entity — identified war crimes cases shall be investigated and/or
tried is under way.
Other rule of law issues
42. The Federation Constitutional Court still lacks three out of nine judges, which
means that the Vital Interest Panel of the Federation Constitutional Court has been
incapacitated for over three years, thereby affecting the protection of constituent
peoples in the decision-making process in the Federation. The High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council adopted its final proposal on the list of qualified candidates
on 23 September 2011, and the procedure is now with the President of the
Federation, who with the concurrence of the two vice-presidents needs to nominate
candidates to the Federation House of Peoples for appointment.
43. Although the total number of international judges in the War Crimes
Department of the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina was planned to drop from four
to three, the mandate of one judge was prolonged until 2012 because of her
involvement in a war crimes trial that cannot be completed sooner.
44. The integration of the Registries of the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
of the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina into domestic institutions
continued to lack the necessary support of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of
Justice and Ministry of Finance and Treasury. Additional premises, updating of the
computer system, regulating the status of the Court police and completion of the

11-57500

15

S/2011/682

integration into the Ministry of Justice of the Criminal Defence Service remain
essential steps that need to be addressed.
High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council working group
45. The High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council’s working group tasked to draft
amendments to the Law on the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council of Bosnia
and Herzegovina continues its work, concentrating on the composition of the
Council, election of its members, and appointment and discipline of judges and
prosecutors. While there was no indication that the plan of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Ministry of Justice to wait for the Council’s initiative on amendments
and then to appoint a new, more restricted working group to prepare the final text of
the amendments to be submitted to the Council of Ministers was changed, there are
signs that the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council does not want to send the
amendments into parliamentary procedure in the current political atmosphere.
Fight against corruption
46. The suspension by the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Chief Prosecutor amid a corruption scandal regarding the alleged
illegal export of arms and ammunition demonstrated the Council’s capacity to react
in disciplinary cases. However, the scandal may also have seriously undermined
citizens’ trust in the Bosnia and Herzegovina judiciary. The suspension was
pronounced on 1 July by the Disciplinary Commission of the High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council and further confirmed after appeal on 8 July. In October, it
was reported that the Disciplinary Counsel had reached a plea agreement with the
suspended Chief Prosecutor, by which he admitted previously denied contacts with
certain individuals, in exchange for accepting a more junior position within the
District Prosecutors’ Office of Banja Luka in the Republika Srpska.
New obstacles to judicial independence
47. On 26 August, the President of Republika Srpska, on his own behalf and that
of the Serb member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency, sent an invitation to
persons from the Republika Srpska working in the State-level institutions to a
meeting with the leadership of their political party, the Alliance of Independent
Social Democrats. The announced agenda of the meeting was “current political
activities on the level of the joint authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, trends and
tasks during the mandate duration, realization of and deviations from the Dayton
Peace Accord and the positioning of Republika Srpska”. The list of invitees included
judges and prosecutors in the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council coming from
Republika Srpska, as well as the President and a judge of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court. The majority of the invited judges and
prosecutors did not attend. This caused the Republika Srpska President to threaten
publicly that those State-level judicial officials would not be reappointed. 13
__________________
13 “No one from the Bosnia and Herzegovina High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council came, along

with the Constitutional Court President. The President of the Constitutional Court was elected
by the Republika Srpska National Assembly and a person elected by the Republika Srpska
National Assembly must have responsibility towards the Republika Srpska. In case they do not
justify their absence from this meeting they will be considered as disqualified.” (Republika
Srpska President Milorad Dodik, 4 September 2011.)

16

11-57500

S/2011/682

48. At its session in June, the Republika Srpska National Assembly adopted the
new Draft Law on Courts of Republika Srpska at the first reading. The draft
contains provisions that undermine the independence of the judiciary from the
executive. The High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council, the Republika Srpska
Association of Judges and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) have submitted comments on the draft law, expressing concerns.
Public security and law enforcement
49. The ongoing initiative to update current legislation on internal affairs at the
Federation and cantonal levels has stalled, owing to disagreements between police
authorities and Ministers of the Interior. On 15 June, cantonal Ministers of the
Interior prepared alternative draft legislation that appears to reintroduce
unacceptable levels of political control over the work of the police. The Federation
and cantonal police commissioners want increased legal and budgetary
independence for operational policing matters along the lines of the long-term
reforms originally initiated by the International Police Task Force.
50. On 14 April 2011, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers adopted
amendments to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Law on Police Officials to permit the
Directorate for Police Coordination to employ active police officials directly from
other police bodies in Bosnia and Herzegovina until 31 December 2012 and
forwarded the amendments to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly
for procedure. This temporary exemption from normal employment procedures
could result in accelerated recruitment of new staff in the Directorate.
51. In parallel to the process described above, a working group composed of the
European Union Police Mission, the Office of the High Representative, the
International Criminal Investigative Training Assistance Program and
representatives of the State, entity, cantonal and Brcko District authorities has
reviewed the Laws on Police Officials currently in force at State, entity, cantonal
and Brcko District levels. The European Union Police Mission is preparing a report
on the working group’s meetings for presentation to working group representatives
at the next meeting, tentatively scheduled for mid-October 2011. The Republika
Srpska Ministry of the Interior did not officially join the working group but attended
sessions in the capacity of observer.

V. Cooperation with the Tribunal
52. With the arrest of Ratko Mladic on 26 May, all persons indicted by the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in relation to war crimes
committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina have been apprehended. Mladic had been a
fugitive since his indictment on 25 July 1995. A number of protest rallies were
organized in the Republika Srpska in response to Mladic’s arrest. As Mladic was the
last remaining fugitive accused of crimes related to the Bosnian war, I lifted all
remaining bans on officials related to non-cooperation with the Tribunal on 10 June.
During the reporting period, the cooperation of Bosnia and Herzegovina with the
Tribunal remained satisfactory, although local institutions showed a less than
dedicated approach to ensuring that individuals responsible for war crimes serve

11-57500

17

S/2011/682

their sentences, as shown in four major cases of escape from the territory of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. 14

VI. Reforming the economy
Economic indicators 15
53. Certain economic indicators for the first six months of 2011 show signs of
improvement. Compared to the same period in 2010, exports increased by
20.5 per cent and imports by 18.2 per cent, which has caused a 15.9 per cent
increase in the total foreign trade deficit. Total industrial production in Bosnia and
Herzegovina rose by 7.7 per cent (5 per cent in the Federation and 3.6 per cent in
the Republika Srpska). The average net salary in Bosnia and Herzegovina amounted
to KM 813, an increase of 2.4 per cent compared to the same period in 2010, while
the average pension amounted to KM 336, a 0.9 per cent decrease. Annual inflation
was estimated at 3.6 per cent. At the same time, unemployment and investments
remain worrisome: registered unemployment at the end of June 2011 was estimated
at more than 527,000 people, approximately 43 per cent of the workforce, while
foreign direct investments in the first half of 2011 decreased by 19.5 per cent over
the same period in 2010.
54. On 16 May, Moody’s Investors Service lowered the credit rating outlook of
Bosnia and Herzegovina from stable to negative, which could downgrade the
country’s credit rating of B2 in the next 12 to 18 months. The decision is based on
the assessment that the political situation in the country is deteriorating. 16 Standard
& Poor’s took a similar decision on 28 July. 17
Indirect taxation system
55. The Governing Board of the Indirect Taxation Authority (ITA) met four times
in the past six months. Building on the meeting of 22 July, which resulted in an
__________________
14 Radovan Stankovic, sentenced to 20 years’ imprisonment by the Court of Bosnia and

Herzegovina for crimes against humanity committed in 1992 in Foca, escaped from prison in
Foca in May 2007 with the assistance of local authorities. He remains at large. His case was the
first to be transferred by the Tribunal to the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Three other
individuals sentenced for crimes against humanity by the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
remain at large. Two indictees, sentenced to 13 years and 17 years respectively, escaped in May
2009 and May 2010 while under prohibitive measures awaiting delivery of their final verdicts.
In December 2010 a fourth accused escaped just before a first instance sentence of 27 years’
imprisonment for crimes against humanity against him was to be rendered.
15 Sources: Bosnia and Herzegovina Economic Planning Directorate, Statistics Agency, Foreign
Trade Chamber, Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations.
16 Moody’s assigned the first credit rating to Bosnia and Herzegovina on 29 March 2004 (B3 with
positive outlook), upgrading it on 17 May 2006 to B2 with stable outlook as a result of the
2004-2006 reforms and achievements strengthening the country’s political and economic
stability. The Moody’s decision of 16 May 2011 to change the credit rating outlook from stable
to negative is the first rollback in the credit rating history of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
assigned by Moody’s.
17 Standard & Poor’s assigned its first credit rating to Bosnia and Herzegovina on 22 December
2008 (B+ with stable outlook), confirming it on 8 December 2009. The Standard & Poor’s
decision of 28 July 2011 to change the credit rating outlook from stable to negative is, therefore,
the first rollback in the credit rating history of Bosnia and Herzegovina as assigned by Standard
& Poor’s.

18

11-57500

S/2011/682

agreement on new indirect tax revenue allocation coefficients applicable to the third
quarter of 2011, 18 the Governing Board made further progress at its session on
7 September. At that session, the Governing Board — on the basis of a temporary
rebalancing of the collected and distributed indirect tax revenue — agreed on debt
settlement for 2008, 2009 and the first six months of 2010 and 2011. Under the
agreement, which took effect on 14 September and will be implemented by the end
of November 2011, the Federation would repay approximately KM 33.8 million to
the Republika Srpska. 19 While the second half of 2010 remains disputed and
continues to cause tension between the entities, 20 the issue will probably be
addressed in the forthcoming period, following an additional analysis of the relevant
data by the Governing Board’s Final Consumption Unit.
56. The Republika Srpska continues to challenge the indirect taxation system,
including the State’s competence for indirect taxation. At the session of 10 May of
the ITA Governing Board, the Republika Srpska Finance Minister called for the
breakup of the single account and the introduction of entity jurisdiction over indirect
tax revenue collection. At meetings with the Office of the High Representative on
10 June, the Republika Srpska Prime Minister and Finance Minister both advocated
a split of the single account into three parts — Federation, Republika Srpska, Brcko
District — and the financing of the State through lower-level transfers. On
9 September, 21 the Republika Srpska Prime Minister repeated his demand for the
creation of separate sub-accounts for the collection of indirect tax revenue. He also
described the existing fiscal structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina as unsustainable
and called for a new one. In an interview on 5 September, the Republika Srpska
President 22 stressed that the system of indirect taxation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
had been imposed contrary to the Constitution and that the Republika Srpska would
“take decisions questioning the functioning of the system”. 23
__________________
18 This is only the second time in the past three years that the ITA Governing Board has complied

with its obligation under the 24 June 2008 Rulebook on Coefficient Calculation and Payments to
the Entities, which clearly states that new coefficients should be agreed on a quarterly basis.
19 The debt results from the ITA Governing Board’s failure to adjust indirect tax revenue allocation
coefficients to the entities’ final consumption on a quarterly basis, as provided for in the 24 June
2008 Rulebook on Coefficient Calculation and Payments to the Entities. In the absence of the
required adjustments, the coefficients agreed on 24 June 2008 were applied for over two years.
20 The Federation requested an explanation for a significant increase in the Republika Srpska final
consumption in the second half of 2010, which led to the increase in the calculated allocation
coefficient for the Republika Srpska and thus to the amount claimed by the Republika Srpska
from the Federation. Doubts over the data in question were also expressed by the ITA Governing
Board’s Final Consumption Unit. The Federation government expressed its willingness to settle
any debt for this period following verification of the data.
21 Glas Srpske of 9 September 2011.
22 OBN, Telering programme of 5 September 2011.
23 Contrary to these claims, the indirect taxation system was established in line with the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Constitution. The transfer of competence for indirect taxation to the State and
the conclusion of the corresponding Transfer Agreement were approved by the Republika Srpska
National Assembly on 30 October 2003 and by the Federation Parliament on 3 December 2003.
Following this approval, the two entity Prime Ministers signed the Transfer Agreement on
5 December 2003 and then both Houses of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly
adopted the Law on Indirect Taxation System on 29 December 2003. Any challenge to the
existing system of indirect taxation would, therefore, represent a rollback on a previously agreed
reform that could negatively affect the financing of the State — since it would make it de facto
dependant on entity transfers as in the pre-indirect taxation system reform state of affairs. Such
changes would also affect the financing of Brcko District, which is dependant on the existing
system of indirect taxation on the basis of the High Representative’s decision of 4 May 2007.

11-57500

19

S/2011/682

Challenges to the fiscal sustainability of State institutions
57. Entity disputes within the ITA Governing Board have spilled over to the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Fiscal Council, which had not met since February before
finally convening on 12 October. A Global Framework of Fiscal Balance and
Policies in Bosnia and Herzegovina for the period 2011-2013 has still not been
adopted. 24 In its absence, international financial disbursements, including the
European Union Macro-Financial Assistance, remain on hold. This increases
pressure on the entities and forces them to seek alternatives — such as resorting to
borrowing — to cover budget deficits and meet their financial commitments. In
addition to this, the Republika Srpska Prime Minister reiterated on 26 July 25 his
earlier claims 26 that the Republika Srpska is one of the two co-founders of the
Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina and that it has a right to its profits, and
called for Central Bank profits to be split between the Republika Srpska and the
Federation and not paid to State institutions, as the State “had not contributed to the
initial founding capital of the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina and was
therefore not its founder”. 27
58. On 14 July, the 2011 State budget proposal failed to receive the required entity
majority from delegates elected from the Republika Srpska and was rejected by the
Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives. The Bosnia and Herzegovina
Ministry of Finance and Treasury revised the previous budget proposal and
submitted it to the Presidency for a new procedure. Although the proposal takes into
account the interests of both the State and the entities and is in line with the
principles agreed at the joint meeting of the State and entity Finance Ministers in
Vlasic held on 13 July (attended by representatives of the Office of the High
Representative and the European Union), it has not been considered to date because
of indications that the Republika Srpska will continue to oppose it. In the absence of
a budget, the State institutions are forced to remain on restrictive temporary
financing, which not only affects their ability to meet their legal obligations and
integration requirements, but also jeopardizes their financial sustainability.
59. Statements by senior Republika Srpska officials indicate that they will
continue to oppose budget proposals which would secure for the State institutions
the revenues needed at least to maintain the same budget level and the same level of
operations as in 2010. Federation officials have also declined so far to support the
State’s requested share of disbursements from the single account for the 2012
__________________
24 Although this document should have been adopted by the end of May 2010 to allow for the

preparation of 2011 budgets at all levels, it has not been agreed to date due to a disagreement
between the entities and the State on the State’s share in indirect tax revenue in 2011.
25 Media statement by Republika Srpska Prime Minister Aleksandar Dzombic on 26 July 2011, as
reported by the Republika Srpska News Agency.
26 Media statements by Republika Srpska Prime Minister Aleksandar Dzombic reported, among
others, by ONASA (Independent News Agency) on 30 April 2011, the Republika Srpska News
Agency on 9 May 2011, and BLIC on 12 May 2011.
27 The Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina was explicitly provided for in annex 4 of the
General Framework Agreement as the sole authority for issuing currency and for monetary
policy throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose responsibilities shall be determined by the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly. The 1997 Law on the Central Bank further
specifies that the Central Bank shall be entirely independent from the Federation, the Republika
Srpska, any public agency and any other authority in the pursuit of its objective and the
performance of its tasks, while the 2005 Amendments to the Law regulate the manner of the
allocation of Central Bank net profits, including payments on this basis to the State budget.

20

11-57500

S/2011/682

budget. It has also been announced that a report on the financial aspects of the
functioning of the Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions is being prepared by the
Republika Srpska government for debate by the Republika Srpska National
Assembly. In the light of these developments, there is growing concern that the
budget is being used to challenge the institutions and competencies of the State. In
line with my mandate, this is a matter I take very seriously.
Ongoing obstruction of the Bosnia and Herzegovina electricity
transmission company
60. The entities continued to disagree on issues related to the management of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina electricity transmission company (TRANSCO) 28 which is
still grappling with the problems following from two earlier attempts by Republika
Srpska authorities and representatives in the company to unilaterally dissolve it (in
2008 and 2009).
61. The State Electricity Regulatory Commission warned TRANSCO about the
ongoing stalemate in the adoption of investment plans (since 2008) and the absence
of investment despite TRANSCO investment funds accumulating to over KM 200
million. It also warned TRANSCO about its refusal to connect new customers to the
transmission network and the negative consequences of employee lawsuits triggered
by the General Manager’s non-compliance with the company’s statute. As a
consequence of the latter, the company has thus far paid KM 17.4 million in damages,
which makes about 83 per cent of TRANSCO’s total debt (KM 21 million). 29 New
appointments are also blocked, and all of the company’s management and most of its
Management Board are still in a caretaker mandate (the General Manager since
September 2009). Moreover, the company no longer has an Audit Board. This,
among others, affects the Company’s audit for 2010, as the TRANSCO statute calls
for completing an independent audit within 120 days of the end of the previous
fiscal year (end of June) and the auditor for 2010 was selected only at the end of
July 2011.
62. In addition, threats of unilateral action re-emerged on 12 October, when the
Republika Srpska government reportedly adopted a conclusion announcing the
establishment of a Republika Srpska electricity transmission company if the
problems in TRANSCO were not resolved by the end of the year. Regrettably, the
Republika Srpska authorities have so far failed to provide my office with the text of
that conclusion.
63. Despite these problems, the electricity transmission network is being
maintained and “the company is showing good business results”.29

__________________
28 TRANSCO was established by the Law Establishing the Company for the Transmission of

Electric Power in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which was adopted by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliamentary Assembly in 2004 following the 2003 agreement between the two entity Prime
Ministers on the basis of article III.5(b) of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution.
29 10 August 2011 report, as sent to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Foreign Trade and
Economic Relations by TRANSCO Acting General Manager Dusan Mijatovic.

11-57500

21

S/2011/682

VII. Return of refugees and displaced persons
64. Implementation of the Annex 7 Strategy remained slow during the reporting
period. There is a particular need to address the living conditions of the remaining
8,600 internally displaced persons in collective centres and to create durable
housing solutions. This is the most vulnerable group of the approximately 113,000
internally displaced persons who remain.
65. A UNHCR envoy, appointed early in 2011 to work on the protracted
displacement situation in the Western Balkans, visited Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the region numerous times in 2011 to support the governments in devising a regional
programme for durable solutions for the most vulnerable. Bosnia and Herzegovina
plays an important role in this process, with the Ministry for Human Rights and
Refugees serving as the regional coordinator. The Bosnia and Herzegovina
component of the regional programme complements the revised Annex 7 Strategy,
which will be presented at a donors conference in 2012. The Office of the High
Representative will continue to support the efforts of the UNHCR office in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to ensure full implementation of annex 7.

VIII. Media development
66. There has been no progress in implementing the public broadcasting
legislation adopted in January 2006. On the contrary, the three public broadcasters
constituting the system continue to disagree on the system’s very structure.
Consequently, the Board of Governors of the Public Broadcasting System failed to
adopt the statute to establish the Corporation, which is crucial for the switchover to
the digital terrestrial signal, a task which Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions hoped
to complete in 2012. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly has not
appointed new governors for the Public Broadcasting System, even though the
mandate of several current governors is expired. The Communications Regulatory
Agency is still functioning with an acting Director General and a Council whose
mandate has expired. This situation is affecting the Agency’s credibility and its
operations.
67. From January until September 2011, attacks against the media increased 30 per
cent compared to the same period in 2010. The Free Media Helpline, a service
operating within the Bosnia and Herzegovina Union of Journalists, registered
42 cases of threats and pressures, physical attacks, denial of information, mobbing,
and one case of a death threat.

IX. Mostar
68. The Mostar authorities elected in 2008 continue to struggle to build on the
progress made between 2004 and 2008 with the assistance of the Office of the High
Representative in integrating the city. After a notable delay, a ruling of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Constitutional Court requiring limited changes to the electoral
system for Mostar finally entered into force on 16 June. The deadline for the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly to adopt the necessary changes to the
Election Law expires on 16 December. No progress has been made on this issue

22

11-57500

S/2011/682

during the reporting period. My Office will be working to facilitate agreement in the
months ahead.

X. Defence reform
69. On 19 May, the Chair of the Bosnia and Herzegovina NATO Coordination
Team tabled a proposal for the Team’s consideration, calling for the ownership and
registration of prospective immovable defence properties on behalf of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Although not required by the Law on Defence of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for the transfer of non-prospective defence properties to municipal
authorities, the proposal was an attempt to reaffirm the commitment of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to fulfil all conditions for the activation of the NATO Membership
Action Plan. In spite of this proposal, there has been no breakthrough and the
responsibility to act continues to rest primarily with the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Council of Ministers and entity governments.
70. On 28 April, and in line with a request from both the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Minister of Security, the United States
Embassy, OSCE and the United Nations Development Programme co-signed and
forwarded a set of recommendations for improving the weapons export regime to
the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations. 30 On 11 May, the Council of
Ministers agreed to support an addendum to the instruction on terms and procedure
for the issuance of permits for foreign trade exchange of goods and services of
strategic importance for the safety of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 31
71. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Minister of Foreign Trade and Economic
Relations has since inserted the addendum to the Law on Control of Foreign Trade
Exchange of Goods and Services of Strategic Importance for the Safety of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. As a consequence, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency ban on
weapons exports no longer applies.

XI. Intelligence reform
72. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Intelligence-Security Agency came under severe
public pressure on several occasions during the reporting period.
73. Of further concern, at its session on 18 August, the Republika Srpska
government decided to initiate the drafting of a Republika Srpska Law on Protection
of Secret Data. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Law on Protection of Secret Data
assigns exclusive authority for the protection of secret data with the State of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. An attempt by an entity authority to regulate this area would be
__________________
30 As a reminder, on 17 March, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency adopted a decision calling

for revised criteria in the country’s licensing regime for export of weapons and ammunition
following (unconfirmed) suspicions of arms exports to questionable recipients. This in effect
halted all exports of weapons and ammunition from Bosnia and Herzegovina.
31 The addendum requires the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations to request the
Intelligence-Security Agency to conduct security checks of involved parties prior to an export
approval. The Council of Ministers also requested closer cooperation between the institutions
participating in the procedures of foreign trade of weapons and military equipment as well as
appealing for appropriate training of relevant civil servants and industry employees.

11-57500

23

S/2011/682

difficult without conflicting with the State law and State-level institutions assigned
to oversee its implementation.
74. On 25 August and 14 September, the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of
Representatives and the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Peoples respectively
adopted the Annual 2011 Intelligence-Security Policy Platform. The Policy Platform
is a set of guidelines that are required for the effective planning, execution and
delivery of the legally prescribed tasks of the Intelligence-Security Agency. This
was the first such document to have successfully passed both the executive and
legislative branches since the Agency’s establishment in 2004.

XII. European Union military force
75. The European Union military force (EUFOR) continued to assist the Office of
the High Representative and other international organizations to fulfil their
respective mandates. Preparations are under way to continue the executive presence
of EUFOR beyond 2011. I consider it important for a United Nations-mandated
executive military presence to be retained.

XIII. European Union Police Mission
76. The European Union Police Mission has continued to support the development
of law-enforcement agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the fight against
organized crime and corruption. The Mission has continued work on harmonizing
the legal framework for police and supported further implementation of the police
reform laws of April 2008, through its mentoring of the Directorate for Police
Coordination. The current mandate of the Mission expires on 31 December 2011.
European Union member States have carried out a review on the future of the
Mission and will decide late in 2011 how the European Union can best continue to
support the law enforcement and criminal justice sectors in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

XIV. European Union Special Representative
77. From 1 May to 31 August, in my role as European Union Special
Representative, I continued to coordinate the various European Union missions on
the ground. In line with my mandate as European Union Special Representative, I
have offered local political guidance to EUFOR and the Police Mission.
Cooperation with the European Union delegation and member States has also been
intense. I handed over my mandate as European Union Special Representative on
1 September to Peter Sørensen, the new head of the European Union delegation and
the new European Union Special Representative.

XV. Future of the Office of the High Representative
78. The Peace Implementation Council Steering Board met at the level of political
directors on 6 and 7 July. It once again expressed its concern over the political
situation in the country, the failure to appoint a State government, as well as the

24

11-57500

S/2011/682

ongoing failure to address the remaining objectives and conditions for the closure of
the Office of the High Representative. The next meeting is tentatively scheduled for
12 and 13 December.
79. Owing to the decoupling of the position of European Union Special
Representative from the Office of the High Representative, 26 highly valuable staff
members have transferred to the office of the European Union Special
Representative. In addition to this, the overall budget of the Office of the High
Representative has been reduced for the current budget year, the ninth such
reduction in the past 10 years.

XVI. Reporting schedule
80. In keeping with the proposals of my predecessor to submit regular reports for
onward transmission to the Security Council, as required by Security Council
resolution 1031 (1995), I herewith present my sixth regular report. Should the
Secretary-General or any Security Council member require information at any other
time, I would be pleased to provide an additional written update. The next regular
report to the Secretary-General is scheduled for May 2012.

11-57500

25
