238

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

against missions and representatives to international intergovernmental organizations and officials of such organizations;
3. Urges States to observe and to implement the principles and rules of international law governing diplomatic
and consular relations and, in particular, to take all necessary
measures in conformity with their international obligations
to ensure effectively the protection, security and safety of
all diplomatic and consular missions and representatives
officially present in territory under their jurisdiction, including practicable measures to prohibit in their territories
illegal activities of persons, groups and organizations that
encourage, instigate, organize or engage in the perpetration
of acts against the security and safety of such missions and
representatives;
4. Recommends that States co-operate closely, inter
alia, through contacts between the diplomatic and consular
mission and the receiving State, with regard to practical
measures designed to enhance the protection, security and
safety of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives;
5. Calls anew upon States that have not yet done so to
consider becoming parties to the instruments relevant to the
protection, security and safety of diplomatic and consular
missions and representatives, inter a/ia, the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961, 15 the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations of 1963, 16 and the respective
optional protocols thereto, as well as the Convention of
1973 on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against
Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic
Agents; 17
6. Calls upon States, in cases where a dispute arises in
connection with a violatim, of the principles and rules of
international law concerning the inviolability of diplomatic
and consular missions and representatives, to make use of
the means for peaceful settlement of disputes, including the
good offices of the Secretary-General;
7. Invites all States to report to the Secretary-General
serious violations of the protection, security and safety of
diplomatic and consular missions and representatives, invites the State in which the violation took place and, where
applicable, the State where the alleged offender is present
to report also on measures taken to bring the offender to
justice and eventually to communicate, in accordance with
its laws, the final outcome of the proceedings against the
offender, and further invites the State in which the violation
took place to report also on the measures aimed at preventing
a repetition of such violations;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate to all
States upon receipt the reports received by him pursuant to
paragraph 7 above, unless requested otherwise by the reporting State;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to invite States to
inform him of their views with respect to any measures
needed to enhance the protection, security and safety of
diplomatic and consular missions and representatives;
10. Requests the Secretary-General, when a serious
violation has been reported to him pursuant to paragraph
7 above, to draw the attention, when appropriate, of the
State where the violation occurred and, when applicable,
of the State where the alleged offender is present to the
reporting procedures established in resolution 35/168 and
reaffirmed in paragraph 7 above;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report on
the state of ratification of, and accessions to, the instruments
"United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 500, No. 7310, p. 95.
16 Ibid., vol. 596, No. 8638, p. 261.
17
Resolution 3166 (XXVIII), annex.

referred to in paragraph 5 above, as well as the reports
received and views expressed pursuant to paragraphs 7 and
9 above, and invites him to submit any views he may wish
to express on these matters;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Consideration of
effective measures to enhance the protection, security and
safety of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives: report of the Secretary-General".
57th plenary meeting
13 November /98/
Report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Drafting
of an International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of
Mercenaries
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the need for strict observance of the
principles of sovereign equality, political independence, territorial integrity of States and self-determination of peoples,
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and developed in the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, 18
Recalling its resolutions, particularly resolutions 2395
(XXIII) of 29 November 1968, 2465 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2548 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969, 2708 (XXV)
of 14 December 1970, 3103 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973
and its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, as well
as Security Council resolutions 405 (1977) of 14 April 1977
and 419 (1977) of 24 November 1977, in which the United
Nations denounced the practice of using mercenaries against
developing countries and national liberation movements,
Recalling, in particular, its resolution 35/48 of 4 December 1980, by which it established an Ad Hoe Committee on
the Drafting of an International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries,
composed of thirty-five Member States,
Having considered the report of the Ad Hoe Committee, 19
Recognizing that the activities of mercenaries are contrary
to fundamental principles of international law, such as noninterference in the internal affairs of States, territorial integrity and independence, and seriously impede the process
of self-determination of peoples struggling against colonialism, racism and apartheid and all forms of foreign
domination,
Bearing in mind the pernicious impact that the activities
of mercenaries have on international peace and security,
Considering that the progressive development and codification of the rules of international law on mercenaries
would contribute immensely to the implementation of the
purposes and principles of the Charter,
Taking account of the fact that the Ad Hoe Committee
has not completed the mandate entrusted to it,
Reaffirming the need for the elaboration at the earliest
possible date of an international convention against the recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries,
I. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on the Drafting of an International Convention against the
Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries;
2. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall continue
its work with the goal of drafting at the earliest possible
'36/76.

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session. Supplement No. 43 (A/36/43).
1

•

19

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

date an international convention against the recruitment,
use, financing and training of mercenaries;
3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee, in the fulfilment
of its mandate, to consider the suggestions and proposals
of Member States, bearing in mind the views and comments
submitted to the Secretary-General2° and those expressed
at the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly during
the debate in the Sixth Committee devoted to the consideration of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee; 21
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make available to
the Ad Hoe Committee at its next session the texts of the
conventions drafted by international and regional organizations on mercenaries, as well as any other relevant
documentation;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Ad
Hoe Committee with any assistance and facilities it may
require for the performance of its work;
6. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit its report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Report of the Ad
Hoe Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against the Recruitment. Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries" .
85th plenary meeting
4 December /98/

36/106.

Draft Code of Offences against the Peace and
Security of Mankind

The General Assembly,
Mindful of Article 13, paragraph 1 a, of the Charter of
the United Nations, which provides that the General Assembly shall initiate studies and make recommendations for
the purpose of encouraging the progressive development of
international law and its codification,
Recalling its resolution I 77 (II) of 2 I November 1947.
by which it directed the International Law Commission to
prepare a draft code of offences against the peace and security of mankind,
Having considered the draft Code of Offences against the
Peace and Security of Mankind prepared by the International
Law Commission and submitted to the General Assembly
in 1954, 22
Recalling its belief that the elaboration of a code of offences against the peace and security of mankind could
contribute to strengthening international peace and security
and thus to promoting and implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations.
Bearing in mind its resolution 33/97 of 16 December
1978, by which it decided to accord priority and the fullest
consideration to the item entitled "Draft Code of Offences
against the Peace and Security of Mankind",
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General2 3
submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 35/49
of 4 December 1980,
Considering that the International Law Commission has
just accomplished an important part of its work devoted to
the succession of States in respect of State property, archives

20

See A/35/366 and Add.1-3 and A/361438.
Official Records of the General As.,emblv, Thirrv-sixrh Session, Sixth
Committee, 16th-23rd and 57th meetings; and ibid., Sixth Committee,
Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.
22
Ibid., Ninth Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/2693). para. 54.
23
A/36/416.
21

239

and debts and that the programme of work is thus at present
lightened,
Taking into consideration that the membership of the
International Law Commission was increased during the
thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly 24 and that it
has at its disposal a new mandate of five years to organize
its future work,
Taking into account the views expressed during the debate
on this item at the current session,
Taking note of paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 36/114 of 10 December I 981 on the report of the
International Law Commission,
I. Invites the International Law Commission to resume
its work with a view to elaborating the draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind and to
examine it with the required priority in order to review it,
taking duly into account the results achieved by the process
of the progressive development of international law;
2. Requests the International Law Commission to consider at its thirty-fourth session the question of the draft
Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind
in the context of its five-year programme and to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the
priority it deems advisable to accord to the draft Code, and
the possibility of presenting a preliminary report to the Assembly at its thirty-eighth session bearing, inter alia, on the
scope and the structure of the draft Code;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to reiterate his invitation to Member States and relevant international intergovernmental organizations to present or update their
comments and observations on the draft Code of Offences
against the Peace and Security of Mankind, and to submit
a report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the International Law Commission all the necessary documentation, comments and observations presented by Member
States and relevant international intergovernmental organizations on the item entitled "Draft Code of Offences against
the Peace and Security of Mankind";
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind" and to
accord it priority and the fullest possible consideration.
92nd plenary meeting
/0 December 1981

36/107.

Progressive development of the principles and
norms of international law relating to the new
international economic order
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with the Charter of

the United Nations, the General Assembly is called upon
to initiate studies and make recommendations for the purpose of encouraging the progressive development of international law and its codification,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-Vl) of
I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Recalling its resolutions 34/ 150 of 17 December 1979
and 35/166 of 15 December 1980, entitled "Consolidation
'" See sect. II, resolution 36/39.
