S/PRST/2000/12

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 April 2000
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4125th meeting of the Security Council, held on 7 April 2000 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Afghanistan”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council has considered the report of the Secretary-General
concerning the situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international
peace and security of 10 March 2000 (A/54/791-S/2000/205).
“The Security Council reiterates its grave concern at the continued
Afghan conflict, which is a serious and growing threat to regional and
international peace and security. It strongly condemns the Taliban for the
launching of new offensives, most notably that of 1 March 2000. The Council
expresses its deep concern at the reports that both parties to the conflict are
preparing for renewed large-scale fighting and recalls its repeated demands
that the Afghan parties cease fighting. These events add to the enormous
suffering of the civilian population of Afghanistan.
“The Security Council reiterates that there is no military solution to the
conflict in Afghanistan and that only a negotiated political settlement aimed at
the establishment of a broad-based, multi-ethnic and fully representative
government acceptable to all Afghans can lead to peace and national
reconciliation. It notes that the United Front of Afghanistan is willing to talk
with the Taliban and recalls its demand that the parties, in particular the
Taliban, resume negotiations under United Nations auspices without delay and
preconditions in full compliance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Council.
“The Security Council calls upon all Afghan parties to comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and to ensure the full and
unhindered access of international humanitarian assistance and personnel to all
those in need. It expresses its grave concern at the further deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan as a result of ongoing hostilities. The
Taliban has the primary responsibility for this.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the Taliban for the repeated
forced entries on 26, 27 and 29 March 2000 by its armed groups into and
searches of the United Nations premises in Kandahar and for the intimidation
of the United Nations personnel. It stresses that responsibility for the

00-38312 (E) 070400
`````````

S/PRST/2000/12

subsequent withdrawal of all international staff from Kandahar and suspension
of humanitarian assistance activities in southern Afghanistan rests solely with
the Taliban. The Council demands that the Taliban stop these unacceptable
practices and ensure the safety and security of all United Nations and
associated personnel and humanitarian personnel working in Afghanistan in
accordance with international law.
“The Security Council stresses its grave concern at the human rights
situation in Afghanistan, which is unacceptable. It expresses particular alarm at
the continuing disregard by the Taliban of the concerns expressed by the
international community. The Council strongly condemns the forced
displacement of the civilian population, notably that conducted by the Taliban
in 1999, the deliberate targeting of civilians and the destruction of their assets
and means of survival, summary executions, arbitrary detention of civilians
and forced labour of those in detention, the separation of men from their
families, indiscriminate bombing and other violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. It calls upon all Afghan parties, especially the
Taliban, to put an end to such practices and to ensure the protection of
civilians.
“The Security Council reaffirms the principle of non-refoulement of
refugees, as provided for in relevant instruments of international law,
welcomes recent efforts of countries neighbouring Afghanistan to support the
voluntary repatriation of Afghan refugees in safety and dignity, and urges
those host States to continue to provide international protection to Afghan
refugees in need of it. It encourages the international community to provide the
necessary assistance in this regard.
“The Security Council condemns the continuing grave violations of the
human rights of women and girls, including all forms of discrimination against
them, in all areas of Afghanistan, particularly in areas under the control of the
Taliban. It remains deeply concerned about continued restrictions on their
access to health care, to education and to employment outside the home, and
about restrictions on their freedom of movement and freedom from
intimidation, harassment and violence. The Council notes the recent reports of
modest progress regarding the access of women and girls to certain services,
but considers that such incremental improvements, while welcome, still fall far
short of the minimum expectations of the international community, and calls
upon all parties, particularly the Taliban, to take measures to end all violations
of human rights of women and girls.
“The Security Council reiterates that outside interference in the internal
affairs of Afghanistan, including the involvement of foreign combatants and
military personnel and the supply of weapons and other materials used in the
conflict, should cease immediately. It calls upon all States to take resolute
measures to prohibit their military personnel from planning and participating
in combat operations in Afghanistan, and immediately to withdraw their
personnel and to assure that the supply of ammunition and other war-making
materials is halted. The Council expresses its deep concern at the continuing
involvement in the fighting in Afghanistan, on the side of the Taliban forces,
of thousands of non-Afghan nationals.

2

S/PRST/2000/12

“The Security Council reiterates its position that the United Nations must
continue to play its central and impartial role in international efforts towards a
peaceful resolution of the Afghan conflict. It welcomes the appointment of a
new Personal Representative of the Secretary-General and the activities of the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA) to facilitate a
political process aimed at achieving a lasting political settlement to the
conflict. The Council supports the phased deployment of the UNSMA Civil
Affairs Unit inside Afghanistan, as the security conditions permit.
“The Security Council welcomes the renewed commitment of members
of the ‛Six plus Two’ group to contribute to a peaceful resolution of the
Afghan conflict in support of the efforts of the United Nations, and urges the
members of the group and the Afghan parties to implement the Tashkent
Declaration on Fundamental Principles for a Peaceful Settlement of the
Conflict in Afghanistan (A/54/174-S/1999/812, annex), particularly the
agreement of members of the group not to provide military support to any
Afghan party and to prevent the use of their territories for such purposes.
“The Security Council expresses its appreciation for the efforts
undertaken by the Organization of the Islamic Conference, in support of and in
coordination with the United Nations, to facilitate the convening of
negotiations between the two Afghan parties. It encourages the process
launched in Rome to convene a loya jirgah in Afghanistan and acknowledges
other recent efforts to promote peace in Afghanistan, such as those of the
Cyprus group and the meeting in Tokyo.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the continuing use of Afghan
territory, especially areas controlled by the Taliban, for the sheltering and
training of terrorists and planning of terrorist acts, and reaffirms its conviction
that the suppression of international terrorism is essential for the maintenance
of international peace and security. It insists that the Taliban cease the
provision of sanctuary and training for international terrorists and their
organizations, take effective measures to ensure that the territory under its
control is not used for terrorist installations and camps or for the preparation or
organization of terrorist acts against other States or their citizens, and
cooperate with efforts to bring indicted terrorists to justice.
“The Security Council demands once again that the Taliban turn over
indicted terrorist Usama bin Laden to appropriate authorities as set out in its
resolution 1267 (1999) of 15 October 1999. It stresses that the continued
failure of the Taliban to comply with this demand is unacceptable. The Council
will ensure effective implementation of the measures imposed by that
resolution. It condemns the recent attacks and planned attacks by terrorists
affiliated with Usama bin Laden which constitute a continuing threat to the
international community.
“The Security Council reiterates that the capture by the Taliban of the
Consulate-General of the Islamic Republic of Iran and the murder of the
Iranian diplomats and journalist in Mazar-e-Sharif as well as the murders of
the United Nations personnel constitute flagrant violations of international law.
It expresses its concern at the failure of the Taliban effectively to bring to
justice those responsible for these crimes. The Council reiterates its demand
that the Taliban cooperate fully with the United Nations in this regard.

3

S/PRST/2000/12

“The Security Council is deeply disturbed by an alarming increase in the
cultivation, production and trafficking of drugs in Afghanistan, especially in
areas controlled by the Taliban, and by its consequences for the continuation of
the conflict. It demands that the Taliban, as well as others, halt all illegal drugs
activities. The Council encourages the initiative of the ‛Six plus Two’ group to
address the drug-related issues in a coordinated manner with the support of the
Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention. It also encourages Member
States and others concerned to increase their support for the efforts aimed at
strengthening the drug control capacities of countries bordering Afghanistan.
“The Security Council stresses the need for prompt and effective
implementation by all Member States of the measures imposed by its
resolution 1267 (1999), and reminds Member States of their obligations under
this resolution, including assisting in the identification of Taliban assets and
aircraft. It underlines that sanctions are not aimed at the Afghan people, but are
imposed against the Taliban because of its non-compliance with that
resolution. The Council reaffirms its decision to assess the impact, including
the humanitarian implications, of the measures imposed by that resolution. It
encourages the Committee established pursuant to its resolution 1267 (1999) to
report in this respect as soon as practicable.
“The Security Council holds the leadership of the Taliban responsible for
not taking measures to comply with the demands made in its resolutions,
especially to conclude a ceasefire and to resume negotiations, and stresses the
need for the Taliban to comply with these demands without delay.
“In this context the Security Council reaffirms its readiness to consider
the imposition of further targeted measures, in accordance with its
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations, with the aim of
achieving the full implementation of all its relevant resolutions.”

4
