General Assembly-Eighteenth Session

gramme for the indigenous people of Territories under
Portuguese administration,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral submitted in accordance with paragraph 9 of
the aforesaid resolution, 21
Noting with regret that, notwithstanding paragraph
10 of that resolution, the Government of Portugal has
not co-operated in the implementation of the resolution,
Noting with satisfaction that several Member States
have extended offers of scholarships to students from.
Territories under Portuguese administration,
Noting that only a few applicants from Territories
under Portuguese administration have the necessary
qualifications to enable them to enter institutions of
higher education,
Noting further that most of the scholarships offered
by Member States are for nigher education only and
consequently are not accessible to inhabitants of Territories under Portuguese administration whose qualifications cannot meet the requirements set for the use
of such scholarships,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to use as fully as possible the existing United
~ ations programmes of technical co-operation and, particularly, to make available to those indigenous inhabitants of the Territories under Portuguese administratio~ who are or who may be temporarily residing in
1972 (XVIII). The situation in Aden
various countries or territories outside the Territories
administered by Portugal the benefits of such proThe General Assembly,
g-rammes, with the consent and co-operation of the host
Recalling its resolution 1949 (XVIII) of 11 DecemGovernments ;
ber 1963 on the question of Aden,
2. Draws the attention of Member States within
Having noted the petitioner's statement on the recent
20
whos_e
1:>oundaries great numbers of refugees from
developments in that Territory,
Terntones under Portuguese administration reside to
Deeply concerned at the critical and explosive situathe possibilities available to them of obtaining assistance
tion obtaining in Aden and the Aden Protectorate as
from the United Nations programmes of technical
a result of the state of emergency, and at the arrest
co_-operation, f?: ~he purpose of providing these refugees
and detention of nationalist leaders and trade-unionists
with more fac1httes for secondary, vocational and techas well as the deportation of others, a situation which
nical education;
constitutes a denial of fundamental rights and endangers
3. Invites the specialized agencies to co-operate in
peace and security in the region,
the_
~stablishment and i1;1plementation of the special
1. Urges the Government of the United Kingdom of
trau~mg pro_gramme mentioned above by offering every
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to take, as a matter
possible assistance and such facilities and resources as
of urgency, measures which would be most effective
they may be able to provide;
to secure:
4. Expresses its appreciation to Member States
(a) The immediate release of the nationalist lea~i:-rs
which hav~ e:i:::tended offers of scholarships to students
and trade-unionists;
from Terntones under Portuguese administration;
( b) An end to all acts of deportation of residents
of the Territory;
5. Invites Member States which have offered scholarships, and those which plan to do so, to consider in
2. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the
the fi~st place offers <;>f scholarships. for secondary
present resolution to the attention of the Government
education and for vocat10nal and techmcal training;
of the United Kingdom with a view to its implementation.
6. Requests Member States to inform the Secretary1281st plenary meeting,
General of any scholarships offered and of awards made
16 December 1963.
and utilized;
7. Further requests Member States to facilitate the
1973 (XVIII). Special training programme for
travel of students from Territories under Portuguese
Territories under Portuguese administration
administration seeking to avail themselves of the educational opportunities offered;
The General Assembly,
8. Reiterates its request to the Government of
Recalling its resolution 1808 (XVII) of 14 December
Portugal to co-operate in the implementation of the
1962 by which it established a special training prospecial training programme for inhabitants of Territories under Portuguese administration ;
19 Ibid., Eighteenth Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/5514),

H a·ving received and considered a report on economic
advancement in Non-Self-Governing Territories prepared by that Committee at its fourteenth session, in
1963. 19
1. Approves the report on economic advancement in
Non-Self-Governing Territories prepared by the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories at its fourteenth session and considers that this
report should be studied in connexion with the other
reports mentioned above ;
2. Jnz,ites the Secretary-General to communicate this
report to the Member States responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories, to the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, to
the Economic and Social Council, to the regional economic commissions, to the Trusteeship Council and
to the specialized agencies concerned, for their consideration ;
3. Expresses its confidence that the Member States
responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories will bring the report to the attention
of the authorities concerned with economic advancement
in those Territories.
1281st plenary meeting,
16 December 1963.

part two.
20 Ibid.,
meeting.

Eighteenth

Session,

Fourth

Committee,

1515th

21 Ibid., Eighteenth Session, Annexes, agenda items 49 SO
51, 52, 53 and 54, documents A/5531/Rev.1 and Add.1 arut' 2. '

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

9. Requests the Secretary-General to report on this
question to the General Assembly at its nineteenth
session.
1281st plenary meeting,
16 December 1963.
1974 (XVIIl). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of NonSelf-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples,
Recognizing the importance of rendering assistance to
colonial countries and peoples in the field of general
and specialized education,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX) of
22 November 1954, 22
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
2. Reaffirms its resolution 1849 (XVII) of 19 December 1962;
3. Urges Member States to continue to offer scholarships to the inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories;
4. Requests the Member States offering scholarships
to take into account the necessity of furnishing complete
information about the scholarships offered and, whenever possible, the need to provide travel funds to
prospective students ;
5. Once again invites the Administering Members
concerned to take all necessary measures to ensure that
all scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States are utilized by the inhabitants of the NonSelf-Governing Territories and to render effective assistance to those persons who have applied for, or have
been granted, scholarships or fellowships, particularly
with regard to facilitating their travel formalities;
22 /bid.,

documents A/5548 and Add.l.

6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its nineteenth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution;
7. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
1281st plenary meeting,
16 December 1963.
1979 (XVIIl). Question of South West Africa
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of South West Africa,
Guided by the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples contained
in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1%0,
Recalling its resolution 1899 (XVIII) of 13 November 1963, particularly paragraphs 5 (b), 5 (c) and 6
of that resolution,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 2 December 1963, 23
Considering that the reply of the Government of the
Republic of South Africa to the letter of the SecretaryGeneral reproduced in that report demonstrates that
South Africa persists in its refusal to co-operate with
the United Nations in regard to South West Africa,
Considering further that the situation obtaining in
South West Africa is seriously disturbing international
peace and security,
1. Condemns the Government of the Republic of
South Africa for its refusal to co-operate with the United
Nations in the implementation of the Declaration on
the granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples and for its non-compliance with the General
Assembly resolutions with regard to South West Africa;
Z. Requests the Security Council to consider the
critical situation prevailing in South West Africa.
1284th plenary meeting,
17 December 1963.
23 /bid., agenda item SS, document A/5634.

•

51

• •

Note,
Territories under Portuguese administration (item 23)
At its 1284th plenary meeting, on 17 December 1963, the General Assembly
took npte of the report of the Fourth Committee. 24
Dissemination of information in the Non-Self-Governing Territories on the
Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries
and peoples ( item 50)
At its 1512th meeting, on 12 December 1963, the Fourth Committee took note
of the report of the Secretary-General. 25
k Ibid., agenda item 23, document A/5629/Add.1.
llll lbitl., agenda items 49, SO, 51, 52, 53 and 54, document A/5523.
