UNITED

NATIONS

OF

th

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2394) . . , . . . , . , . . , . . . . , . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . .

Expression of welcome to the new representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . , , . , . . . . . , . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Expression of thanks to the retiring President

.. . , , . . , . . . . . . ,. . . . . . . . . . I I .

Adoption of the agenda , . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . , , , . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
((I) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162);

(h) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent Representatives of Egypt
and France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15316);
(c*) Letter dated I6 September 1982 from the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council(S/15392) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SlPV.2394

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .> are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Official Records uf the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcsolrrtiut~~ and
DoGuns of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2394th MEETING
Held in New York an Thursday, 16 September 1982, at 5.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Masahiro

NISIBORI

(Japan).

tion to pay a well-deserved
dedicated leadership.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China,
France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama,
Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional
Adoption

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15162);
tb) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives
of Egypt and France to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15316);
(cl Letter dated 16 September 1982 from the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15392)
The meeting

The agenda

was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162);
(b) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives of Egypt and France to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15316);
ICI Letter dated 16 September 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15392)

of the agenda.

In accordance with decisions
3. The PRESIDENT:
taken at previous meetings [237&h, 2375th, 2377th,
2385th and 2389th meetings],
I invite the representatives of Lebanon and Israel to take places at the
Council table; I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a place at
the Council table; I invite the representatives of Cuba,
Egypt, India and Pakistan to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council table.

was called to order ut 5.55 p.m.

Expression of welcome to the new representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Tueni (Lebanon) and Mr. B/urn (Israel) took places ut the Council
table; Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization)
took a place at the Council table: Mr. Roa Kouri
(Cuba),
Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt),
Mr. Krishnnn
(India) and Mr. Mahmood (Pakistan)
took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

1. The PRESIDENT:
At the outset of this meeting,
I wish to extend a warm welcome to Sir John Thomson,
the new representative
of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland. We look forward
to the same close co-operation with him as we enjoyed
with his predecessor, Sir Anthony Parsons.
Expression

to him for his

Adoption of the agenda

agenda (S/Agenda/2394)

1.

tribute

4, The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Kuwait in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
that representative
to participate
in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

of thanks to the retiring President

2. The PRESIDENT:
It gives me the greatest pleasure, as I preside at the first formal meeting of the
Council
for the month of September, to express to
Mr. Noel Dorr, of Ireland, the deep appreciation felt
by ail members of the Council for his services ‘as
President
of the Council during the month of August.
Both during the formal meetings and in the course of
consultations,
Mr. Dorr demonstrated
qualities of
patience,
courtesy, skill and wisdom during a particularly demanding period. I am happy to be in a posi-

At the invitation of the President,
Ms. Abulhassan
(Kuwait)
took the pluce reserved for him ut the side
of the Council chamber.

1

5. The PRESIDENT:
This meeting of the CounciI
has been convened in response to a letter dated 16 September from the representative
of Lebanon to the
President of the Council and distributed under the

unexpectedly successful results. The constitution;11
process in my country had not been disrupted by all
the violence to which we had been subjected. We
were struggling to survive-often
in silence, always
in determination
and with an unfailing confidence in
our ultimate right to lead our own life, control our own
destiny and restore our total sovereignty over all of
our territory.

symbol S/15392.

6. I should like to draw the attention of the members of the Council to the following documents:
S/15356, containing the text of a letter dated 12 August
from the representative of Australia to the SecretaryGeneral; S/15362, containing the report of the Secretary-General in pursuance of Council resolution 518
(1982); S/15371, containing the text of a letter dated
20 August from the representative
of the United
States to the Secretary-General;
S/15376, containing
the text of a letter dated 26 August from the representative of Egypt to the Secretary-General;
S/15382
and Add.1, containing the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in the Beirut area; and S/ 15386,
containing the text of a letter dated 3 September from
the representative of Israel to the Secretary-General.
7. The first speaker is the representative
on whom 1 now call.

12. Yet, we felt compelled to return once more to
the Council to reiterate our call that Lebanon should
be left to the Lebanese, and the Lebanese alone.
13. Yesterday, we were healing our wounds and
drying our tears. We had barely finished burying a
President, whose death has accented the hero-image
he had assumed. He was the youngest President in the
world and the first in our country to die a violent
death. Emerging from years of strife, Bashir Gemayel,
a unique leader, had come with a message of dialogue,
pledging to reconstruct Lebanon and to create a new
nation-young,
vigorous, free and, above all, united.
Fate struck the up-coming statesman just as he was OR
the threshold of success. Those he had dreamt of
uniting around him in the Government of Lebanon
and who were already responding were all mourning
his death on the hilltops of his native village before the
dream could come true.

of Lebanon,

8. Mr. T&N1
(Lebanon): As this is the first time,
Sir, that my delegation has beerr invited to the Council under your presidency, may I take this opportunity
to congratulate you on your assumption of responsibilities and to say how pleased we are that our case
is being debated today with you at the helm-you,
personally, and as the representative
of Japan. Not
only has your country displayed every sign of friendship towards Lebanon and tendered every assistance
to us but you, personally, have been the author, coauthor and initiator of many resolutions which have
contributed to the cause of peace in Lebanon and the
Middle East.

14. That was the day the Israelis chose to invade
Beirut, occupy government
buildings, houses and
streets, flouting every possible international law, Iet
alone challenging the Council’s resolutions and violating cease-fire agreements and other commitments
which we considered as the beginning of the end of
a long tragedy. I refer in particular to the agreement
negotiated by Mr. Philip Habib, the special envoy of
the President of the United States, who had performed
what was described as a miracle of diplomacy. I should
like to express here my country’s gratitude not only 10
Mr. Habib’s Government but also to those of France
and Italy, which, along with the United States, had
dispatched troops as part of a multinational force to
ensure the fulfilment of the agreements that had then
and there been reached.

9. May I also add a personal word. As you and the
other members of the Council know, this is probably
my last appearance before the Council as the representative of Lebanon. At first, I regretted that I was
relinquishing my post without taking formal leave of
the Council as a “permanent
client” now for almost
five years, if I may be permitted the expression. I now
regret that the circumstances of my return before the
Council should be under such dire and dramatic conditions, to say the least.

15. It is not my intention to debate once more what
we have all spent endless hours debating in this &amber--that is, the Israeli invasion of Lebanon, which
has been presented by Israel as yet another phase of
its struggle against the Palestinians. I should like 10
limit my remarks specifically to the most recent ePisode in the long tragedy-namely,
the invasion of
Beirut, which has been described by Israel as a “Peace*
keeping” act.

10. It has now been nearly a month since the Council last met to consider the Lebanese question. Many
changes have occurred during this eventful month,
and we were hoping that the cause of peace was advancing slowly but steadily in my country and in the
Middle East.

16. Indeed, Israel’s pretenses are so ludicrous, So
intolerable and so revolting that one is tempted *ot
even to try to respond, for by what right can Israe1
pretend to allot to itself the “mission” of maintaining
law and order in the capital of a sovereign Country and
preventing so-called factional feuds precisely at the

11. During long, almost daily meetings over the
course of weeks, the Council had in numerous resolutions laid a general framework within which we
were moving forward.
Bilateral
and multilateral
efforts inspired by Council resolutions had produced
2

very moment when, in mourning, my people had come
together as they had hardly ever done before? By what
right can the Israeli army describe itself as a force of
stability in a country which has been destabilized for
years because it had become the theatre of Israel’s
wars? By what right and by what mandate can Israel
pretend that it could not allow the Lebanese armed
forces and the Lebanese security forces to perform
their mission because Israel decided that they were not
capable of doing so with success?

Lebanon’s
determination
to continue
seeking the
total and unconditiorlal
evacuation of Israeli forces
and of all non-Lebanese forces from Lebanese territory.
23. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): As this is my first
occasion to speak at a formal meeting of the Council this month, may I express my most sincere congratulations to the President of the Council for September, Mr. Masahiro Nisibori, of friendly Japan, on
his assumption of office, and wish him all the best.
Mr. Nisibori
truly reflects his great country, foremost among the enormous accomplishments
of which
has been its dedication to peace and its renunciation of
military means as an instrument of policy.

17. I need not pursue this any further. We feel that
it would be an insult to the Council’s wisdom and
judgement
even to want to discuss the Israeli pretenses and the mockery they are making of international law. We believe that our case is perfectly clear
and simple. The nations of the world have expressed
themselves
unanimously
in supporting our desire
-nay, even our determination-to
preserve our territorial integrity and the unity of our land and its people
and to restore our sovereignty.

24. I should like also to take this opportunity to pay
the highest tribute to the President of the Council for
the month of August, Mr. Noel Dorr, of friendly
Ireland, for the outstanding skill with which he carried
out the heavy responsibilities
of the office of President in a month of very grave turbulence.

18. Lebanon must not continue to be the theatre and
the arena of wars and revolutions waged on its soil
by friends and foes alike. War in Lebanon has become
not only a danger for Lebanon and the Lebanese but
also a threat to world peace and security and to the
integrity of every single nation in the area.

25. I wish most warmly to welcome Sir John Thomson as the new representative of the United Kingdom
and to express my conviction that his renowned diplomatic skills and experience will be a great asset to
the functioning of the Council.

19. Many a world leader, particularly the President
of the United States, has recognized publicly that
peace in Lebanon has become a moral as well as a
poIitical imperative-an
imperative for all, an imper.ative of peace, both regional and international. Indeed,
it is now universally admitted that peace in Lebanon
cannot be the end of the long and arduous Middle
East peace process to which we are all committed.
It should be the beginning, for, as long as there is no
peace in Lebanon, there can be no peace, no stability
anywhere else in the Middle East.

26. We have just heard that Mr. TuCni will be leaving
us, and I wish to express my very profound regret at
the impending departure of the representative of Lebanon, Ghassan Tueni, who has given so much of his
time, dedication and health in serving the cause of the
redemption
of Lebanon and its people, under the
most exacting conditions. He has always risen to the
challenge and done an outstanding job. We shall
deeply miss him here, but I am sure that he will continue his noble pursuits in other fields of public life.
27. I wish to express my country’s deep appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his timely, objective
and illuminating
report on the present tragic situation in Beirut [S/15382] and the addendum to that
report [S/l5382/Add. 11, concerning today’s events,
and for his innovative oral presentation, including the
highly instructive map, which enlightened us all at the
informal meeting held earlier.

20.
Lebanon is determined to perform once more
its role-its
mission-within
the Arab community,
to
which it belongs, and it must be allowed to restore
its institutions and to recover its land. Within the next
few days, new presidential elections should be held
and, we trust, will be held. The Lebanese earnestly
wish that the new President should be elected in a
spirit of unity and harmony.

28. We are meeting today at the request of the GOVernment of Lebanon to take up once more the renewal
and intensification
of yet another chapter in Israel’s
genocidal war against the independence,
territorial
integrity and inviolability
of Lebanon, in the very
heartland of Beirut, in a stunning unravelling of Israel’s
long-laid plans to wipe Lebanon off the map of the
world by destabilization,
dismemberment,
vivisection and the planned annexation of large chunks of its
territory in the south by lackeys and proxies, embodied in the renegade Major Saad Haddad, with whom
the Council has become all too familiar after this
years of ignominious treachery.

22.
Could it not be that Israel has invaded our capital
precisely
to disrupt the constitutional
process and
to prevent our democratic institutions
from functioning freely and unhampered?
22.
The Council has a clear responsibility
towards
Lebanon
which we are certain it will fulfil, as it has
done so many times in the past. We ask that, in simple
terms, previous resolutions be now reaffirmed and
that Israel be called upon unequivocally
and immediately
to withdraw its forces from Beirut, it being
understood
that that withdrawal in no way prejudices
3

29. While large parts of Lebanon have been enduring
the indignity and ruthlessness of Israeli occupation
for months, Israel’s insatiable lust for further bloodshed and subjugation has reached a climax in its
ongoing conquest of west Beirut, one of the great
cultural centres of the Arab world and, since the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the birthplace of its contemporary renaissance. It is indeed sad
and sickening beyond any human tolerance. Its psychological impact will for generations to come long
outlive the totally uncalled-for
military
aggression
which we are experiencing at present.

notice on the late President-elect
that they were
planning practically to sever the whole of the south
from southern Lebanon and give it a “special status”
as a prelude to possible annexation and the seizure
df the waters of the Litani, an old Israeli plan approved
as far back as 1954 or 195.5 but awaiting implementation.
35. Thirdly,
the Israelis have been insisting on
imposing a full-fledged peace treaty on Lebanon at
bayonet-point in total disregard of the fact that ge&
uine peace can never be imposed by force and occupation-that
is not the way to achieve peace-and the
equally important fact that Lebanon had not invaded
Israel on 6 June but that Israel had been the invader.
The Lebanese State and army did not even participate
in the conflict, which the Israelis repeatedly claimed
was directed solely against the PLO and the Palestinian
refugees, even though Lebanese civilians suffered a
preponderance of casualties and destruction in the
Iraeli’s genocidal war.

30. The sequence of events in which the Israelis
committed
their latest act of aggression and their
conquest of half a million inhabitants of west Beirut
is crystal-clear, for all to see and judge. A dastardly
criminal act against the President-elect
of Lebanon,
the late Mr. Bashir Gemayel, which we and the whole
world have condemned, was cold-bloodedly
cited by
the rampaging Israeli military vulture as a convenient
excuse for the conquest of west Beirut.

36. Relations between Lebanon and Israel, since
Israel’s uprooting of the Palestinian people, had been
governed by the General Armistice
Agreement of
1949,’ the efficacy of which had been proved for
decades.

31. I am a fervent believer in the due process of
law; I make no vain accusations. But on the basis of
overwhelming
evidence-indeed,
of a consensus
belief in our part of the world sand elsewhere in all
knowledgeable circles--l
charge that the planting of
the 450 pounds of highly sophisticated
remote-controlled high explosive which resulted in the shocking
death of President-elect
Gemayel was perpetrated
by Iraeli agents to achieve the following ends.

37. Fourthly, perhaps the overriding
reason for
Israel’s conquest of west Beirut, the seat of Government, housing the Prime Ministry and most of the
other ministries and departments,
institutions and
agencies and the Central Bank, which the Israeli
bombardment apparently set on fire, and most of the
embassies-and
the latest two days of shelling have
not accidentally hit the embassies of France and Italyis the fact that, in spite of hitherto sharp internal
differences, all too natural in any country, for in every
country there are varying views, all the prominent
leaders of west Beirut agreed with the late Presidentelect on a “framework of agreement for a government
of national unity”. That was a mere few days before
his headquarters
in east Beirut were savagely
blown up. It would have meant the emergence of a
strong and unified central Lebanese authority that
would restore normality and amity to war-torn Lebanon, an objective which Israeli designs on Lebanon
cannot countenance. The Israelis have been de&bilizing Lebanon since 1968, since they raided the
Beirut international
airport and virtually destroyed
Lebanon’s entire national airline and its more than
14 Boeing aircraft, in addition to its various in&llations,

32. First, the Israeli aggressors, not knowing-despite their pretences-the
Arab, and particularly the
genuinely Lebanese, mind, had grown increasingly
disenchanted
with the late President-elect
Bashir
Gemayel when they failed, after persistent and highhanded efforts, to treat him as a pliant too1 in the same
manner as they sought out and obtained their servile
lackey Major Haddad in the south. They should have
known that Mr. Gemayel and his party were, first and
foremost, Lebanese nationalists
and patriots who
would not tolerate subjugation by anyone.
33. Secondly, Prime Minister Begin and Mr, Sharon
had been aggressively seeking the reinstatement of the
renegade Major Haddad to a prominent position in the
Lebanese army, but to no avail. For the Lebanese
army, notwithstanding
its divisions and weakness over
the past few years, has an honourable and long record
of military tradition which it would never forsake.
34. This so angered the Israeli leaders that they
threatened to augment not only Haddad’s mercenary
forces-to
the extent that they were talking about
increasing them to the point of putting 50,000 troops
at his disposal-but
also the area under his control,
as an Israeli protCgC, beyond the occupied city of
Sidon. Indeed, the renegade Major Haddad turned
back the men and closed down the offices of the Phalangist party a few weeks ago. The Israelis served

38. ‘I witnessed that aggressive and unprovoked
attack from a tiouse a mere few hundred yards from
the international
aifport. There was not one PLO
fighter that the Israelis could use as an excuse. Indeed,
this and numerous other attacks against unprotected
Palestinian refugee camps were what mainly impelled
the endangered refugees to arm themselves in selfi
defence.
4

39. Fifthly,
the siege and genocide inflicted
on
Beirut for two and a half months were eventually
resolved through the mediation of Mr. Philip Habib,
the special envoy of President Reagan. The agreement signed by Mr, Habib and the Lebanese Government-of which lsrael was a signatol’y and the United
States, a super-Power, a guarantor-specifically
provided that, in exchange for withdrawal of the PLO
forces, the Israeli army of invasion would not enter
west Beirut. Aside from the Israeli duplicity, which
has come as no surprise to us because there is such
a massive record of duplicity over decades, what is of
deep concern, even though the agreement was reached
outside the jurisdiction
of the Security Council, is that
Israel has chosen to lay bare either the ability or the
credibility of a super-Power, the United States, which
is a guarantor of that agreement. It is an enormous
challenge involving
the honour of a super-Power
without whose massive assistance an expansionist
Israel could not pursue its policies of aggression and
expansion. I need hardly emphasize that such undermining cannot be taken lightly, either in the Middle
East or in other regions of the world. Many peoples,
not only the victimized
Lebanese people, are still
awaiting the response of the United States to this
blatant ch llenge in concrete terms. It is up to the
United State
x-t o redeem its word.

could the Palestinian fighteis return, even if they had
wanted to-unless, of course, the Israelis regard every
civilian refugee as a fighter?
44. The Israeli invading forces are in virtual occupation of the whole city of Beirut, in spite of scattered
civilian resistance here and there which the SecretaryGeneral explained fully to us this evening. The Israelis
have occupied ministries,
government
departments
and vital institutions.
They have not yet occupied
foreign embassies, to the best of my knowledge, even
though they have hit the French and Italian embassies,
presumably to show their appreciation for the valiant
contingents contributed by those two great countries
to the multinational
force which supervised the withdrawal of the Palestinian
forces under extremely
hazardous conditions.
45. At present, the ‘Israeli invaders have encircled
and cut off the Palestinian refugee camps from the
rest of the city to commit the kind of atrocities-they
sometimes call them interrogations-which
they had
committed
in. the south after their occupation,
including the massive graves in which innocent Palestinian refugees, men, women and children, have been
laid to rest and thousands others deported and subjected to unspeakable torture, including thirst and
hunger. I hope that the Red Cross will be doubly alert
and will report to us on the fate of those PLO refugees
whose safety was guaranteed when they agreed to
evacuate Beirut and leave their families, children,
wives and mothers behind.

40. Sixthly,
the Israeli invaders allege that they
marched on Beirut to restore law and order. What had
happened in west Beirut to disturb that law and order?
There are no Palestinian fighters left to repel any
invasion of west Beirut, as they successfully did for
two and a half months. That is proved by the fact
that there was scattered and scant resistance to the
invasion by possibly a few hundred or a few thousand
armed Lebanese militia. But they were Lebanese.

46. Last, but not least, of the Israeli objectives in
conquering west Beirut is the Israelis’ paranoic fear
of any serious talk or initiatives for a peaceful solution
of the Palestiniari-Israeli
conflict. They clearly want
to derail this process, to divert attention, in spite of
the fact that that process was agreed to at the Twelfth
Arab Summit
Conference,
held recently at Fez
(Morocco) [set S/lSSlO, ann.ex], and, along similar
lines, in President Reagan’s initiative.
It is rejected
outright by a chauvinistic Israel to which, apparently,
peace is anathema.

41. Seventhly,
the legitimate Lebanese army was
in full control of the city and life was returning to
normal at an astonishing speed, which testifies to the
genius and the ingenuity of the Lebanese people.
We have been reading the daily dispatches of on-thespot observers.
42. Reconstruction
and repairs were in full swing;
government
bulldozers were opening and repairing
highways and roads which had been closed since
1975. To what factional fighting were the Israelis
referring to justify their invasion? Indeed-and
this is
the irony-the
invasion took place when all the leaders
of west Beirut were attending the funeral services in
the mountains of Bekfaya, east of, Beirut, for the late
President-elect.

47. Yesterday, Mr. Brezhnev reiterated more or less
similar ideas, as has virtually the whole international
community
[see S/152103, nnnex].
48. A few days ago, His Majesty King Hussein of
Jordan reiterated clearly and forcefully what he has
been stating since 1967: withdrawal from all the Palestinian and Arab territories occupied since 1967 and
restoration of Palestinian rights including the right to
self-determination,
in exchange for peace.

43. The Israelis claim that they had also marched
on Beirut to prevent the return of Palestinian fighters
to west Beirut when those fighters had deferred to
the wishes of the leaders of west Beirut and withdrew
in their totality to spare the civilian inhabitants the
scourge of further Israeli savagery. Besides, the
lsraeli army rings Beirut from all sides, Wow, then,

49. Nothing
thwarts Israeli
designs more than
meaningful prospects for peace-and there has been an
Arab consensus on working to achieve that goal.
Evidently, certain circles in Israel thrive on perpetual
war. But we are determined not to leave a stone unturned to achieve the rights of the Palestinian people
5

in a!! their aspects. We intend to act, not to react,
as we have inadvertently
done in the past, paying
heavily for our mistakes.

57. It is also ironic that tile Israelis, who were
claiming that the Palestinians
were hiding behind
civilians in Beirut in an effort to justify the mass murder of that population, are the same people who have
in so cowardly a fashion invaded the city after its
evacuation by all armed elements.

50. The Secretary-Genera!
has warned the world of
the dangers inherent in a drift to international anarchy.
Nothing better exemplifies that drift than the adventurism of an Israel acting totally outside the framework
of international law and morality. The Council is duty
bound to demand that Israel, at the risk of a!! the
punitive measures in the Charter of the United Nations, withdraw immediately from Beirut as a prelude
to total and complete withdrawal to the internationally
recognized boundaries of Lebanon, in accordance with
unanimously
adopted Council resolutions 508 (1982)
and 509 (1982) and subsequent resolutions.

58. We believe that this latest Israeli act of aggression is only another episode in an overall strategy, a
strategy that aims at establishing only one military
force in the Middle East and at seeing to it that that
military force alone has the right to dictate in the
Middle East. It is also our conviction that the United
States has a major responsibility to force the Israelis
to withdraw forthwith from west Beirut, particu!ar!y
because the other parties to the agreement concluded
by the American envoy have abided by the spirit
and letter of that agreement.

51. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Kuwait. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

59. There is no doubt that American credibility is
now at stake, and the sooner the United States compels Israel to abide by that agreement, the better the
chances for peace, particularly at this time when the
Lebanese people are trying to elect a new president.

52. Mr. ABULHASSAN
(Kuwait): In my capacity
as Chairman of the Group of Arab States, I should
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month and to
express my delegation’s firm belief in your dedication and leadership. I should like also to commend the
skilful manner in which your predecessor, the representative of Ireland, conducted the Council’s work in
times of crisis.

60. We should also like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to the report of the SecretaryGenera! on the work of the Organization, of 7 September, in which he states:
“There is a tendency in the United Nations for
Governments to act as though the passage of a resolution absolved them from further responsibility for
the subject in question.“’

53. We are meeting today yet again to discuss the
dangerous situation created by the Israelis, a practice
which has become so symptomatic
of the Israeli
character and Israeli behaviour and can be described
as anything but acceptable in international
terms.

Nothing could be more illustrative of that particular
remark than the fact that not only have all of the COWci! resolutions demanding the unconditional
withdrawal of the Israeli forces from Lebanon been ignored
by the aggressor, but they have not been followed by
action.

54. The Israeli invasion of Beirut yesterday, under
the pretext of filling the vacuum-a
pretext which
was not acceptable even to Israel’s friendsis yet
another example of the Israeli insult to our intelligence. This invasion is a grave and flagrant violation
of the agreement sponsored by the United States
Government which had led to the withdrawal of the
Palestinian
and Syrian forces from the capital of
Lebanon.

61. It is our conviction-as
I am sure it is the COW
viction of many other nations of the worId-that the
Israeli acts of aggression have already gone beyond
a!! comprehension and that it is time to stop the Israeli
madness. This, we believe, could largely be brought
about by the one country without whose many-faceted
support and protection it would be impossible for such
a small nation to become the number-one aggressor
in the world today. Needless to say, the Counci!
should also assume its responsibilities
in a way that
will put an end to this abnormal Israeli phenomeacn#

55. The fact that Israeli troops have moved into
Beirut and occupied the whole Lebanese capital at a
time when the Lebanese people are trying to establish
a strong constitutional
government
casts doubts on
the sincerity of the Israeli claims that one of the
objectives in the invasion of Lebanon was to assist
in that attempt. It also casts doubts upon Israel’s
credibility
as a party to an agreement which was
genuinely entered into by the other parties to it.

62. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Cb
vis Maksoud, Permanent Observer of the League of
Arab States, to whom the Council extended an invitation at the 2347th meeting under rule 39 of its Provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a Place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

56. It is no coincidence that the Israeli army, which
could not enter west Beirut when it was we!! defended,
found it so convenient to invade and occupy the
undefended Lebanese capita! under the protection of
an agreement which Israel chose to violate before the
ink with which it was written was dry.

63. Mr. MAKSOUD:
I should like to take this oPPer*
tunity to share in the universal congratulations aad
6

i

appreciation expressed to you, Sir, on your assumption of the Presidency of the Council for this month.
your graciousness as a diplomat and your wisdom
and that of your great country have been a source of
tremendous and resilient friendship between the
Arab people and Japan. I should also like to take this
opportunity to express our deep appreciation for the
tremendous wisdom, knowledge and articulation of
conscience that your predecessor, the representative
of Ireland, exhibited during his presidency last month.

tion which Israel applies to the Palestinians or their
leadership. They did not acquiesce to the diktat of
the semantic acrobatics that Israel seeks to impose.
Therefore, if it is not coterminous with what Israel
describes, then it resorts to its own intellectual terrorism, which is the blasphemy of questioning motives
and trying to exploit the fact that the Vatican has not
consistently
pursued its humanitarian
endeavours
and its spiritual vocation,

64. We are meeting again today to discuss yet
another unfolding of Israel’s designs and the consequences of its piecemeal eating up of whatever territory it wants to take. We have apparently been avoiding
a just and comprehensive peace and a solution of the
problem of Lebanon’s unity, independence and integrity, as well as restoration of the rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and the establishment of a State in their homeland. It is as if these
elementary and obvious aspects of a comprehensive
peace, one that is just and durable, have become mere
rhetorical expressions by the international community because the might of Israel has chosen to reduce
those definitive commitments
by the international
community to purely juristic, legalistic rhetoric.

In this respect, Israel has attempted today to use
and tragic events in Lebanon, which
led to the assassination of the President-elect
of Lebanon, Mr. Bashir Gemayel, as a pretext to pursue an
objective which was, in its opinion and in its judgement, temporarily arrested by the intervention of the
international
community
and the agreement that
was negotiated by the United States special envoy,
Mr. Habib. Does anybody in the world believe that
Israel wanted to comply with that agreement? Does
the United States now believe that Israel was intent
on complying with that agreement?

68.

the unfortunate

69. Israel invaded Lebanon on the false pretext
that the PLO had attempted the assassination of its
ambassador in London. That was another pretext for
a large-scale invasion of Lebanon, as if there had
been no plans, as if there had been no designs and as
if there had been no details in the intelligence
and
defence departments of Israel and in the Israeli Cabinet of any invasion of Lebanon and as if Israel had
suddenly been overtaken by the grief of the attempted
assassination and all of a sudden had decided to invade
Lebanon to penalize it. And now it claims that the
invasion of west Beirut is another unravelling
of a
design that it did not intend to carry out, had it not
been for the assassination that has taken place inside
Israeli-occupied
east Beirut. And then what happened?
Israel immediately
presumed that in Lebanon there
was going to be a breakdown of law and order because
Israel, throughout its equation with Lebanon, could
never conceive, admit or recognize the vitality and
resilience of Lebanese unity and Lebanese national
cohesion. Therefore, Israel used this pretext when
there was absolutely no evidence that there was any
potential for factional struggles or conflicts in Lebanon, On the contrary, there was growing evidence
that, despite earlier polarizations,
the election of
President Bashir Gemayel, whatever might have been
the background, let to a desire on the part of all Lebanese, irrespective
of the background and motivations of earlier conflicts, to rally behind the united
State of Lebanon, to rally behind constitutional
legitimacy, irrespective
of political and ideological
differences.

65. Aglow with the power of destruction, living in
saturated euphoria, drunk with military power, Israel
looks upon the world-upon
its resolutions, upon its
will, upon its desire-with
its usual contempt, as if it
had been endowed with total righteousness and as if
everybody were wrong and Israel not only right, but
absolutely right. Let the world community discuss,
debate and deliberate; let it adopt resolutions: Israel
will always be capable of finding pretexts and excuses.
It does not matter whether they are related to truth
or reality; what is more important is that they buy time,
that they deflect the world community, that they insult
it if it ever dares to question any aspect of Israel’s
behaviour, if it ever casts any doubt on whatever
Israel might think or do, because Israel wants the
world to know that whatever it does has a built-in
sanctity and immunity.
66. The annexation of Jerusalem and the Golan
Heights, the proliferation of settlements, the occupation of Lebanon and the march into west Beirut: all
those acts emanate from Israel’s inflated self-righteousness that it is unaccountable to anybody and
that the world must be answerable to it and its dictates.

67.
It is in this context that we have witnessed in
the last few days that method of intellectual and political terrorism which Israel has now elevated to a
Perfect
technique of communications,
in which it
has insulted one of the great spiritual leaders of the
world because he had the courage and, in Israel’s
view, the temerity to receive in audience the Chairman
of the Executive Committee of the PLO. In a way,
the Vatican and the Pope did not accept the defini-

70. It was that visible evidence of growing cohesion and political reconciliation
within Lebanon that
confirmed that Israel was being foiled in its attempt
to perpetuate destabilization,
factionalism
and conflict in Lebanon.
7

71. That is why, no sooner had the assassination
taken place, than the contingency plan to violate the
agreement and occupy west Beirut came into action.
And not only that: the ready-made propaganda machine came into play to the effect that the Israelis
had entered west Beirut to preserve law and order
and to assume policing. They even had the audacity to
call it a “peace-keeping”
role, thus insulting the terms
“peace” and “peace-keeping”.
They had assumed.
a “peace-keeping”
role because Sharon had been
prevented from indulging his conquest mentality and
his mania to take over all of Beirut. He considered
that an interruption in his designs and in his schemes.
Why? Because at that moment Beirut had no PLO
forces anymore. The international
community
and
Mr. Habib had al! testified to the orderly and dignified
manner in which the PLO forces withdrew after Israel
had heaped its genocidal attempts on the population
of Beirut for two and a half months. It is as if Israel
had a historical revenge to take against the reconstruction of Beirut. How could there be a resilient
capital like Beirut, where the cultural, intellectual,
journalistic and informational
renaissance not only of
Lebanon but of the entire Arab world might be able
to recover? How dare the people of Beirut resist the
onslaught of the Israeli war machine? How dare the
population of Beirut find in themselves the ability to
reconstruct and recover? How dare the newspapers
in Beirut-the
newspaper of Mr. Tueni-be
able to
publish regularly every day? How dare freedom of
expression continue?

to render credible its will to translate its convictions
into policies. Israel witnessed the beginning: it witnessed a Secretary-General
openly stating that the
United Nations mechanism and United Nations resolutions must be not only respected but implemented.
Here was a Secretary-Genera!
willing, eager and
perhaps determined to bring to fruition the intemational community’s
will that the United Nations
should be the anchor of peace and the ‘peacemaker.
Should the United Nations regain its credibility and
effectiveness, Israe! would be totally incapable of
continuing its repeated contempt and characteristic
defiance.
76. Then Israel saw that President Reagan’s speech
was a firm attempt to distance the United States from
the mad dimension of Israel’s behaviour-patterns, that
the United States was no longer eager or willing to
underwrite without question a!! of Israel’s behaviour,
that there was no longer an American disposition to
give the green light in advance to whatever Israel
intended to do.
77. If any Government, any Arab Government, had
answered President Reagan in the manner that Israel
answered President Reagan, there would have been
the beginnings of a rupture in international relations.
But there is residual leniency in the United States
that acts as a shock absorber for many of the insulting
attacks launched by Israel in recent days.
78. Israel cealized that the Palestinian movement,
in the aftermath of the Beirut withdrawal, re-established the mandate of the PLO, regained its unity
and recouped its political effectiveness as the articulator of the aspirations of the people of Palestine. It
began to function in such a way that it was no longer
what Israel wanted it to be when it forced the Palestinians to mirror its own addiction to terrorism. Instead, it found the Palestinian movement retaining its
militancy
and determined
to achieve its political
objectiyes. Not only that: there was the TweIfth Arab
Summit Conference at Fez. Israel hoped that divisiveness and fragmentation
among the Arabs would
give it further leeway to manipulate and manoeuvre
the whole region in order to establish its military and
strategic hegemony, in order to dictate the destiny Of
the peoples of the area, in order to utilize our human
and economic wealth and in order to run rampant in
the area, uninterruptedly
and without interference

72. Then Israel had to seek pretexts. On the one
hand, it wanted to save Beirut from so-called international communism,
hoping to cause a gut reaction
in professional cold warriors. On the other hand, it
tried to say that there were still remnants of Palestinianforces there, as though the poor refugees-palestinians who were not even allowed to reconstruct
their tents in the refugee camps that are their temporary residences-constituted
an obstacle.
73. Thus, there was a vendetta against Beirut,
not only the city, not only the population,
but the
institutions.
74. How dare Lebanon allow itself the luxury of its
Parliament electing a president? How dare the President-elect refuse the two options that Israel wished
to present to, force upon and dictate to Lebanon:
either to accept a treaty dictated by Israel’s military
presence or to accept the rupture and the tearing
apart of southern Lebanon and its functional, if not
theoretical, annexation to Israel? How dare Lebanon
and its President-elect
refuse those options so that
they might secure for Lebanon national reconciliation and national entente?

79. Then it found how the people and Government
of Greece welcomed the PLO, as did the Inter-Parliamentary Union yesterday. Then, to top it off, there
,was the moral victory in which the highest spiritual
leader received the leader of the PLO.
80. All this took place while Israel was proliferating
more settlements,
encouraging
new settlers, destroying the freedoms and democratic rights of tbc
population under occupation and trying to create new
facts inside Lebanon in order to pre-empt the resumP
tion by the central authority of its sovereignty.

75. This whole accumulation
of Israel’s false glory
and its attempts to create havoc were counterpoised
by a developing situation in which the international
community sought to render credible its resolutions,
8

81. And then Israel came before the world with its
pathetic claims. As Mr. Sharon said today to the
United States ambassador: “We have saved Lebanon
for you.” Now the Israeli cabinet meets for four
hours and states clearly that: “Israeli forces have taken
over positions in west Beirut in order to prevent the
danger of violence, bloodshed and anarchy.”

sincerity.
His perseverance
great praise and admiration.
I should be proud of him.

and dedication
merit
If I were an Irishman,

88. At the beginning of his statement,
the representative of Lebanon informed us of the sad events
that have resulted from a criminal attack committed
in Lebanon. Yasser Arafat, Chairman of the Executive
Committee of the PLO, sent a cable of condolence to
Sheik Pierre Gemayel, in which he said:

82. But if Israel itself causes bloodshed, violence
and anarchy, as it has done in the last two days in
Beirut, destroying institutions,
banks, schools and
hospitals, that is permissible. The cabinet statement
went on to say that “this danger was indeed averted”
and that the Government would instruct the IDE-do
not laugh: that stands for “Israel Defence Forces”to yield control over its positions when the Lebanese
army is able to assume responsibility
for ensuring
public order and security in co-ordination
with the
IDF. This means that the Lebanese security forces
-the
Lebanese army-has
to co-ordinate with and
seek permission from the Israeli forces in west Beirut
to resume their functions of protecting public order and
public security.

“We convey to you our warm condolences for
the grievous misfortune that has befallen you, and
we pray to God to bestow upon you patience and
consolation.
This criminal act is directed against
fraternal Lebanon and only serves our common
Zionist enemy.”
89. Those who seized the opportunity
and immediately took advantage of the crime could only be
those who perpetrated the crime. The criminals must
have had prior designs to commit further violations
and crimes and acts of State terrorism,
making a
mockery of the concept of stability and peace.

83. And, Mr. President and members of the Council, if you do not like it, you will be subjected to the
constant insulting manner in which every attempt to
criticize
Israel is attributed either to lingering antiSemitism
or to attempts to encircle and suffocate
pathetic Israel. Even in their moment of Fascist arrogance, the Israelis will try and play on the sympathies
of their audience.

90. The criminal record of the murderers of innocent
civil servants in the King David Hotel annex, the
secretariat of the civilian mandatory government in
Palestine-and
they were civilians and not armed
forces of occupation; the murderers of the innocent
villagers of Deir Yassin and Kafr Kassem; the murderers of Jewish survivors of the Nazi detention
camps who were being saved on the Pcrtricr-those
Judeo-Nazis
who collaborated
with the National
Socialists have a bloody record, a record they still
pursue in occupied Palestine, in Lebanon and in Beirut
in particular.

84. There is definite anger in our approach. But
we have seen that, despite the tragedy Israel is trying
to inflict upon us and the humiliation it is trying to
force upon the international
community,
there are
certain positive signs, and we want the Council to
galvanize them into a credible deterrent against Israel’s
further pursuit of its aggressive designs and into the
realm of factoring the Council’s determination to bring
about for Lebanon the healing process that has long
eluded it and for the Palestinian people the exercise of
its right to independence and sovereignty.

91. Early in August, the Council unanimously
took
note of the decision of the PLO to move the Palestinian armed forces from Beirut. The PLO took that
decision to spare Beirut further destruction and devastation and to save civilian lives. It took many, many
days and weeks to reach some sort of an agreement,
and that agreement stated, among other things, that:

85. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative
of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
I call on him.

“Law-abiding
Palestinian
non-combatants
left
behind in Beirut, including the families of those
who have departed, will be subject to Lebanese laws
and regulations. The Governments of Lebanon and
the United States will provide appropriate
guarantees of safety.”

86.
Mr. TERZI
(Palestine
Liberation
Organization):
Mr. President, it gives us reassurance to see
you presiding over the Council at this crucial time. We
are fully aware of, appreciate and express gratitude
for the understanding
position of your Government
on the fate of the Middle East and especially your
assertion
that the Palestinian
people must freely
exercise
its right to self-determination
in its own
country as well as its right to establish its own State in
its own country.

92. The Secretary-General
had his hands tied; the
only power the Council had given him was the power
to report through his observers. But through them he
informed us about the withdrawal of the Palestinian
armed forces from Beirut. The Secretary-General
and the Council had-willingly,
1 would say-deprived
themselves of any authority to safeguard peace and
security in the area. And the price was the resumption
of Israeli criminal attacks on Beirut and more blood-

I should like to address a few words to Mr. Dorr,
87.
of Ireland, who has demonstrated articulate skill and
9

shed. Is this the price of bypassing the Council? Do we
not have any more faith -in the Council, or does the
Council not have faith in itself anymore? That is my
question.
93. In his letter to the Government of Lebanon, the
representative of the United States, Mr. Robert
Dillon, said:
“The United States is prepared to deploy temporarily a force of approximately
800 personnel as
part of a multinational
force to provide appropriate
assistance to the Lebanese armed forces as they
carry out their responsibilities
concerning
the
withdrawal of Palestinian personnel in Beirut from
Lebanese territory under safe and orderly conditions. It is understood that the presence of such
an American force will in this way facilitate the
restoration of the Lebanese Government’s
sovereignty and authority over the Beirut area, an
objective which is fully shared by my Government.”
94. The withdrawal of those Palestinian forces and
the Lebanese who did stand in the face of the Israeli
occupation of Beirut only facilitated disruption of law
and order and only facilitated disruption of the restoration of the Lebanese Government’s
sovereignty and
authority over Beirut.

of the PLO

“The new barbaric Israeli aggression against the
Lebanese and Palestinian
people, and especially
against the Palestinian refugee camps in Beirut,
reaffirms to the whole world that the aim of the
Israeli leadership is to continue the war of annihilation against the Palestinian people and to liquidate
the Palestinian camps.

the critical

97. The State Department of the United States this
afternoon stated that what the Israelis have done was
contrary to assurances given to it by Israel, both in
Washington and in Israel. It said: “There is no justification, in our view, for Israel’s continued military
presence in west Beirut. We call for an immediate
pull-back.”

99. Again I repeat: is this the price, or is it an advantage for bypassing the Council and eroding the Council’s powers when dealing with such issues? Be that as
it may, we still maintain our confidence that the Council will fully assume its responsibilities as prescribed
in the Charter of the United Nations.
100. Before I conclude, I should like it to be known
very clearly here that, while we are engulfed in acts
of aggression on one front-in
Beirut and LebanonIsrael is persisting in its policy of vindictive repression of our brothers under occupation in Palestinian
territories occupied since 1967. But this will be the
subject, I hope, of another meeting and, God wilIin&
under your presidency, Sir.

“The Palestine Liberation
Organization
calls on
the world community to stop this criminal aggression against the Palestinian and Lebanese peoy’ .
The Israeli army started to storm west Beirut Liespite the guarantees given by the multinational
force and the United States. These guarantees were
specifically made to safeguard the Palestinian
refugees and the camps. This was the primary role
of the American, French and Italian troops.
“This new aggression indicates
tion in the region.

“The Palestine Liberation
Organization calls
upon world public opinion to take immediate steps
at this critical moment to put an end to this aggression against Palestinian
and Lebanese women,
children and the elderly. It is time to save the
Palestinian people from the holocaust and to deter
the Israeli aggressors and stop their insane crimes.”

98. I wonder how many of us sitting here place any
credibility in what the United States is saying, Is it
really serious about it? Why wait all this time-that is,
about 48 hours-and
let the Israelis reap what they
want in Beirut-capture
all of Beirut, destroy the
greater part of Beirut, imprison and detain the young
people and the elderly of Beirut, while the State
Department says there is no justification for them to
stay in Beirut, as if there were justification to enter
Beirut in the first place, as if there was justification to
enter Lebanon. This is, I would say, some twisted
juristic approach to issues,

95. The question is this: was the Government of the
United States aware of the Israeli designs and did it
engage in, so to speak, collusion? Or was the Government of the United States taken for a ride? And were
others, such as France and Italy, which willingly
participated in the multinational
force, also taken in,
as a cover for the implementation
of further Israeli
designs?
96. Today, the Executive Committee
has issued the following communiquC:

national force during his meeting with the Italian
Foreign Minister, He demanded that contacts be
made with the United States and French Governments to ensure their commitment to the guarantees
which safeguard the Palestinian camps and which
force the Israeli troops to withdraw. Of course, the
Italian Foreign Minister did indeed inform both
Governments on the subject, and Chairman Arafat
sent a memorandum to the French Foreign Minister
in this regard.

101. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russicrn): First of all,
permit me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the responsible post of President of the Council for this month and to wish you success in Your
important task.

situa-

“Chairman Arafat raised the issue of the guarantees given by the participant States of the multi10

102. Permit me also to express my gratitude to the
representative of Ireland, Mr. Dorr, your predecessor
as President of the Council last month, for his skilful
and highly qualified conduct of the Council’s work
in very difficult circumstances.
103. I should like also to associate myself with the
good wishes addressed to the new representative of
the United Kingdom,
Sir John Thomson, and wish
him success in his work.
104. More than three months ago, the Council
adopted resolution 509 (1982), which called for the
immediate
and unconditional
withdrawal of Israeli
troops from Lebanon. That was followed by a number
of Council decisions which confirmed that fundamental demand as a key element in the normafization
of the situation in Lebanon. Throughout this period,
Israel has provocatively
ignored all decisions of the
Council and unswervingly
raised the scale of its
aggression.
105. History knows of many wars, but I do not think
it would be an exaggeration to say that never, so far,
has an annexationist
acted so cynically and so arrogantly. Never in history has it so deliberately and coldbloodedly and openly pursued the policy of genocide
against a whole people. Israeli aircraft and guns
bombed Lebanese towns and villages and dropped
thousands of tons of deadly bombs and shells. Israeli
tanks have ruthlessly crushed peaceful inhabitants of
Lebanon, right under the United Nations flag.
106. Today, the Israeli military has written a new
bloody
page in the tragic saga of Lebanon. Israeli
troops have totally seized the capital of Lebanon,
Beirut, to which it has laid siege for two months. This
is obviously a new act of aggression; it has exposed to
the whole world the barefaced arrogance of Zionist
terrorism which has held Beirut and the whole of Lebanon hostage to its sinister designs.
107.
What has been done during the last few days
by the Israeli military in Beirut is but the latest link
in the chain of its sinister actions. This chain as a
whole shows that Israel has openly embarked upon an
expansionist
policy in the Middle East. The links in this
chain include the attack on the nuclear reactor in
Baghdad, the violation of the airspace of Jordan and
Saudi Arabia, the bombing of the peaceful population of Lebanon, the annexation of the Syrian Golan
Heights,
the targe-scale intrusion into Lebanon and
the occupation
of one third of its territory and its
capital,
and the creeping annexation of the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip.
108.
Ail that is the direct result of the treaty on
Strategic co-operation
between Israel and the United
States.
In that alliance, Israel, with United States
?oney,
with United States arms and under the politICal cover of the United States, including in the United
Nations
Security Council, is carrying out the goals of
American
imperialist
policy in the Middle East.

109. Accordingly, what we are facing is joint American-Israeli aggression in the Middle East against Arab
countries and peoples. The General Secretary of the
Central Committee
of the Communist
Party and
President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Mr. Brezhnev,
speaking yesterday in Moscow, made the following
statement:
“The Israeli aggressor has finally revealed its
predatory nature for all the world to see. Never
before has an invader acted so cynically, violating
the integrity of a sovereign country, methodically
committing
mass murder of Palestinians and Lebanese, and brazenly flouting the generally accepted
norms of international law and the decisions of the
United Nations Security Council.
“During the bloody war, the essence of United
States policy in the Middle East was also revealed
in the clearest of terms. Not only did the United
States make no attempt to restrain the Israeli aggressor; it actually delivered Lebanon into the hands
of Israel. As a result, the Israelis have occupied a
considerable portion of Lebanon, killing tens of
thousands of people and leaving hundreds of thousands of peaceful inhabitants homeless.
“And all this time in Washington, where they are
so fond of all sorts of ‘sanctions’ and ‘punishments’,
there was not a single word of condemnation
addressed to the aggressor, much less any concrete
measures to curtail its actions.” [Ihid.]
110. The joint American-Israeli
line in the Middle
East is a cynical one, a policy that fundamentally
contradicts the interests of a just and lasting peace in
that region. It is designed to disregard the legitimate
rights and interests of the Arab countries and peoples
and to impose upon them American-Israeli
conditions for their existence in that area. It is precisely
because of the totally open and flagrant character of
that policy that the United States and Israel have found
themselves totally isolated. The United States was in
total isolation in the Security Council when it was
forced, alone, to veto the draft resolution submitted
by Spain [S//5/85]. Similarly, it was in total isolation
when it vetoed the draft resolution submitted
by
France [S//.525.5/Rev.2] and when it vetoed, alone, the
draft resolution
submitted
by the Soviet Union
[S/15347/Re~.l].
In the General Assembly, Israel and
the United States were the only two delegations to
vote against a draft resolution submitted to that body.
I1 1. This policy of Israel and the United States is
wrong: it is an imperialist policy. It is for that very
reason that it is doomed to failure. The Council is now
faced with the task of rebuffing the most recent raid
and incursion by the Israeli aggressor. In the view of
the Soviet delegation, the Council must decisively
condemn Israel’s flagrant violation of its many decisions. We must call for the immediate withdrawal of

Israeli troops from west Beirut. We should provide
for the use of the machinery that would enable the
Council to monitor
implementation
of whatever
measures might be called for in any resolution. Ultimately, we must issue a decisive warning to Israel to
the effect that if it does not immediately
withdraw
its troops from west Beirut, it will have applied against
it the due and necessary measures set forth in the
Charter of the United Nations. In the view of the
Soviet delegation, that is the very least the Council
can do in this situation.

115. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Israel, on whom I now call.
116. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Mr. President, permit me
at the outset to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of
September. We are confident that you will discharge
the duties of your high office with the wisdom, skill
and courtesy that have become the hallmark of your
activities at the United Nations, I should also like to
associate myself with the words of welcome which
you addressed to our new colleague, the representative of the United Kingdom.

112. Yet, even that minimal action, in so far as one
can judge, is already meeting with resistance on the
part of one delegation. It is no accident that many
members of the Council have recently been saying
that the institution
of informal consultations
quite
often serves as a hindrance to the adoption of neces_sary measures in the Council. The truth of that became apparent today: one delegation, the delegation
of the United States, in essence opposed the adoption
of any serious measures by the Council. For example,
we did not hear from the United States delegation that
it condemns Israel’s actions in Beirut. Today, the
State Department
published a statement apparently
condemning those actions. The United States delegation ought then to have called for the outright withdrawal of Israeli troops from west Beirut and, at least
on that formal level, have supported the statement of
the State Department. However, we heard nothing of
the sort. Why not? Surely because the official United
States statements with regard to Israel are made to
divert attention, to allay public anxiety and to soothe
feelings in the Arab countries, while in actual fact the
United States delegation rejects all demands to condemn Israel. The United States has, I must say, found
itself in an unenviable situation: either to be forced in
the Council to vote in favour of the condemnation
of
Israel and the immediate withdrawal of Israeli troops
from west Beirut, or to stand fully exposed.

117. The criminal assassination of the Lebanese
President-elect, Mr. Bashir Gemayel, referred to by
Mr. Maksoud as “unfortunate
and tragic events in
Lebanon” Iparn. 68 &OVC], has created a most dangerous situation in that country and in Beirut in particular.
118. The terrorists left behind in west Beirut over
2,000 of their operatives armed with large quantities
of light and heavy weapons.
119. Paragraph 1 of the Habib plan for the withdrawal and departure of the PLO terrorist groups from
Beirut, published on 20 August, calls specifically for
all the PLO terrorists in Beirut “to leave Lebanon
peacefully for pre-arranged
destinations
in other
countries”. That same paragraph continues as follows:
“The basic concept of this plan is consistent with the
objective of the Government
of Lebanon that all
foreign military forces withdraw from Lebanon.”
120. Paragraph 18 of the same document states that
the PLO will turn over to the Lebanese armed forces
all heavy and spare weaponry and munitions left
behind in the Beirut area.
121. It is a matter of public record that not only
were all these and other provisions of the Habib plan
not adhered to by the PLO but that gross violations of
the general cease-fire occurred over the last four
weeks by the terrorists. Among these violations are
the failure to evacuate all the terrorists from the Beirut
area, large numbers of whom, running apparently
into the thousands, have been left behind in the honey
comb dug-outs and tunnels of the refugee camps in the
Beirut area. Heavy weapons were not turned over to
the Lebanese armed forces but, rather, to various
private groups acting on behalf of, and in league with,
the remaining terrorists.

113. In resolving the problem that has arisen today,
of course, the Council should not lose sight of the need
to ensure total and unconditional
withdrawal of Israeli
troops from the whole of Lebanese territory. The task
before the Council is still to give active support for a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East. Only a just
peace can be a lasting peace. But a piratical peace,
the peace of the grave, one dictated by the Israeli
aggressor and its Washington partner, cannot exist.
It must not exist and it shall not come about.
114. The Head of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union and the Soviet State, Mr. Brezhnev, speaking
yesterday in the Kremlin,
stressed that, for its part,
the Soviet Union intended to continue to use the resources available to it to exert active support in favour
of the Palestinian resistance movement, the Lebanese
patriots, Syria and all those who were not willing
to bow their heads to the aggressor and who were struggling for a just settlement and peace in that area.

122. It is also a matter of public record that large
numbers of terrorists have been infiltrating back into
the Bekaa valley and have opened fire at the Israel
Defence Forces through a protective screen of the
Syrian army. Indeed, in a dastardly attack on an outpost of the Israel Defence Forces only a few days a@)
the terrorists abducted eight Israeli soldiers and are
now attempting to blackmail Israel by threatening to
mistreat these prisoners.
12

123. But as if neither this nor the methodical and
continued violations of the cease-fire were enough
100 or so terrorist bosses have slipped back to Tripoli
and other locations in Lebanon and some of them
have made public speeches inciting to renewed fighting
and violence. Surprisingly,
there has not been any
reaction from any quarter to these blatant violations
by the terrorists of the Habib plan, by virtue of which
Israel agreed to let the terrorists go and save their
skins.
124. With all these adverse developments
in the
background, the assassination of the Lebanese President-elect,
Bashir Gemayel,
threatened and was
apparently designed to completely disrupt the ceasefire agreement and plunge the area into renewed
violence. This situation was especially true of the
Beirut area. The calculation of the murderers of the
President-elect was that, if the status ylro mte could be
re-established, the remnants of the PLO would use
this smoke-screen as a cover for regaining their lost
positions in Beirut and to fan out from there.
125. It was in order to shatter these designs and to
prevent the PLO from exploiting what might have
turned out to be the gambit for a renewed take-over
that the Israel Defence Forces moved into west Beirut.

representative of the country which by common accord
is one of the worst offenders-if
not the worst offender-against
international law has posed here as the
champion of international law.
130. Need one say more about the statement
representative of the Soviet Union?

of the

13 1. I do not believe I have to address myself in
great detail to the unmitigated
and unadulterated
nonsense that we heard today from Mr. Nuseibeh. Let
me therefore only briefly remind him that, with the
election of Bashir Gemayel as President of Lebanon
last month, Arab propagandists in various countries,
and particularly in Damascus, embarked on a campaign
of incitement and intimidation
against Mr. Gemayel,
calling actually for his liquidation,
132. Thus, for instance, on the day of the election
of Mr. Gemayel, the newspaper AI-&‘&,
published
in Damascus, had the following to say in its issue of
23 August:
“Lebanon is not the Lebanon of Bashir Gemayel
and his gangs. It is an Arab land, the population of
which is represented by patriotic leaders who have
rejected the candidate of the occupiers. These
leaders will continue to oppose this candidate until
he falls from power; and with him will fall all upon
which the enemies of Lebanon have gambled.”

126. As we have already had occasion to state elsewhere, the operation of the Israel Defence Forces is of
a limited scope and duration. The Government
of
Israel will instruct the Israel Defence Forces to relinquish their positions in west Beirut when the Lebanese armed forces are ready to assume contro1 over
those positions in co-ordination with the Israel Defence Forces in order to ensure public order and
security.

133. Four days later, on 27 August, another mouthpiece of the Syrian Government, the daily Ath-Tlmwn,
stated the following:
“We need a concerted mobilization
to eradicate
those defeatists who sold themselves to the devil
and became, by means of the devil’s support, a
real and influential force, a force starting with Sadat
and culminating in Bashir Gemayel, who agreed to
serve as the new military governor of Lebanon in
place of the Zionists,”

127. As I have stated on many occasions before in
the Council and elsewhere, Israel has no intention
whatsoever to remain in Lebanon or in any part thereof
and, with the departure of the foreign forces from that
country,
the Israel Defence Forces will also leave
Lebanon.
As the representative
of Lebanon has
rightly pointed out here again today, Lebanon should
be left to the Lebanese and to them alone.

134. On the same day, 27 August, Radio Damascus,
another mouthpiece of the Syrian rdgime, stated the
following:

128. The representative
of the Soviet Union has
introduced
a humorous dimension to what should
have been a serious debate. The representative of the
leading annexationist
Power of our time fulminated
here against annexation.
The representative of the
country that has cynically murdered millions of innocent civilians, in its own country as well as in other
countries,
has spoken here against cynicism and has
feigned compassion for innocent human beings.

“The national trend in Lebanon must be the
expulsion of the Zionist invaders from Lebanon and
the overthrow of the agents of occupation which
have associated themselves
with them. Bashir
Gemayel is not interested in a national army. He is
the leader of corrupt gangs which sow destruction
throughout Lebanon.”

129,
The representative
of the foremost aggressor
State of our time has sermonized here tonight against
aggression.
The representative of the country that is
commonly
considered as the worst violator of human
tights has spoken in support of human rights. The

13.5. Only last week, on 7 September, international
terrorist, Naef Hawatma, who was not supposed to be
back on Lebanese soil, having been evacuated from
Beirut only days before, in a speech in Baalbek,
Lebanon, threatened Bashir Gemayel with the s:lme
fate that had befallen President Sadat.
13

136. Mr. Nuseibeh, who knows of the many attempts
on the life of King Hussein and who knows full well
who murdered King Abdallah, should have known
better than lay his astounding and shameless accusations at Isratl’s doorstep. But it is this logic of recklessness, which transcends the present debate, that
truly reflects the outlook which is responsible for the
creation of the Arab-Israel conflict in the first piace
and for its perpetuation over the years and decades.

Israel is an aggressive entity which is dragging our
world-and I say it without any hesitation--to a conflagration the consequences of which will be felt in
the area and in the world at large,
145. I do not wish to enter into the heart of the matter. All my colleagues, Arabs and non-Arabs, including
you, Mr. President, and every member present here,
except one, have in one way or another spoken publicly about the character of Israel, condemned its acts
as violations of international
law, resolutions and
everything civilized that we have come to know since
the Second World War. The heart of the matter, the
essence of the matter, is clear. The Council has condemned it time and again, and had it not been for the
United States, Israel would not have become a Member of this Organization. We would not have to listen
to lies spread among our colleagues here, as well as
insinuations, allegations and accusations concerning
what the press in Syria has said. We have a free press.
We are free to say whatever we like. But, inasmuch
as we are free to say whatever we like, the members
of the Council must also listen to our official pronouncements.

137. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform
members of the Council that I have just received a
letter from the representative
of the Syrian Arab
Republic, in which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

146. A spokesman in Damascus made a statement on
the assassination of Mr. Bashir Gemayel. But certainly, the representative of Israel, in his selective
intelligence, his selective Zionist approach-because
Zionism is selective in its nature since it is a racist
theory-chose
to quote from the press but not what
has been published in Damascus by an official spokesman of the Syrian Arab Republic.

138. The PRESIDENT:
I now invite the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
139. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic):
Mr. President, I thank you and the other members
of the Council for allowing me to make a statement.
140. I should like to put on record that my place at
this table is not the right one.

147. The text of the statement is in Arabic. I shall
paraphrase since I did not have the time to translate
it word for word. Commenting
on the assassination
of Mr. Bashir Gemayel, an official spokesman from
our Government in Damascus said the following:

141. I should like, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
difficult month. The month before was no less difficult, and the representative
of Ireland distinguished
himself as President and as a just and humane person.

“There is no doubt that Israel has assassinated
Mr. Bashir Gemayel, despite the close relation
at that time between Israel and Mr. Gemayel.
Mr. Gemayel began to emphasize, underscore and
stress the imperative necessity of a total Israeli
withdrawal from Lebanon and he expounded his
reluctance to conclude a treaty-a
treaty of the
grave, a treaty of surrender-with
Israel. And
during the last few days he was speaking in this
sense: no treaty with the conqueror; total Israeli
withdrawal. No treaty under duress, no treaty under
occupation.”

142. I wish on this occasion to congratulate the
Secretary-General for his report [S/15382 and Add.11,
which is very pertinent to the work of the Council.
143. Our resolutions are being filed and not implemented. And the Secretary-General
has warned
-excuse
me for using the word “warned’‘-the
Council as to the present and future of peace and security, of which the Council is a guarantor and protector.
144. I really had not intended to speak in the debate
today but for some preposterous insinuations made
by the representative of the settler colonialist entity of
Israel, the ever-aggressive.
And along with aggression there has been the spreading of lies-not
just
today, but since the inception of this movement-the
big lie: “a country without a people for a people without a country” -the big lie of Israel, the constitution
of Israel. Israel exists because aggression exists.
1

/

You will not find another Sadat.
148. Let us remember facts. We have the repofl bY
the Secretary-General
in document S115382/AddJ*
There are episodes and dates in that report. Let us
refer to Tuesday, 14 September. It was on that date
that President-elect
Bashir Gemayel and several
others were killed in the blast. That is found in Pamgraph 6 ((a) of the document to which I referred, The
14

very next paragraph, 6 (d), states that: “Early on
I5 September, IDF”which means Israeli forces of
occupation,
not Israel Defence Forces--“infantry
personnel and armour moved forward from their
previous positions in west Beirut. . ,” The words
“Early on 15 September” should attract the attention
of every member of the Council. We have information.
Mr, Blum, do not think you have the means for getting
information. I do not think that you have information.
You fabricate information.
You are good at getting
information
from certain sources, You co-operate
with the intelligence
services of your protector and
ally: you exchange information.
According to the
spokesman, from whom we derive our information, the
military commander of the Israeli forces in and around
Beirut, at 9.30 a.m. on Tuesday, 14 September, began
calling for a meeting that was held at 6 p.m. among the
officers of the racist Israeli occupation forces around
Beirut. During that meeting, each officer was assigned
a certain task. Among the tasks assigned were entering
Beirut, taking up positions and reassembling in certain
parts of Beirut.

“Israel wants peace in and with Lebanon. Israel
has no quarrel with Lebanon, only with those who
have subjugated it.”
151. But who has subjugated Lebanon? Who has
killed 30,000 or more Lebanese? Who has displaced
600,000 Lebanese? Who has maimed 18,000 Lebanese? Israel wants to terrorize Lebanon, to subjugate
Lebanon, to exploit Lebanon and to annex those parts
of Lebanon that are of interest to it, and the interests
of Israel are all too well known to everyone because
of the many precedents that exist-Jerusalem,
the
Golan Heights, the de j&lo
annexation of the West
Bank where we have lost count of the number of settlements, settlements the construction of which, we are
told, should merely be frozen; they need not be dismantled; they may be kept there.
152. The hour is late. I took the floor categorically
to rebut the Israeli allegations, insinuations, lies and
fabrications. As this juncture I shall end my statement
and resume it at a later stage. I would only take this
opportunity
to express a welcome to the presence
among us of our new colleague, the representative of
the United Kingdom.

149. However, the most interesting thing is that at
the very moment-and
I emphasize that word, for
in my opinion the word “moment”
corresponds to the
words “early on 15 September”-the
assassination of
Mr. Gemayel was confirmed and orders were issued to
Israeli units to carry out their pre-planned, pre-arranged task, namely, the invasion of Beirut. At the
very moment that the death of Mr. Gemayel was confirmed,
the invasion of Beirut was proceeding according to plan and a curfew was immediately imposed.

153. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Israel
has asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply,
and I now call on him.
154. Mr. BLUM
(Israel): The representative
of
Syria has confronted us with a serious question. He
asked the Council, and I suppose he asked it in all
seriousness: “Who has subjugated Lebanon?” I think
the answer is clear. Syria has subjugated Lebanon.
For the past eight years, the Syrian army of occupation, in conjunction with the terrorist PLO, has been
terrorizing
the Lebanese people all over Lebanon,
including Beirut, which they shelled and bombed for
weeks in October 1978.

150. All of this clearly indicates that Israel planned
the assassination of Mr. Gemayel in advance and that
whatever happened while Israel was carrying out that
assassination or after the deed was done is the result of
that assassination. Facts-not to mention history-will
soon speak for themselves. Members of the Council
should listen carefully to and read what I say tonight:
Israel has assassinated Mr. Gemayel. I repeat: Israel
has assassinated Mr. Gemayel. Israel is the only one
with territorial ambitions, ambitions that go far beyond
what any one of us imagines, as history has proved.
Israel has declared here through its representative
that it has no territorial ambitions. Yet if Israel has no
territorial
ambitions,
why is it now implementing
its plans by setting up El Al offices, banks and waterresource programmes
near the Litani? This corresponds precisely to what Mr. Sharett said when he
denounced his own friends by relating in his memoirs
the story of the occupation of southern Lebanon. One
day, we shall also quote Mr. Blum and rebut what
he has said in document S/15386, lying as he did so,
when he quoted from his statement to the General
Assembly
on 17 August, at the 26th meeting of the
Seventh Emergency Special Session, that:

155. The representative
of the Soviet Union calculated that about one third of Lebanon is now under
Israeli control. That leaves two thirds of Lebanese
territory unaccounted for. I presume the representative of the Soviet Union does not know who controls those two thirds of Lebanon’s territory,
but
I think it would be difficult to assume that the representative of Syria does not know under whose control
those two thirds are. But I should like to ask him: who
controls those two thirds of Lebanese territory? What
is the purpose of their presence there? Who regards all
of Lebanon as part of greater Syria, of Suriya AlKrrhr~? Who has never established diplomatic
relations with Lebanon because of the fraternal relations that exist between the two countries? When was
the Syrian ambassador recalled from Beirut, Mr. ElFattal? He was not recalled, because he was never
appointed.
Will Mr. El-Fattal
be good enough to
explain to the Council the reasons for the non-appointment of Syrian envoys to Lebanon during all these
years?

“Israel has no territorial ambitions whatsoever
in Lebanon. We do not covet even one single square
inch of Lebanese territory. . .
15

156. But I believe that we are all grateful to the
representative of Syria for an important and sensational piece of information.
He informed the Council
that there is freedom of the press in his country. Well,
some of us were not aware of this interesting fact until
now, but I am sure that it is as true as the existence of
democracy in Syria -the multi-party
State of Syria,
I should add. But if the representative of Syria really
wants to know more about the true situation in his
country, I would refer him to the parting shot of his
predecessor, to the press statement made by his immediate predecessor when he left office and told all of us
about the democracy, freedom of speech, freedom
of the press and all the other freedoms that existed
under the ri?gime of the Assad brothers-the
majority
rCgime of the minority Alawites of Syria.

161, The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Israel
again wishes to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
I would appreciate it very much if he would bear in
mind the lateness of the hour. I now call on him.
162. Mr. BLUM
(Israel): Mr. President, 1 shall
certainly bear in mind the lateness of the hour and
be very brief,
163. I want to address myself to just one sentence in
the statement of my Syrian colleague. He has again
treated us for the umpteenth time to the fiction of the
Syrian presence in Lebanon being at the request of
Lebanon and of the Arab League. I am sure that he
knows that that claim has been a fiction all these years
and that the Syrian army of occupation was hiding in
Lebanon behind that fig-leaf. But even that fig-leaf has
disappeared since last July. The so-called mandate of
the so-called Arab Peace Deterrent Force-a
very
CURIOUS
designation but that, I think, was the official
designation-expired
on 27 July. The Lebanese Government did not ask for the extension of that mandate; in fact, it asked that all foreign forces, including
those of Syria, leave Lebanon. And yet, here we have
the Syrian representative six or seven weeks later
pretending that the Syrian army of occupation is on
Lebanese soil at the request of Lebanon and of the
Arab League. I leave it to members of the Council
to determine for themselves who fabricates facts and
who fabricates information here.

157. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of the
Syrian Arab Republic has asked to speak in exercise
of the right of reply. I invite him to make his statement.
158, Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic):
I believe that we are here for a very important question-the
invasion of the second part of Beirut.
159. We are faced with a situation that, in accordance with Israeli designs, would lead to the annexation
of part of Lebanon if permitted to continue. Let us
be very frank about that.
160. I should like to remind the members of the
Council that Syria is in Lebanon because it was ordered
to do so by the League of Arab States of which we
are a member, and we are proud to perform our national duty in Lebanon, a national duty which stopped
once and for all the civil war which Israel is restarting
today through the killing of Mr. Gemayel, the civil
war which Israel, through its occupation of west
Beirut, is rekindling again. That is why Syria and the
Arab Deterrent Forces are performing a sacred national duty. This must be understood very clearly by the
Israeli representative.
It is a sacred national duty;
“Greater Syria”, “Smaller
Syria”-there
is nothing
of the sort that should be of concern to him. Israel has
become super-Israel; it has destroyed Palestine; it has
destroyed part of my country; it has occupied one
third of Lebanon, as the representative of the Soviet
Union said: then the Israeli representative claims that
Syria has objectives in Lebanon which are different
from the objectives of the Arab people of Lebanon.
That is the biggest lie. To be more polite, I could say
“misrepresentation”,
but in my dictionary it is a lie.
Syria is performing a national duty and it will continue
to do so until the last of the colonialist Israeli soldiers,
coming from all parts of the world to grab land and
water, leave the entire territory of Lebanon, This
should be made very clear to the Israeli representative
and to those who perhaps have intentions to portray
our presence in Lebanon as something other than a
national duty.
i

164. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I have before me
the text of a draft resolution, which in actual fact is
a working paper and which I did not and still do not
intend to introduce to the Council before further consultations with the members of the Council. As I stated
to several of my colleagues and to members of other
delegations, I should like to put on record that I would
deeply appreciate any proposals, amendments or
changes which any delegation might wish to submit
to this working paper which has appeared in provisional form [S/15394.
165. Even though it has already appeared in provisional form, I think there must be further consultations among the members of the Council, because Our
principal aim is to achieve consensus on an extremely
grave situation in Lebanon; our principle aim and
motivation
is solely to safeguard the integrity of
Beirut and its population.
166. I therefore hope that my colleagues around ihis
table will consider this as an initial draft and that they
will make proposa]s for inclusion in this draft resolw
tion, which I shall then officially submit to the Council,
167.

The PRESIDENT:

sentative

16

of Lebanon.

I call now on the rePr@

168. Mr. TUl?NI (Lebanon): I am not going to speak
in exercise of my right of reply at this stage.

consensus which we hope it will be possible to reach
in the Council.
Thr

169, I wish to thank the representative of Jordan
for having submitted his working paper and for welcoming observations from other members. I would,
however, draw the attention of the President and the
other members of the Council to the urgency of the
situation and ask for extreme celerity in reaching the

mrcting

~nw

at 8.30

p.m.

Council,

Fl~r~rth

NOTES
1 (?ffiffic+ol

Rworc/s

of tlrc

Scwrrity

Ycrrr,

.Spc~~~icrl

S//pp/m?c~rItNo. 4.
2 A/37/1,

17

p. 3.

,

HOW

TO

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

OBTAIN

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
l’rom bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations.
Salts Sectton.
New

SE PROCURER

LES

Les publications
des Nations
Units
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupres
des ventes,
New York
ou Geneve.

COMD

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations.

New

York

PUBLLCATIONS

DES

NATIONS

sent en vcnte dam les librairies
de votre tibreire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Lils publicaciones
de las Nacioncs
todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLLCATIONS

DE

LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
estan en venta en libretias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

0040o

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et Its agences
a : Nations

depositaims
dtr
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Scccion de Ventas.
