A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/240
15 October 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 96 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee
(A/AC.250/1 (Parts I-III))]
51/240.

Agenda for Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 49/126 of 19 December 1994, in which it decided
to establish an ad hoc open-ended working group of the Assembly to elaborate
further an action-oriented, comprehensive agenda for development, which was to
begin its work as early as possible in 1995 under the chairmanship of the
President of the Assembly,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group of
the General Assembly on an Agenda for Development;1
2.
Adopts the Agenda for Development, as set forth in the annex to
the present resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
20 June 1997
ANNEX
Agenda for Development
1.

Development is one of the main priorities of the United Nations.
Development is a multidimensional undertaking to achieve a higher

1

A/AC.250/1 (Parts I-III). For the final text, see Official Records of the
General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 45 (A/51/45).
97-77479

/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 2

quality of life for all people. Economic development, social
development and environmental protection are interdependent and
mutually reinforcing components of sustainable development.
Sustained economic growth is essential to the economic and social
development of all countries, in particular developing countries.
Through such growth, which should be broadly based so as to
benefit all people, countries will be able to improve the
standards of living of their people through the eradication of
poverty, hunger, disease and illiteracy, the provision of adequate
shelter and secure employment for all and the preservation of the
integrity of the environment.
Democracy, respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
including the right to development, transparent and accountable
governance and administration in all sectors of society, and
effective participation by civil society are also an essential
part of the necessary foundations for the realization of social
and people-centred sustainable development.
The empowerment of women and their full participation on a basis
of equality in all spheres of society is fundamental for
development.
2.
Building on the outcome of recent United Nations conferences and other
relevant agreements, the Agenda for Development aims at invigorating a renewed
and strengthened partnership for development, based on the imperatives of
mutual benefits and genuine interdependence. It testifies to the renewed
commitments of all countries to mobilize national and international efforts in
pursuit of sustainable development and to revitalize and strengthen
international cooperation for development. In that context, the Agenda for
Development acknowledges the primacy of national policy and measures in the
development process and calls for action towards a dynamic and enabling
international economic environment, including an open, rule-based, equitable,
secure, non-discriminatory, transparent and predictable multilateral trading
system and promotion of investment and transfer of technology and knowledge,
as well as for enhanced international cooperation in the mobilization and
provision of financial resources for development from all sources, the
strategy for durable solutions to the external debt and debt-servicing
problems of developing countries and the efficient use of available resources.
I. SETTING AND OBJECTIVES
A. Setting
Development, peace and security
3.
Peace and development are closely interrelated and mutually supportive.
Development should also be pursued in its own right. Development is
indispensable to the achievement and maintenance of peace and security both
within and among nations. Without development there can be neither peace nor
security. There is complementarity between the processes related to the
Agenda for Development and the Agenda for Peace. For peace and stability to
endure, national action and effective international cooperation are required

97-77479

/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 3

to promote a better life for all in larger freedom, a critical element of
which is the eradication of poverty.
4.
Development cannot be attained in the absence of peace and security or
in the absence of respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Under conditions of war, and during periods of short-term emergencies and
humanitarian needs, development efforts are often neglected, diminished or
abandoned. Excessive military expenditures, arms trade and investment for
arms production, acquisition and stockpiling have a negative impact on
development prospects. With the relaxation of international tensions the
opportunity exists for reducing, as appropriate, military expenditures and
investments for arms production and acquisition, consistent with national
security requirements, in order to increase resources for social and economic
development.
(a)

Globalization, regional cooperation and interdependence:
commitment for partnership

the need for a

5.
Profound changes have occurred, especially coupled with the end of the
cold war, which question some of the traditional ways of addressing the
challenge of development.
6.
One such increasingly important change affecting all countries is the
process of market-driven globalization, including as a result of rapid
progress in information exchange and telecommunications. Globalization
encompasses the varying degrees of increasing integration of world markets of
goods, services, capital, technology and labour. This has generated greater
openness and freer movement of factors of production and has created greater
opportunities for international cooperation. Greatly increased trade and
capital flows and technological developments open new opportunities for growth
of the world economy, particularly in developing countries. Wider
dissemination of ideas, cultures and lifestyles brought about by innovations
in transportation and communications are also important manifestations of the
globalization process. Globalization permits countries to share experiences
and to learn from one another's achievements and difficulties and promotes a
cross-fertilization of ideals, cultural values and aspirations, taking into
account the recognition of cultural diversity.
7.
Globalization of the world economy presents opportunities and challenges
for the development process, as well as risks and uncertainties. As a result
of the process of globalization and growing interdependence in the economic,
social and environmental fields, an increasing number of issues cannot be
effectively addressed by countries individually. Therefore, international
cooperation is required. Furthermore, non-State actors with a global reach,
such as transnational corporations, private financial institutions and
non-governmental organizations, have important roles to play in the emerging
network of international cooperation.
8.
Greater interdependence among States has accelerated the international
transmission of macroeconomic policy decisions and therefore their effects
throughout the global economy. This is particularly true for the development
prospects of the developing countries, which have been particularly affected
by globalization.
9.
Global financial integration presents new challenges and opportunities
for the international community. Sound domestic macroeconomic policies in
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 4

each country for promoting macroeconomic stability and growth are primary
elements for determining private capital flows, and the coordination of
macroeconomic policies, where appropriate, and a favourable international
economic environment play an important role in reinforcing their
effectiveness. The globalization of financial markets can generate new risks
of instability, including interest rate and exchange rate fluctuations and
volatile short-term capital flows, which require all countries to pursue sound
economic policies and to recognize the external economic impact of their
domestic policies. There is a need for the expansion of private capital flows
and for broader access by all developing countries to these flows, and
therefore a need for the international community to assist low-income
countries, especially those in Africa, in their efforts to create an enabling
environment necessary to attract such flows.
10.
Increasing the capacity to respond to these trends requires sound
domestic policies as well as a favourable international economic environment.
Although new growth poles are emerging in a number of developing countries
which will provide an increasing share of the stimulus to world development,
it is likely that the role of the developed countries in world finance will
remain preponderant for a long time. The policies they follow in their
domestic affairs will, in the increasingly globalized capital markets, be of
decisive importance for the rest of the world as they have a significant
influence on world economic growth and, consequently, over the international
economic environment.
11.
Notwithstanding the importance of a favourable international economic
environment, ultimately each country bears primary responsibility for its own
economic and social policies for development. In order to take advantage of a
rapidly integrating world economy, all countries should adopt sound and stable
domestic policies, address external and internal imbalances and encourage a
continuous process of adjustment. Sound national policies are also essential
for cushioning external shocks. National policies of all countries would also
benefit from improved political institutions and legal systems. In this
context, the international community should give strong support to the efforts
of developing countries to solve their serious social and economic problems
and should promote a favourable international economic environment for
development.
12.
Globalization and interdependence are deepening the need and creating
greater opportunities for international cooperation. The problems and
questions that globalization and interdependence bring in their wake show that
there clearly exists a shared, common interest among all countries in solving
and answering them. International development cooperation, which is not only
founded in solidarity but also based on mutual interest and partnership, forms
an essential part of this effort. With the waning of ideological
confrontations, the rise in globalization and the deepening of interdependence
among nations, the historic opportunity has arisen for constructive dialogue
among all countries, in particular among the developed and developing
countries, and political mobilization for the promotion of international
cooperation for development based on genuine partnership and mutuality of
interests and benefits. The present Agenda for Development manifests our
commitment to grasp this opportunity.
13.
The deepening interdependence among countries has already led to the
emergence and strengthening of regional economic groupings and arrangements.
They are recognized as important catalysts for global economic growth and
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 5

expansion of trade. They offer a framework for fostering and enhancing
cooperation among States not only on economic policy but on other areas of
common concern as well. Regional economic groupings and arrangements that are
outward oriented, supportive of and complementary to the multilateral trading
system are important actors in the global development process.
(b)

Variety of development experiences and impact of globalization

14.
Development experiences among countries reflect differences with both
progress and setbacks. A number of developing countries have experienced
rapid economic growth in the recent past and have become dynamic partners in
the international economy. These countries, which maintain a high rate of
economic growth, have increased their share in world trade and foreign direct
investment, thereby expanding their role in the global economy.
15.
At the same time, developing countries continue to face difficulties
participating in the globalization process. Many risk being marginalized and
effectively excluded from the globalization process. Many of them continue to
be mired in poverty, hunger, malnutrition and economic stagnation, including
slow or negative economic growth. The global changes in finance,
communications and technology have largely bypassed them, despite their
efforts at undertaking economic reforms, including structural adjustment
programmes. The gap between the developed and developing countries remains
unacceptably wide. Imbalances and uncertainties continue to exist in the
global economy, which affect all countries but in particular the interests of
the developing countries. We reiterate the need for broadening and
strengthening the participation of developing countries in the international
economic decision-making process.
16.
The development spectrum ranges widely not only among countries but also
within countries. The varied country situations indicate that, in addition to
overall measures needed for the promotion of a favourable international
economic environment for development, there is a need for specific measures in
particular country situations. Success will often depend on the removal of
key constraints, which vary greatly from country to country. Cooperation
among developing countries and sharing their experiences can greatly
contribute to achieving such success. It also requires that international
development cooperation has to take into account the respective plans,
programmes, needs, priorities and policies of developing countries. A new
international partnership is required for development at the national,
subregional, regional and international levels.
(c)

Critical situations and special problems in developing countries

Critical situation in Africa
17.
The critical socio-economic situation in Africa is of priority concern.
Africa is the only region where poverty is expected to continue to increase
substantially. Much of the continent suffers from, inter alia, inadequate
physical and institutional infrastructure, poor human resource development,
lack of food security, malnutrition, hunger, widespread epidemics and diseases
and unemployment and underemployment. These conditions are further compounded
by a number of conflict and disaster situations. All these diverse
limitations and constraints make it difficult for Africa to benefit fully from
the processes of globalization and liberalization of trade and to integrate
fully into the world economy. Increased mobilization of domestic and external
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 6

resources for development, as well as their more effective use, are critical
for the success of the economic and political reforms undertaken by African
countries. International solidarity is fundamental to Africa's development
and international cooperation and support must necessarily complement the
national resources mobilized by the African countries themselves.
Critical situation in the least developed countries
18.
The critical situations of the least developed countries, which are
particularly marginalized from the world economy, require the priority
attention of the entire international community, in support of appropriate
domestic economic and social policies. The heavy burden of debt and debt
servicing on their economies, deterioration in the terms of trade, decline in
real terms in recent years in the overall level of official development
assistance and limited flows of private resources are some of the main factors
that impede the already limited opportunities for these countries to
participate in and benefit from the processes of globalization and
liberalization. By most measures of economic and human well-being, the least
developed countries lag seriously behind. Their social indicators are
consistently low and have worsened in some cases. Their institutional and
physical infrastructures are fragile and therefore enhanced national and
international support is required to strengthen them.
Special problems in small island developing States
19.
The special problems of small island developing States also need to be
given priority attention by the international community. The special
challenges and constraints to their development arising from, inter alia,
their limited market size and resource base, their particular transportation
and communication problems and their high degree of vulnerability to natural
and environmental disaster need to be addressed.
Special problems in landlocked developing countries
20.
Lack of territorial access to the sea, aggravated by remoteness and
isolation from world markets and prohibitive transit costs and risks, impose
serious constraints on the overall socio-economic development efforts of the
landlocked developing countries. The special challenges and constraints
specific to these countries need to be addressed.
(d)

Post-cold-war realities and challenges
(i)

Special problems and features of countries with economies in
transition

21.
The special problems and features of countries with economies in
transition require particular attention in the post-cold-war era. The dual
transition to democracy and to a market economy makes their situation
especially complex, particularly regarding their economic growth and
sustainable development. This ongoing process is guided by and based on
respect for human rights, transparent, representative and accountable
governance, the rule of law and civil peace.
22.
Considerable strains are put on the social fabric of the societies of
the countries with economies in transition. Structural adjustments bring
economic benefits but are causing social problems which were unknown before
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 7

the transition. Severe environmental degradation, a worsening population
situation and the problem of conversion of military production to civilian in
those countries are of primary concern.
23.
The completion of the transition process and the integration of those
countries into the world economy and their effective involvement in the
multilateral institutions will have a positive impact not only on the
countries themselves but also on the global economy. Thus, it is especially
important for them to promote effective cooperation in trade, economy,
finance, science and technology with all countries and regions. Their
integration should contribute to economic cooperation with developing
countries and to mutually beneficial exchanges of scientific and industrial
know-how. Increased cooperation among countries with economies in transition
will also be important. In order to bring this integration about in a speedy
manner, effective international support for reforms in those countries is
essential both in terms of financial resources and of institutional expertise.
The measures that should be undertaken in this regard must ensure the
maximization of the benefits from, and the minimization of the negative
effects of, trends in the world economy for all countries, in particular for
developing countries.
(ii)

The end of the cold war and the developing countries

24.
While the end of the cold war has fostered a new spirit of dialogue and
cooperation at the global political level, there is a need to improve the
international economic environment so that it is more conducive to the
socio-economic development of developing countries, including through the
fulfilment of commitments agreed to at the recent major United Nations
conferences.
25.
In the post-cold-war situation, the record of development is so far a
mixed one. The successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round of multilateral
trade negotiations, the consensus on development arising from recent major
United Nations conferences and the expansion in private flows to developing
countries are positive developments. On the other hand, the recent decline in
real terms of official development assistance, the deterioration in terms of
trade and the risk of marginalization from the world economy of developing
countries, in particular the least developed countries, are particular
concerns. The international community and multilateral financial institutions
and the World Trade Organization should focus their attention on ways to
address these concerns effectively.
(e)

Democracy, transparent and accountable governance and the promotion and
protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the
right to development

26.
The waning of ideological conflicts has improved the climate of
cooperation at all levels. Although there is no universal prescription for
successful development, a consensus has emerged, inter alia, that economic
development, social development and environmental protection are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing components of sustainable development,
which is the framework of our efforts to achieve a higher quality of life for
all people. In this context, we reaffirm that democracy, development and
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the right to
development, are interdependent and mutually reinforcing.

/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 8

27.
Respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms, democratic and
effective institutions, combating corruption, transparent, representative and
accountable governance, popular participation, an independent judiciary, the
rule of law and civil peace are among the indispensable foundations for
development. At the same time, we reaffirm that the right to development is a
universal and inalienable right and an integral part of human rights. As
stated in the Declaration on the Right to Development,2 the human person is
the central subject of development. Development facilitates the enjoyment of
all human rights, but the lack of development may not be invoked to justify
the abridgement of internationally recognized human rights.
28.
Efforts to reinforce democratic institutions and actions are vital for
achieving peace and economic and social progress. Social stability, needed
for productive growth, is nurtured by conditions in which people can readily
express their will. For this, strong national participatory institutions are
essential.
29.
The existence of widespread absolute poverty inhibits the full and
effective enjoyment of human rights and renders democracy and popular
participation fragile. It is unacceptable that absolute poverty, hunger and
disease, lack of adequate shelter, illiteracy and hopelessness should be the
lot of over one billion people. We commit ourselves to the goal of
eradicating poverty in the world through decisive national actions and
international cooperation as an ethical social, political and economic
imperative of humankind.
30.
Democracy, which is spreading everywhere, has raised development
expectations everywhere. Their non-fulfilment risks the rekindling of
non-democratic forces. Structural reforms that do not take social realities
into account could destabilize democratization processes as they impede the
fulfilment of those expectations. While it is recognized that States have the
primary responsibility for securing a sound and stable national political,
economic and social environment for development, international support, at the
request of interested Governments, and the creation of a favourable
international economic environment are crucial ingredients in this effort.
31.
It is increasingly recognized that the State's role in development
should be complemented by other relevant actors of civil society, including
the private sector. The State has the overall responsibility in various
areas, including social, economic and environmental policy formulation, and
for creating an enabling environment for the private sector; the State should
encourage effective participation by the private sector and major groups in
activities that complement and reinforce national objectives.
32.
Every State has an inalienable right to choose its political, economic,
social and cultural systems, without interference in any form by another
State. By virtue of the principle of equal rights and self-determination of
peoples enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, all peoples have the
right freely to determine, without external interference, their political
status and to pursue their economic, social and cultural development, and
every State has the duty to respect this right in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter.

2

Resolution 41/128, annex.
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 9

B. Objectives
1. Strengthening international cooperation for development
(a)

Implementing all international agreements and commitments for
development

33.
The new opportunities, challenges and risks opened by the globalization
of and growing interdependence in the world economy, the critical situation
and special problems in many developing countries and the special problems of
economies in transition heighten the need for strengthened international
cooperation. A strong political will is essential to sustain such
cooperation. Through the present Agenda, we renew our commitment and seek to
impart new vigour to a global partnership for development.
34.
The international community has convened over the past five years or so
a number of major conferences and meetings that have adopted decisions and
made commitments on key development issues aimed at reinvigorating the
development process and international cooperation for development. These
include the Declaration on International Economic Cooperation, in particular
the Revitalization of Economic Growth and Development of the Developing
Countries,3 the International Development Strategy for the Fourth United
Nations Development Decade,4 the World Conference on Education for All held at
Jomtien, Thailand, the Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries, the World Summit for Children, the United Nations New Agenda for
the Development of Africa in the 1990s,5 the Cartagena Commitment,6 Agenda
217 and the various consensus agreements and conventions adopted before, at or
after the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, the World
Conference on Human Rights, the Global Conference on the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States, the International Conference on
Population and Development, the World Summit for Social Development, the
Fourth World Conference on Women, the ninth session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements (Habitat II) and the World Food Summit.
35.
Those conferences bear witness that the United Nations system is and
should continue to be more actively involved in the full spectrum of
development issues. The accords, commitments and internationally agreed

3

Resolution S-18/3, annex.

4

Resolution 45/199, annex.

5

Resolution 46/151, annex, sect. II.

6

See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
Eighth Session, Report and Annexes (TD/364/Rev.1)(United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.93.II.D.5), part one, sect. A.
7

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio
de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions Adopted by the Conference, resolution 1,
annex II.
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 10

targets reached at those conferences should be fully implemented by all States
and international organizations. Only through full implementation can we give
credence to the notion that these development initiatives are truly a priority
issue for the international community.
36.
Such implementation requires foremost political will by all actors at
all levels. Too often the gap between what has been agreed and what has been
implemented leaves much to be desired at both the national and the
international levels. The commitments we have made individually and
collectively need to be fulfilled if the development needs of all countries,
particularly the developing countries, are to be addressed effectively.
37.
To this end we reaffirm, through the present Agenda for Development, the
continued relevance of the agreements reached at these international
conferences and other meetings of the United Nations and stress the need for
an integrated, interrelated and coherent implementation of and coordinated
follow-up to the outcomes of those conferences.
(b)

Enhancing the role, capacity, effectiveness and efficiency of the United
Nations system in development

38.
As we approach the twenty-first century, it is the collective
responsibility of the international community to ensure that within the
multidimensional and integrated character of its mandate the United Nations
system is equipped to show leadership in the fulfilment of the commitments
made on international cooperation for development and to serve as a forum for
the expression of global goals and as an advocate for the promotion and
protection of all human rights, including the right to development and the
protection of the environment, as well as to respond to humanitarian
assistance requirements and to maintain peace and international security.
39.
The United Nations system, by virtue of its global reach, its universal
membership, its impartiality and the unique and comprehensive mandate
reflected in its Charter, has a vital role to play in the development process.
Enhancing that role, capacity, effectiveness and efficiency requires a
continuous focus on development issues and ensuring its sound financial basis.
40.
The wide array of issues which the United Nations system addresses is
reflected in its various functions, such as those of the specialized agencies,
including the Bretton Woods institutions, and the regional commissions. Each
part of the system has a specific role to play in addressing those issues.
Relative strengths and weaknesses among the various parts of the system cannot
be ignored. Enhancing the role, capacity, effectiveness and efficiency of the
United Nations system has to take those basic facts into account and
programmes should be concentrated on areas where particular needs and the
special capacity of the Organization converge.
41.
However, overarching these considerations of efficiency and
effectiveness of delivery is the political dimension of the development
agenda. The United Nations is unique because it conducts international
political debates on all issues in the economic, social and related fields.
These debates should provide political impetus to other forums to undertake
the necessary policies and measures. Hence, the political interaction of the
United Nations not only with Member States, the specialized agencies,
including the Bretton Woods institutions, and the regional commissions, as
well as with organizations such as the World Trade Organization, but also with
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 11

non-State actors should be intensified with a view to enhancing effective
action and coordination among them in the economic, social and related fields.
42.
The present Agenda for Development sets out a new framework for
international cooperation, defines the role of the United Nations and how both
can make a particular contribution, sets out the development priorities as
well as time-frames for implementation and keeps the implementation of the
development agenda under political review.
2. Promoting development based on an integrated approach
43.
Sustained economic growth is essential for expanding the resource base
for development and hence for economic, technical and social transformation.
It generates the required financial, physical, human and technological
resources. It is also essential to the eradication of poverty. An open and
equitable framework for trade, investment and technology transfer, as well as
enhanced cooperation in the management of a globalized world economy and in
the formulation and implementation of macroeconomic policies, are critical for
the promotion of growth and development. While the private sector is a motor
for economic growth, the Government has an active and essential role in the
formulation of economic, social and environmental policies.
44.
In order to ensure an integrated approach to development centred on
human beings and to achieve sustainable development, economic growth on its
own is not sufficient and environmental protection cannot be considered in
isolation from the development process. The goal of development is the
improvement of human well-being and the quality of life. This involves the
eradication of poverty, the fulfilment of the basic needs of all people and
the protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the
right to development. It requires that Governments apply active social and
environmental policies and promote and protect all human rights and
fundamental freedoms on the basis of democratic and widely participatory
institutions.
45.
Investments in health, education and training are particularly critical
in the development of human resources and should be pursued in such a way that
everyone, both women and men, are given an equal opportunity to participate
actively and productively in the development process. The improvement of the
role and status of women, including their empowerment, is central to all
efforts to achieve sustainable development in its economic, social and
environmental dimensions. Diversion of resources away from social priorities
and needs should be avoided and, where it has occurred, be corrected. Basic
social programmes and expenditures, in particular those affecting people
living in poverty and the disadvantaged and vulnerable groups of society,
should be protected from budget reductions. When formulating and implementing
structural adjustment policies and programmes such considerations should be
taken into account.
46.
Development is and should be centred on human beings. Economic
development, social development and environmental protection are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing components of sustainable development,
which is the framework of efforts to achieve a higher quality of life for all
people. As the well-being of human beings depends on all facets of
development, a multidimensional approach to development is essential.
Therefore, any formulation of strategies, policies and national, subregional,
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 12

regional and international actions has to be based on an integrated and
comprehensive approach. It is in this spirit that we frame the present Agenda
for Development. All of the areas identified for action are closely
interrelated for implementation of the Agenda.
II. POLICY FRAMEWORK, INCLUDING MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION
47.
An encouraging development in recent years has been the almost universal
pursuit of increased economic openness and integration. This has contributed
to a growing economic and social interdependence among countries. It is a
common responsibility and in the common interest to ensure that these trends
continue and also to ensure that all countries benefit from them. The last
point is fundamental: the benefits attributable to these various changes have
been widespread, but they have been neither universal nor achieved without
costs. A primary objective of the implementation of the present Agenda should
be to contribute in such a way that the benefits stemming from future growth
and development are distributed equitably among all countries and peoples.
48.
Achieving and maintaining an international environment favourable to all
countries is in the interest of all countries. Global economic, environmental
and social issues can be approached effectively only through a constructive
dialogue and genuine partnership among all countries. This requires
recognition not only of the mutuality of interests and benefits but also of
common, though differentiated, responsibilities. This mutual understanding
has permeated the ongoing sequence of United Nations world conferences and
summits.
49.
However, some of the commitments and agreements for development,
including those referring to international development cooperation, resulting
from these conferences and summits, as well as from previous international
undertakings, remain to be fulfilled. Those commitments, as well as the new
and additional priority actions identified here, should be implemented in the
spirit of solidarity and partnership. In this context, efforts should be made
to mobilize public support for development cooperation, inter alia, through a
strategy based on partnership between developed and developing countries,
which incorporates, as appropriate, mutually agreed goals for development.
A. Economic development
1. Macroeconomic policies geared towards sustained economic growth and
sustainable development
50.
National developmental policies should be formulated in conformity with
national needs, conditions and development priorities and should take into
account the lessons learned from decades of development experience. Among the
latter, the dynamic role of the private sector and the contribution of human
resource development in creating wealth figure prominently. The challenge for
public authorities is, inter alia, to develop and implement policies that are
conducive to prosperity and that eradicate poverty and conserve the
environment.
51.
To this end, Governments should encourage a supportive environment for
the private sector, including active competition policies, the application of
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 13

the rule of law, an open framework for trade and investment and sound fiscal
and monetary policies. In the area of finance, policies need both to promote
domestic savings and to attract external resources for productive investment.
For both purposes, it is necessary to improve the efficiency of domestic
financial markets. Addressing the needs of people living in poverty and the
disadvantaged and vulnerable groups of society, and the creation of more and
better jobs, requires attention to be given to conducive macroeconomic
policies and to such issues as human resources development, gender equality,
public participation and social integration. Social and environmental factors
should be considered as important elements to be taken into account by all
countries in the formulation and implementation of macroeconomic policies.
Particular attention should be paid to the effect of structural adjustment
programmes on people living in poverty and on disadvantaged and vulnerable
groups of society.
52.
Increased economic integration and interdependence place greater
responsibilities than before on all countries, but particularly the developed
countries, to contribute to ensuring that their domestic policies are
favourable to economic growth and development in the rest of the world.
National and international actions are closely interrelated and should be seen
as mutually reinforcing components of the overall goal of achieving
development. In order to foster a supportive international environment for
development, countries should pursue economic stability, full employment, a
low rate of inflation, sustainable external and internal balances, including
the avoidance of excessive budget deficits, low long-term real interest rates
and a measure of exchange rate stability. They should also ensure open
financial and commercial markets and, where appropriate, provide concessional
aid flows.
53.
International cooperation in the formulation and implementation of
macroeconomic policies should be reinforced with a view to promoting greater
coherence and consistency of domestic policies and thereby enhancing their
effectiveness. Measures should also be taken to broaden cooperation among
monetary authorities in order to maintain a sound international financial
system. This enhanced cooperation should take full account of the interests
and concerns of all countries. Multilateral surveillance should
correspondingly address the policies and measures of all countries.
2. International trade and commodities
54.
The growing, though far from complete, integration of all countries in
world trade and investment represents a historic structural change in
international economic relations. In recent years, trade of developing
countries has increased, largely as a result of their liberalization policies
concerning trade and investment. The expansion of their markets appears to be
creating a virtuous circle in which mutually beneficial liberalization of
trade and investment can become a major means for generating the resources
necessary for development.
55.
The liberalization of trade regimes and the promotion of an open and
secure multilateral trading system are central requirements for the promotion
of economic development. All Governments should commit themselves to the
liberalization of trade and investment policies and should foster
international cooperation towards this goal. All countries have a shared
interest in an open, ruled-based, equitable, non-discriminatory, transparent
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 14

and predictable multilateral trading system. While many provisions in this
area have been identified by the General Assembly over the last five years,
the agreements as represented by the World Trade Organization are particularly
important. In this regard, the World Trade Organization's dispute settlements
mechanism is a key element for the credibility of the multilateral trade
system. The commitments agreed upon in the Final Act of the Uruguay
Round8 should be implemented fully. Unilateral actions of a protectionist
nature, inconsistent with multilateral trade agreements, should be avoided and
prevented. Appropriate monitoring measures should be established to ensure
that, in the implementation of the Uruguay Round, the rights, interests and
concerns of all countries are protected, recognized and redressed.
56.
There is a need to promote greater integration in the world economy of
those countries that have not yet benefited from the overall increase in trade
and investment flows, in particular African countries and the least developed
countries. Special attention should be given to the full implementation of
the specific provisions for the least developed countries, including the
provisions emanating from the Marrakesh agreements, and to the needs of the
net food-importing developing countries, so that all countries benefit fully
from the results of the Uruguay Round. These measures will also require
domestic efforts to promote greater diversification of trade of those
countries and to increase the competitiveness of their trading sectors.
57.
Efforts to make trade and environment policies mutually supportive in
favour of sustainable development should continue. Trade liberalization
measures should be complemented by sound environmental policies, but measures
adopted for environmental purposes should not become a means of arbitrary and
unjustifiable trade discrimination or a disguised form of protectionism. In
the same vein, social concerns should not be used for protectionist purposes.
58.
Commodity exports continue to play a key role in the economies of many
developing countries, especially in terms of their export earnings, the
livelihoods of their people, and the dependence of general economic vitality
on those exports. This makes the continuing deterioration in their terms of
trade of special concern, even if there is some recent evidence of improvement
in the prices of some primary commodities. Increased participation of
developing countries in the processing, marketing and distribution of their
commodities, if accompanied by improved market access, provides an alternative
means for ensuring greater value added, as well as predictability and
increased export earnings, from commodity production. This diversification
will require such countries to continue their macroeconomic, trade and
investment policy reforms.
59.
It will also require a strong commitment by the international community
to support such policy reforms. The international community should endeavour
to improve the functioning of commodity markets, with greater transparency and
more stable and predictable conditions. There should be further evaluation of
the usefulness of commodity agreements in this regard, taking into account the
potential of new financial and trading instruments and techniques. Improved
market access for primary commodities, especially in their processed forms,
should be provided, particularly by developed countries. They should also

8

See Legal Instruments Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994 (GATT
secretariat publication, Sales No. GATT/1994-7).
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 15

respond favourably to requests for technical assistance aimed at enhancing the
diversification of the export sector in those developing countries which are
highly dependent on the export of a limited number of commodities. The
strengthening of multilateral compensatory financing schemes is a further
means of addressing the short-term difficulties that can arise as a result of
heavy dependence on commodity exports.
60.
The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development must build upon
its comparative advantage and offer support appropriate to the needs of
developing countries to ensure that they participate in the world economy on a
more equitable basis. Its policy research and analytical work must illuminate
the changes in the global economy as they relate to trade, investment,
technology, services and development. This work should be undertaken in
cooperation with the World Trade Organization and other relevant international
institutions.
3. Issues of internal and external finance
(a)

Mobilization of domestic resources for development

61.
Both domestic and external resources are required for development. In
most countries, domestic savings contribute by far the larger part of the
resources utilized for investment and are mainly mobilized through national
fiscal and monetary policies, including equitable taxation and fiscal
incentives. Exploring new ways of generating new public and private financial
resources, inter alia, through the appropriate reduction of excessive military
expenditures, including global military expenditures and the arms trade and
investments for arms production and acquisition, taking into consideration
national security requirements, will be undertaken so as to allow possible
allocation of additional funds for social and economic development.
62.
The experiences of those developing countries which have achieved high
rates of economic growth in recent years show that sustained economic growth
is linked to an effective strategy for domestic resource mobilization. Those
economies have maintained significantly higher rates of national savings and
investment than other developing countries. However, some developing
countries have limited scope for increasing savings because of their low per
capita income levels and because levels of consumption are already low and are
difficult to restrain further; those countries will continue to need
substantial external resources as an important complement to domestic efforts
to stimulate their development.
(b)

External resources

63.
Total net resource flows to developing countries have expanded rapidly
in the 1990s. However, the trend has not been universal, in terms of either
the types of financing or the recipients. Within the total, official (public
sector) flows have languished; all the growth has been accounted for by an
increase in the private sector component. Secondly, while some low-income
countries have been the recipients of the increased private sector capital
flows, others have not benefited at all.
(c)

External debt

/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 16

64.
There is an urgent need for effective, equitable, development-oriented
and durable solutions to the external debt and debt-servicing problems of
developing countries and to help them to exit from the rescheduling process.
The evolving debt strategy has contributed to the improvement in the debt
situation of a number of developing countries. Debt-relief measures have been
undertaken by creditor countries both within the framework of the Paris Club
and through their cancellation and equivalent relief of bilateral official
debt. Nevertheless, external debt and debt-servicing problems have persisted,
particularly for the poorest and most heavily indebted countries.
Debt-servicing problems of middle-income countries should continue to be
addressed effectively.
65.
Those developing countries that have continued, at great cost to
themselves, to meet their international debt and debt-servicing obligations in
a timely fashion have done so despite serious external and domestic financial
constraints.
(d)

Official development assistance

66.
Official development assistance is a small proportion of a country's
total resources for development, but is a significant source of external
resources for many developing countries, particularly African countries and
the least developed countries. As such, it can play an important
complementary and catalytic role in promoting economic growth. Despite its
critical importance, the overall decline in official development assistance is
a serious cause for concern.
(e)

Role of multilateral financial institutions

67.
The multilateral financial institutions have an important role to play
in meeting the challenges and urgent needs of development and the commitments
made at a series of recent international conferences. Renewed efforts should
be made in order to provide them with resources commensurate with their role,
while pursuing ongoing efforts to increase efficiency and effectiveness. So
that international financial facilities, particularly the International
Development Association, have more positive effects on development, the
commitments for their replenishment should be fully implemented in a timely
manner, thereby contributing more effectively to development.
(f)

United Nations financing for development

68.
At present, the capacity of United Nations funds and programmes to
respond to the needs of developing countries is being threatened by the
persistent insufficiency of resources for the operational development
activities of the United Nations, in particular the decline in contributions
to core resources. At the same time, the present sequence of global
conferences and other international meetings has resulted in a wide range of
additional development demands being imposed on the United Nations. The
efficiency, effectiveness, accountability and impact of the operational
activities of the United Nations system must also be enhanced.

(g)

Private investment flows

/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 17

69.
Private resource flows to developing countries, including foreign direct
investment, have increased in recent years. Key determinants for attracting
external private sector capital are, inter alia, a stable domestic political,
legal and economic environment, based on the rule of law, sound economic
policies and an openness to foreign investment. Other factors include the
prospects for growth and a favourable external environment.
70.
The growth in foreign direct investment in developing countries is of
particular importance since, in addition to finance, the recipient economy
usually benefits in terms of technology transfer and enhanced access to export
markets. However, foreign direct investment in developing countries, as well
as the recent parallel surge in international portfolio investment, has been
concentrated in the more advanced economies, the larger economies and those
with high rates of economic growth. This situation needs to be addressed.
There is also a need to promote favourable conditions for achieving
international stability in private capital flows and to prevent the
destabilization arising from swift movements of private capital flows.
(h)

Peace dividend

71.
When the cold war ended, a peace dividend appeared at hand. The
relaxation of international tensions was thought to offer opportunities for
reducing military spending worldwide and for using the resources so released
to enhance spending on social and economic development for the benefit of all
countries. There should be an appropriate reduction of excessive military
expenditures, including global military expenditures and the arms trade, and
investments for arms production and acquisition, taking into consideration
national security requirements, so as to allow possible allocation of
additional funds for social and economic development. While the reduction in
global political tensions has yielded many benefits, the impact on development
has not materialized in a tangible form or to the extent that was foreseen.
4. Science and technology
72.
The ability of countries to participate in, benefit from and contribute
to the rapid advances in science and technology can significantly influence
their development. Hence, international cooperation efforts should be
intensified and strengthened towards endogenous capacity-building in science
and technology of developing countries, including their capacity to utilize
scientific and technological developments from abroad and to adapt them to
suit local conditions. There is a need to promote, facilitate and finance, as
appropriate, access to and transfer of environmentally sound technologies and
the corresponding know-how in particular to the developing countries on
favourable terms, including on concessional and preferential terms, as
mutually agreed, taking into account the need to protect intellectual property
rights as well as the special needs of developing countries. In this regard,
the international community is called upon to meet all the objectives
reaffirmed in chapter 34 of Agenda 21.
73.
Promotion of science and technology for development calls for a clear
definition of the respective roles in this area of the private sector,
Governments and international organizations. The private sector plays a role
in the productive application of science and technology and most commercially
relevant technology is controlled by the private sector. Governments play a
role in ensuring that there is a propitious environment for the development,
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 18

access to, transfer, adaptation and application of environmentally sound
technologies and in providing appropriate regulatory frameworks and incentives
for the development of scientific and technological capabilities. Promotion
of science and technology for development also requires a labour force that
has the professional and technical training necessary to utilize newly
introduced technologies.
74.
Developing countries should further advance their collective efforts in
promoting technology research, training, development and dissemination, as
well as facilitating access and exchange through information and technology
centres. This development calls for continued and enhanced support from the
international community through technical assistance and financing. The
international community should also continue to promote the development of
effective and mutually beneficial technological cooperation between countries
with economies in transition and all other countries, including in the area of
new and emerging technologies.
75.
International cooperation can complement national science and technology
policy measures and is necessary in areas where global interests are at stake.
The world community has a common interest in the development and widespread
dissemination of technology geared towards environmental protection and
conservation and the rational use of energy and raw materials. Governments
should implement the commitments they made in Agenda 21 on this subject.
5. South-South cooperation
76.
South-South cooperation is an integral and dynamic part of international
development cooperation. The end of the cold war, increasing globalization,
liberalization, regional cooperation and interdependence are all making such
cooperation more imperative. The countries of the South exhibit common as
well as varying development experiences and know-how that offer many
opportunities at the bilateral, subregional, regional, interregional and
international levels for greater cooperation between them. Grasping these
opportunities will result in a stronger basis for their self-reliance and
development as well as provide an important complement to international
development cooperation.
77.
Exploiting trade opportunities among countries of the South by
undertaking trade promotion activities, devising payment arrangements and
expanding availability of trade information is particularly important. At the
same time, there are many other areas, such as communications, information,
transportation, investments, science and technology, environment, food and
agriculture, population, education and human resource development, in which
South-South cooperation can be fostered and promoted.
78.
Technical cooperation, arrangements to improve market access, technical
and financial assistance, sharing of knowledge and technology and exchange of
information are some of the many ways and actions by which developing
countries that have been able to achieve social and economic progress can
assist those that have been less successful. The concept of triangular
cooperation, which involves, inter alia, technical, financial and other
support by developed countries and international organizations for South-South
cooperation, can also make a significant contribution to the promotion of
cooperation among developing countries. All these collaborative efforts
should be accorded high priority and increased support from the international
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 19

community and assistance from all sources, including relevant multilateral
institutions and non-State actors.
6. Regional economic cooperation
79.
Regional economic integration and cooperation is increasingly recognized
as a means towards expanding trade and investment opportunities, and for
promoting economic growth and sustainable development and other forms of
cooperation between countries of various regions. Regional arrangements can
also contribute to growth of the world economy.
80.
Regional economic integration and cooperation should be actively
considered as a means of eliminating obstacles to trade and investment and of
fostering economic cooperation within a region. However, there is the risk
that regional organizations may turn inward and that the world will evolve
into competing economic blocs. Therefore, reductions of barriers to trade and
investment among members or participants in regional groupings should be
consistent with internationally agreed rules, where applicable, and without
detriment to other economies.
81.
Regional economic groupings should be outward-oriented and supportive of
the multilateral trading system. This requires a strong commitment by the
international community, in its pursuit of regional economic integration and
cooperation, to open regionalism within the framework of an equitable,
non-discriminatory and rule-based multilateral trading system.
82.
Regional cooperation also provides a vehicle for addressing
environmental and social issues of common concern. The development of common
approaches to environmental problems of a transboundary nature is particularly
pertinent. National efforts at combating poverty and unemployment and
promoting social integration can also benefit from regional cooperation.
Furthermore, possibilities could be explored for using regional forums as a
means of cooperation in supporting national action to promote and protect all
human rights and fundamental freedoms, the rule of law and democratic
institutions.
83.
Regional integration and cooperation should be complementary and
contributory to national policies and to global multilateralism. In order to
take advantage of regionalism, multilateral economic and trade institutions
must have the capacity to accommodate regional arrangements in their
structures. The challenge is to use both global and regional arrangements in
a mutually supportive way.
7. Development in agriculture, industry and the services sectors
84.
The agricultural, industrial and services sectors need to be developed
in a balanced manner. While it is recognized that the private sector is the
primary contributor to sectoral development, Governments have an important
role to play in creating the enabling environment for sectoral development to
flourish, particularly in the agricultural and services sectors. Besides
promoting a dynamic and competitive domestic economy, based on comparative
advantages, and providing physical and institutional infrastructures, domestic
sectoral policies should also seek to integrate the protection and

/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 20

conservation of the environment and the achievement of social development
objectives into sectoral development plans.
85.
In implementing sectoral policies, particular attention should be given
to the potential of such policies to generate employment and contribute to the
eradication of poverty. In this context, the important contribution of small
and medium-sized enterprises should be recognized. It is also essential to
facilitate equal access of women to resources, training, employment, market
and trade and to strengthen their economic capacity and commercial networks,
as well as their equal access to, and equal opportunity to participate in,
scientific and technological areas.
86.
The agricultural sector remains the main source of income for the
majority of the population in developing countries. Its marginalization from
the overall process of economic development should be avoided. Agricultural
policies should particularly aim at increasing food production, improving
access to food by low-income people and enhancing the income-generating
potential of agriculture. Developing countries, with the support of the
international community, should promote the development of small and
medium-sized agro-industries and cooperatives and improve the processing,
transportation, distribution and marketing of food and other agricultural
products. Governments should enhance, at the national and local levels, the
income-generating potential of rural women by facilitating their equal access
to and control over productive resources, land, credit, capital, property
rights, development programmes and cooperative structures.
87.
The industrial sector constitutes one of the key factors in sustained
economic growth and in achieving social objectives. In order to promote
industrial development, policies in this area should be geared towards
ensuring the legal and institutional framework that fosters entrepreneurship
and attracts foreign investment, protecting intellectual property rights and
facilitating technology cooperation. Moreover, special support should be
given to the promotion and development of environmentally sustainable industry
and attention needs to be directed to rural industrial development, to
industrialization programmes for marginalized segments and regions and to
enhancing the role of women in industrial development.
88.
The services sector is of increasing importance for the economies of
developing countries. Developing countries should continue to pursue policies
to create conditions for the development of their national services sector
through the modernization of the necessary infrastructure. Measures should
include enhancing the efficiency of domestic sectors by encouraging human
resource development and by ensuring appropriate investment policies.
89.
All countries should enhance the efficiency of domestic service sectors
through greater internal and external competition and by ensuring the
transparency, effectiveness and non-discriminatory nature of domestic
regulations, in accordance to each country's commitments, and with the
provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, including article IV
on the increasing participation of developing countries. The developing
countries face a major challenge of strengthening the capabilities of their
domestic services to derive full benefits from the implementation of the
General Agreement on Trade in Services. In this context, as reaffirmed at the
ninth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
appropriate technical assistance should be extended to developing countries to

/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 21

develop and strengthen their service sectors to help to ensure that they reap
the maximum benefits from liberalization of trade in services.
90.
The domestic sectoral policies elaborated by developing countries should
be supported by favourable international action. Trade liberalization should
be pursued on a global basis. It should include the liberalization of market
access in sectors and modes of supply of exports of interest to developing
countries and should cover access to technology on a commercial basis, to
distribution channels and to information networks. With the growing
internationalization of the services sector, further action should be taken to
facilitate the participation of developing countries in international service
transactions.
B. Social development
91.
Equitable social development is a necessary foundation for development
and an important factor in the eradication of poverty. The commitments agreed
upon at the World Summit for Social Development should be fully implemented.
92.
The ultimate goal of development is to improve and enhance human
well-being and the quality of life of all people. Social development is best
pursued if Governments actively promote empowerment and participation in a
democratic and pluralistic system respectful of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Efforts to sustain broad-based economic growth
reinforce the promotion of social development. Processes to promote increased
and equal economic opportunities, to avoid exclusion and to overcome socially
divisive disparities while respecting diversity are also part of an enabling
environment for social development.
93.
It is the primary responsibility of States to attain social development.
But the international community, the United Nations system, the multilateral
financial institutions, all regional organizations and local authorities and
all actors of civil society also need to contribute their own share of efforts
and resources to promote social development and to reduce inequalities among
people and narrow the gap between developed and developing countries. As part
of these shared responsibilities, interested developed and developing country
partners could agree on mutual commitments to allocate, on average, 20 per
cent of official development assistance and 20 per cent of their national
budget, respectively, to basic social programmes.
1. Eradication of poverty and hunger
94.
Poverty continues to affect far too many people in the world. Hunger
and malnutrition, ill-health, lack of access to safe drinking water, little
access to education and other public services and resources, exclusion, lack
of participation and violence are some of the many aspects that characterize
poverty. Widespread poverty affects the future of societies, as children
growing up in poverty are often permanently disadvantaged. The burden of
poverty is disproportionately borne by women. Although poverty occurs in all
countries, its extent and manifestation are particularly severe in developing
countries.
95.
The goal of eradicating poverty in the world is an ethical, social,
political and economic imperative. It can be achieved only through a
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 22

multidimensional and integrated approach that combines programmes targeted at
people living in poverty with policies and strategies that meet the basic
needs of all, strengthen their productive capacities, empower them to
participate in decision-making on policies that affect them, ensure access of
all to productive resources, opportunities and public services, enhance social
protection and reduce vulnerability. Sustained and broad-based economic
growth, social development and environmental protection are crucial for
raising living standards and for eliminating poverty in a sustained manner.
96.
At international conferences organized by the United Nations in the
recent years, Governments committed themselves to meet the basic needs of all.
High priority should be placed on achieving and monitoring the goals and
targets set in the areas of education, health, food security, shelter and
access to safe drinking water and sanitation, in partnership with major
development actors.
97.
At the World Summit for Social Development, it was decided to formulate
or strengthen, preferably by 1996, national policies and strategies geared to
substantially reducing overall poverty in the shortest possible time, reducing
inequalities and eradicating absolute poverty by a target date to be specified
by each country. National budgets and policies should be designed with the
strategic objective of meeting basic needs, eradicating poverty and reducing
inequalities.
98.
The eradication of poverty requires determined national actions. At the
same time, the international community, bilaterally and through the
multilateral financial institutions and other international organizations,
should support the efforts of developing countries in the eradication of
poverty and in ensuring basic social protection.
99.
Commitments and targets agreed upon since 1990 to achieve the overall
goal of poverty eradication should be fully implemented by Governments, in
partnership with all development actors, the United Nations system, including
financial institutions, non-governmental organizations and the international
community as a whole. The United Nations system should make every effort to
enhance the coordination of actions relative to poverty eradication and to
support developing countries and other countries in that endeavour.
100. Hunger and malnutrition continue to be the fate of hundreds of millions
of people, most of whom live in Africa and the least developed countries.
Eliminating hunger and malnutrition and achieving food security are major
objectives of the present Agenda. Therefore, the institutional structures of
the United Nations system must be made more effective in this respect.
101. The key to increasing food production lies in the sustainable
development of the agricultural sector and in improving market opportunities.
Solving the problems in developing countries calls not only for improving
agricultural productivity, but also for financial incentives to encourage
investment in agriculture. It is also important to promote secure land tenure
and access to resources and technology for farmers, in particular women, whose
role is crucial in food supply and food security. The macroeconomic and trade
policy issues and the social factors that constrain and limit the achievement
of food security in the least developed countries should also be addressed.
102. The international community should support the efforts of Africa and the
least developed countries to increase food security. It should strive to
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 23

ensure coordinated and rapid delivery of food assistance in situations of
transitory food insecurity, in full awareness of longer-term national and
local development objectives and the need to improve access to food of the
most vulnerable groups of the population.
2. Employment
103. Creating adequately and appropriately remunerated employment for all and
reducing unemployment and underemployment are essential for combating poverty
and for promoting social integration.
104. Pursuing the goal of full employment should be a basic priority of
economic and social policies, so as to enable all men and women to attain
secure and sustainable livelihoods through freely chosen productive employment
and work. At the World Summit for Social Development, Governments agreed on
those common goals and on a set of objectives, policies and strategies to
achieve them.
105. Economic growth as well as the expansion of productive employment should
go hand in hand. The expansion of adequately and appropriately remunerated
employment and the reduction of unemployment should be placed at the centre of
economic and social policies with the participation of employers, workers and
their respective organizations. The basic rights and interests of workers and
the quality of jobs should be ensured and the relevant conventions of the
International Labour Organization should be fully respected. Also essential
is ensuring equal employment opportunities for women and men. Special efforts
should be made against long-term and structural unemployment and
underemployment, particularly among youth and women. In employment creation,
employment development strategies should take into account the role of
self-employment, entrepreneurship, small and medium-sized enterprises and the
informal sector.
106. The United Nations should elaborate ways and means to implement, follow
up on and assess the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development in
relation to the goal of full employment through expansion of productive
employment and the reduction of unemployment. The General Assembly, through
the Economic and Social Council with the support of the Commission for Social
Development and other relevant bodies as well as the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, should be involved in the implementation of,
follow-up to and assessment of international commitments on employment. The
International Labour Organization, because of its mandate, has a special role
to play in this regard.
3. Social integration
107. The aim of social integration is to create "a society for all", where
every individual, each with rights and responsibilities, has an active role to
play. Since the founding of the United Nations, the quest for humane, stable,
safe, tolerant and just societies has shown a mixed record. While progress
has been achieved in many areas, there have also been negative developments,
such as social polarization and fragmentation, widening disparities and
inequalities of income and wealth within and among nations and marginalization
of people, families and social groups. Even entire countries have been
negatively affected owing to rapid social change, economic transformation,
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 24

migration and major dislocations, particularly in areas of armed conflicts and
violence in its various manifestations.
108. These are compelling reasons for actions by Governments, individually
and, as appropriate, jointly, to foster social cohesion, while recognizing and
protecting diversity. An inclusive society must be based on respect for all
human rights and fundamental freedoms, on non-discrimination, tolerance,
equality of opportunity, solidarity, security and respect for diversity, and
on participation of all people, including the vulnerable and disadvantaged
groups and persons. The problems of crime, violence and abuse of and
trafficking in drugs should also be addressed. International cooperation in
the area of drugs should be reinforced in accordance with the Global Programme
of Action adopted in the context of the international decade to fight drug
abuse. In this context, the convening of a special session of the General
Assembly in order to consider the fight against the illicit production,
supply, demand, trafficking and distribution of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances and related activities, and to propose new strategies,
methods, practical activities and specific measures to strengthen
international cooperation in addressing the problem of illicit drugs is of the
highest importance.
4. Human resources development
109. At the World Conference on Education for All and the World Summit for
Social Development, Governments committed themselves to ensuring universal
access to quality education, attaining the highest possible standards of
physical and mental health and ensuring access of all to primary health care.
This should include efforts to rectify inequalities relating to social
conditions, race, national origin, age or disability, and between urban and
rural areas. Appropriate steps should be taken to close the gender gap at all
levels of education and to ensure the full access of women to health care
throughout the life cycle.
110. Quality education is critical for enabling people to develop their full
capacities in health and dignity and to participate actively in the social,
economic and political process of development. It is also crucial for
achieving the objectives of economic development. Education and vocational
training are the key to higher productivity and allow faster and easier
adaptation to technological and economic change. They are vital for job
creation and combating unemployment and for sustained growth.
111. Resolute and vigorous national actions are crucial for developing human
resources. Governments have committed themselves to formulating or
strengthening strategies for the eradication of illiteracy and
universalization of basic education. The link between education and training
and labour market policies should be strengthened, so as to facilitate the
adaptation of workers and employers to changing economic conditions,
technologies and labour markets. Not only should the importance of higher
education and scientific research be emphasized, but also that of broadening
the means and scope of basic education, of enhancing the learning environment
and of promoting life-long learning.
112. From the perspective of the economy at large, it is of great importance
that the requisite policies be applied to ensure human resources development,
including a satisfactory level of education and training of the workforce and
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 25

increasing their receptivity to technological innovations, in particular in
the field of information technology.
113. Efforts to achieve the goals of national "health for all" strategies, in
line with the Alma Ata conference declaration on primary health care,9 should
be expedited. The need for an integrated and intersectoral approach to health
strategies has been recognized, as well as the importance of strengthening
national and international efforts to prevent and combat epidemics and other
diseases that are endemic in many developing countries, and in particular to
address malaria and the spread of human immunodeficiency virus/acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) more effectively.
114. At previous international conferences, Governments agreed upon a set of
goals and objectives for national and international efforts in the areas of
education, literacy and health, in particular maternal and child health, and
the control of major communicable diseases. We are committed to achieving
those goals within the time-frame we agreed to.
115. Enhanced international cooperation is also called for to advance human
resources development. Concerted efforts should be made to support the
efforts of developing countries, especially the least developed countries and
other countries in need to develop their human resources. Developed countries
have an important role to play. Human resources development and
institution-building can also be promoted through cooperation among developing
countries. International organizations, including the international financial
institutions, must give high priority to supporting the objectives of human
resources development and to integrating them into their policies, programmes
and operations. Support might include exchange of information and training
and skill development programmes, as well as the provision of other forms of
assistance.
5. Human settlements
116. More people than ever are living in absolute poverty and without
adequate shelter. Inadequate shelter and homelessness are growing plights in
many countries, threatening standards of health, security and even life
itself. Urban settlements have the ability to support large numbers of people
while limiting their impact on the natural environment. Yet many cities are
witnessing harmful patterns of growth, production and consumption, land use,
mobility and degradation of their physical infrastructure.
117. At the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), the
international community adopted the goals and principles of adequate shelter
for all and sustainable human settlements development in an urbanizing world.
It reaffirmed its commitment to the full and progressive realization of the
right to adequate housing, as provided for in international instruments. The
international community also subscribed to the principles and goals of
equitable human settlements, in which all people have equal access to housing,
infrastructure, health services, adequate food and water, education and open
spaces. It affirmed that eradication of poverty is essential for sustainable
human settlements.

9

E/ICEF/L.1387, annex, sect. V.
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 26

118. Sustainable development is essential to human settlements development
and gives full consideration to the needs and necessities of achieving
economic growth, social development and environmental protection. Special
consideration should be given to the specific situation and needs of
developing countries, and, as appropriate, of countries with economies in
transition. Human settlements shall be planned, developed and improved in a
manner that takes full account of sustainable development principles and all
their components, as set out in Agenda 21 and related outcomes of the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development.
119. Formulation and implementation of strategies for human settlements
development are primarily the responsibility of each country at national and
local levels within the legal framework of each country. National plans of
action and other relevant national programmes and actions to achieve the goals
of adequate shelter for all and sustainable human settlements development will
need to be developed or strengthened, where appropriate, and their
implementation will need to be monitored and evaluated by Governments in close
cooperation with their partners in development at the national level. There
is also a need for an enabling international environment and for integrated
approaches at the national and international levels to support these efforts.
120. New and additional financial resources from various sources are
necessary to achieve the goals of adequate shelter for all and sustainable
human settlements development in an urbanizing world. The existing resources
available to developing countries - public, private, multilateral, bilateral,
domestic and external - need to be enhanced through appropriate and flexible
mechanisms and economic instruments to support adequate shelter for all and
sustainable human settlements development. These should be accompanied by
concrete measures for international technical cooperation and information
exchange.
121. The United Nations system, in cooperation with all States and with
relevant international and non-governmental organizations also has a key role
to play in promoting international cooperation on the provision of adequate
shelter and sustainable human settlements development in an urbanizing world
as well as in rural areas.
C. Empowerment of women
122. While the status of women has advanced in some important respects in the
past decade, progress has been uneven, inequalities between men and women have
persisted and major obstacles remain to women's empowerment, with serious
consequences for the well-being of all people.
123. The Beijing Declaration and the Platform for Action adopted by the
Fourth World Conference on Women10 are important contributions to the
advancement of women worldwide and must be translated into effective action by
all States, the United Nations system and other organizations concerned, as
well as non-governmental organizations.

10

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4-15 September
1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution
1, annexes I and II.
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 27

124. Empowering women is essential for achieving the goals of sustainable
development centred on human beings. It requires appropriate public policies
to ensure that women enjoy all human rights and fundamental freedoms and
participate fully and equally in all spheres of public life, including
decision-making. Public policies to promote women's economic potential and
independence and their full and equal participation in development are also
essential for the empowerment of women. Before decisions are taken in the
areas of social and economic development and of the environment, an analysis
should be made of their impact on women and men respectively.
125. Measures should be taken to ensure the full enjoyment by women and the
girl child of all human rights and fundamental freedoms. Actions to be taken
by States in this regard include fulfilling their commitments regarding the
ratification of, accession to and the implementation of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women11 so that universal
ratification of the Convention can be achieved by the year 2000, and avoiding
as far as possible resorting to reservations. Measures should also be taken
to ensure women's full and equal access to economic resources and social
services through full respect for their human rights and fundamental freedoms.
126. Measures are needed to ensure women's equal access to education and to
training and retraining. The targets set by the Fourth World Conference on
Women for achieving gender equality in primary and secondary education should
be implemented. Measures should be taken to ensure women's equal rights with
men and their equal access to economic resources and social services,
including land, credit, science and technology, vocational training,
information, communication, markets and education and the right to
inheritance. Eliminating occupational segregation and wage inequality and
creating a flexible work environment that facilitates the restructuring of
work patterns and the sharing of family responsibilities are also major goals.
Methods should be developed for assessing the value of unremunerated work
outside national accounts. Policies and development strategies that address
the needs and efforts of women living in poverty should be reviewed, adopted
or maintained in line with the recommendations of the Platform for Action.
127. Measures are also needed to achieve the full participation of women in
decision-making processes in all walks of life and at all levels. The success
of policies and measures aimed at supporting or strengthening the promotion of
gender equality and the improvement of the status of women should be based on
the integration of the gender perspective in general policies relating to all
spheres of society as well as the implementation of positive measures with
adequate institutional and financial support at all levels. Enhanced
participation by women will also contribute to ensuring that all policies and
programmes are designed, implemented and monitored in full awareness of their
possible or actual gender-specific effects.
128. The Beijing Declaration and the Platform for Action should be urgently
implemented in their entirety. Adequate mobilization of resources at the
national and international levels, as well as new and additional resources to
developing countries from all available funding mechanisms to strengthen the
advancement of women, are required. The implementation of the Nairobi

11

Resolution 34/180, annex.
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 28

Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women,12 aimed at achieving
equality by the year 2000, should be accelerated. Also called for is
implementation of the relevant sections of Agenda 217 and of the Programme of
Action adopted by the International Conference on Population and
Development13 and the Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social
Development,14 as well as of the Geneva Declaration for Rural Women adopted by
the Summit on the Economic Advancement of Rural Women15 and the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human
Rights.16
D. Rights of the child
129. Children are the most important resource for the future. Greater
investment in children by parents and societies is essential to the
achievement of sustained economic growth, social development and environmental
protection. Therefore, the promotion, to the fullest extent, of the health,
well-being and potential of all children, adolescents and youth is a crucial
objective. The international community expressed its commitment to that
objective when it adopted the Convention on the Rights of the Child17 and at
the World Summit for Children. We call for full implementation of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and encourage States to remove all
reservations to that Convention.
130. Measures must be undertaken by States, with the support of the
international community, to achieve, by the year 2000, the goals contained in
the plan of action adopted at the World Summit for Children and to reach the
goals set by subsequent international forums for the year 2000 and beyond.
The rights of children must be ensured, with special attention paid to the
particular situation of girls. Their rights to a standard of living adequate
for their health and well-being, including food, clothing, housing and medical
care and necessary social services, and their rights to education must be
ensured, recognizing the rights, duties and responsibilities of parents and
other persons legally responsible for children to provide, in a manner

12

Report of the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of
the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Nairobi,
15-26 July 1985 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.85.IV.10), chap. I,
sect. A.
13

Report of the International Conference on Population and Development,
Cairo, 5-13 September 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
14

Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6-12 March
1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1,
annex II.
15

A/47/308-E/1992/97, annex.

16

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

17

Resolution 44/25, annex.
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 29

consistent with the evolving capacity of the child, appropriate direction.
The efforts of developing countries to achieve those major goals must be
supported.
131. Exploitation, maltreatment, child prostitution and child abuse should be
combated, and the root causes of these phenomena have to be addressed.
Actions are also needed for improving the situation and protecting the rights
of children in especially difficult circumstances and ensuring that the vital
importance of family reunification is recognized, in line with the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development, and taking into account the relevant
provisions of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees.18
132. Another key issue with regard to the rights of the child is child
labour, which is pervasive in many parts of the world. Overall socio-economic
conditions, income uncertainty, women's health and education, schooling
opportunities and the size of households all have an impact on child labour.
Abolishing child labour requires setting specific target dates for eliminating
all forms of child labour that are contrary to accepted international
standards, in particular article 32 of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, for ensuring the full enforcement of relevant existing laws and, where
appropriate, for enacting the legislation necessary to implement the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, and relevant International Labour
Organization standards. In this context, priority should be given to the
elimination of all extreme forms of child labour, such as forced labour,
bonded labour and other forms of slavery. National efforts to deal with the
problem of working children can be complemented by international support
measures, which may include provision of education facilities as well as
compensatory support measures for their families.
E. Population and development and international migration
133. The Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development emphasized the importance of translating the Conference's
recommendations into actions at all levels. This will involve decisive
actions by Governments and increased support from the international community.
The effective implementation of the Programme of Action will require an
increased commitment of financial resources, both domestically and externally.
The developed countries have committed themselves to complementing the
national efforts of developing countries on population and development. The
Programme of Action includes commitments to increase substantially the
availability of international financial assistance to the developing countries
in the field of population and development in order to ensure that population
and development objectives and goals are met.
134. In this connection, Governments should commit themselves at the highest
political level to achieving the goals and objectives contained in the
Programme of Action and should take a lead role in coordinating the
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of follow-up actions. The Programme
of Action endorsed the crucial role of non-governmental organizations,
reflected in an effective partnership between Government and non-governmental
organizations in all aspects of population and development-related programmes

18

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 30

and policies. The capacity of non-governmental organizations for entering
into such a partnership needs to be enhanced.
135. The Programme of Action and Agenda 21, among others, affirm that
demographic trends cannot be considered in isolation from development.
Therefore, population programmes are not simply about numbers and demographic
targets, but rather about the human beings who are at the centre of population
and development activities. Consequently, the Programme of Action is grounded
in a development and human rights framework and underscores the need to
reconcile the aspirations and requirements of individual women and men with
long-term development objectives.
136. Countries have learned much about the relationships between population
growth and sustainable development. There is general agreement that
persistent widespread poverty as well as serious social and gender
inequalities have significant influences on, and are in turn influenced by,
such demographic parameters as population growth, structure and distribution.
Gender equality, including full and equal access to education by women, and
universal access to basic health care services, including those relating to
reproductive health services, are essential to achieving population and
development objectives. Furthermore, integrating population into economic and
development strategies will both speed up the pace of sustainable development
and poverty eradication and contribute to the achievement of population
objectives and an improved quality of life of the population.
137. Successful reproductive health care, including family planning
programmes, must be based on the principle of free and responsible choice of
family size and child-spacing, which includes the ability of men and women to
make informed decisions on the number and spacing of their children. Such
choice calls for access to the widest possible range of health-care programmes
and services and for greater support for reproductive health services and
appropriate educational programmes.
138. Concomitant support is needed for stronger, better coordinated global
actions against major diseases that take a heavy toll of human lives, such as
malaria, tuberculosis, cholera, typhoid and HIV/AIDS. In this context, the
Joint and Co-sponsored United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS should be brought
into full operation as quickly as possible and the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council on malaria should be
implemented.
139. The international community also has a vital role to play in attaining
the objectives of the Programme of Action regarding international migration
and development, which reflects the special importance attached to the impact
of international migration on both countries of origin and receiving States.
The flow of people between countries, and indeed within countries, affects and
is affected by the development process. As underlined in the Programme of
Action, international economic imbalances, poverty and environmental
degradation, combined with the absence of peace and security, violations of
human rights and the varying degrees of development of judicial and democratic
institutions are all factors in the movement of people.
140. There is a need to formulate or strengthen measures at the national
level to ensure respect for and protection of the human rights of migrants,
migrant workers and their families, to eliminate the increasing acts of racism
and xenophobia in sectors of many societies and to promote greater harmony and
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 31

tolerance in all societies. Ultimately, the long-term manageability of
international migration hinges on making the option to remain in one's country
a viable one for all people. The possibility of convening an international
conference on migration and development could be considered.
F. Environment and development
1. Full implementation of Agenda 21 and other outcomes of the
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
141. The consensus on and basis for actions at global, regional, subregional,
national and local levels to ensure sustainable development has been
established by the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in
Agenda 21,7 the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development19 and the
Non-legally Binding Authoritative Statement of Principles for a Global
Consensus on the Management, Conservation and Sustainable Development of All
Types of Forests,20 as well as in all international conventions on the
environment and development. Priority must be given to the prompt and full
implementation of these commitments and recommendations.
142. At the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development an
integrated approach towards development and environment was adopted, whereby
the protection of the environment would constitute an integral part of the
development process and could not be viewed in isolation from it. Depletion
and degradation of nature and its resources endanger the prospects for
development for our generation and even more so for future generations. The
cost of reversal will be far higher than the cost of prevention. Therefore,
sustainable development strategies and programmes which aim at integrating
environmental protection requirements into economic, social and development
policies should be formulated and implemented at all levels. All States have,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
international law, the sovereign right to exploit their own resources pursuant
to their own environmental and development policies and the responsibility to
ensure that activities within their jurisdiction or control do not cause
damage to the environment of other States or of areas beyond the limits of
national jurisdiction, in keeping with the principles contained in the Rio
Declaration, Agenda 21 and relevant international environment conventions.
143. Eradication of poverty should have the highest priority on the
international agenda. One of the adverse effects of poverty, which affects
mostly developing countries, is related to environmental and natural resource
degradation. The essential task of eradicating poverty is an indispensable
requirement for sustainable development in order to decrease the disparities
in standards of living and better meet the needs of the majority of the people
of the world. Strategies aimed at poverty eradication are also important in
avoiding degradation of resources.

19

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio
de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions Adopted by the Conference, resolution 1,
annex I.
20

Ibid., annex III.
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 32

144. While poverty results in certain kinds of environmental stress, the
major cause of the continued deterioration of the global environment is the
unsustainable patterns of consumption and production, particularly in
industrial countries, which is a matter of grave concern, aggravating poverty
and imbalances. Promoting changes in such consumption and production patterns
should also be of the highest priority. All countries should strive to
promote sustainable consumption and production patterns. In view of the
different contributions to global environmental degradation, States have
common but differentiated responsibilities. Developed countries bear a
special responsibility and should take the lead in this area. Action is
required to promote changes in unsustainable production and consumption
patterns through behavioural changes and through the promotion of
internalizing environmental costs and the potential use of economic
instruments that can both generate revenue for financing sustainable
development and send signals to the market to help to change unsustainable
consumption and production patterns.
145. In general, the financing for the implementation of Agenda 21 will come
from a country's own public and private sectors. For developing countries,
particularly the least developed countries, official development assistance is
a main source of external funding, and substantial new and additional funding
for sustainable development and implementation of Agenda 21 is required. So
far, the financial resources provided to developing countries have fallen
short of expectations for the means of implementation set forth in Agenda 21.
All countries should honour their commitments related to financial resources
and mechanisms for implementation, as laid down in chapter 33 of Agenda 21.
Both domestic budgets and development assistance, including assistance by the
United Nations system, should be consistent with and supportive of the
objectives of sustainable development. The potential of innovative,
additional financial resources should be urgently explored.
146. The Global Environment Facility, whose additional grant and concessional
funding is designed to achieve global environmental benefits, should meet the
agreed incremental costs of relevant activities under Agenda 21, in accordance
with the Facility instrument, in particular for developing countries. The
restructured Facility, with initial commitments of 2 billion United States
dollars for three years, constitutes a first step in providing resources to
address global environment concerns. The prime task now is for the Facility
to pursue its operational phase in line with its agreed operational strategy,
while ensuring that it continues to be consistent with the guidelines of
relevant conventions. Facility procedures could be further improved to speed
up project implementation without compromising the quality of appraisal and
participation.
147. Another essential dimension of the commitments of the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development concerns concrete measures for the
transfer of environmentally sound technologies to developing countries on
favourable terms, including concessional and preferential terms, as mutually
agreed. The Governments of developed countries have a major role to play,
both as a conduit for such transfers and by providing market incentives for
the private sector. Recognizing the importance of protecting intellectual
property rights and taking into account the special needs of developing
countries are two essential considerations in the transfer of environmentally
sound technology.

/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 33

148. The process relating to the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development culminated in a new global partnership for sustainable
development. Implementing the recommendations of Agenda 21 is essential for
strengthening this partnership based on common but differentiated
responsibilities. In this partnership, the special situation and needs of
developing countries, particularly the least developed countries and those
most environmentally vulnerable, must receive special priority.
149. The United Nations system has a key role in stimulating and supporting
countries and major groups in the implementation of Agenda 21, in helping to
build further consensus and in preparing the ground for standard-setting on
issues of sustainable development.
2. Implementation of international conventions on the environment
150. International legal instruments for the regulation of activities
affecting the environment form an essential framework for practical efforts by
the international community to reduce environmental degradation and promote
sustainable development. In this context, it is important to promote further
the implementation and development of international conventions in the field
of environment and development, taking into account the principles contained
in the Rio Declaration.
151. The full implementation of these instruments will be an important
contribution to ensuring the sustainable use of land, marine and air
resources, including through reduction and recycling of waste and through
nature management. Governments should become parties to and comply with the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change21 and the Convention on
Biological Diversity,22 signed at the United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development. They should also become parties to and implement the United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in Africa;23 the Basel
Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and
their Disposal;24 and the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the
Ozone Layer.25 Countries are encouraged to sign and become parties to the
Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks,26 and to implement that agreement. Implementation of the

21

A/AC.237/18 (Part II)/Add.1 and Corr.1, annex I.

22

United Nations Environment Programme, Convention on Biological Diversity
(Environmental Law and Institution Programme Activity Centre), June 1992.
23

A/49/84/Add.2, annex, appendix II.

24

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1673, No. 28911 (forthcoming).

25

Ibid., vol. 1522, No. 26369 (forthcoming).

26

A/CONF.164/37; see also A/50/550, annex I.
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 34

Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States27 is also called for.
152. Developed countries parties to the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, particularly in Africa, should support, through fulfilling
their commitments to mobilize substantial financial resources and to
facilitate the transfer of technology, knowledge and know-how, the efforts of
affected developing countries parties, in particular African countries, to
develop and implement their own long-term plans and strategies to combat
desertification and mitigate the effects of drought.
153. Developed country parties should fulfil their financial commitments and
enhance cooperative efforts to support developing country parties in
implementing the Convention on Biological Diversity and the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change. The effective implementation of the
two conventions and their strengthening, in accordance with decisions adopted
by the respective conferences of the parties, should be ensured by the parties
with the support of the international community. Developed country parties
should continue their efforts to support parties undergoing the process of
transition to a market economy in the implementation of those conventions.
154. Action towards sustainable development is an evolving process:
additional commitments, actions and instruments may be required in the light
of new global, regional and subregional or national developments and needs.
But this should in no way delay the implementation of what has been agreed.
G. Humanitarian issues and development
155. Humanitarian assistance is essential for the victims of natural
disasters and other emergencies, including major technological and man-made
disasters. Emergency measures should be seen as a first step towards longterm development.
156. The General Assembly has recognized that humanitarian assistance must be
provided with the principles of humanity, neutrality and impartiality. It has
also recognized that the sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity
of States must be fully respected in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. Humanitarian assistance should be provided with the consent of the
affected country and in principle on the basis of an appeal by the affected
country.
157. At the same time, each State has the responsibility first and foremost
to take care of the victims of natural disasters and other emergencies
occurring on its territory and to provide for the security of humanitarian
personnel. Hence, the affected State has the primary role in the initiation,
organization, coordination, and implementation of humanitarian assistance
within its territory. To this end, the United Nations is continuing to

27

Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April-6 May 1994 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution
1, annex II.
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 35

identify ways of strengthening the coordination of emergency humanitarian
assistance of the United Nations system.
158. Many emergencies reflect the underlying crisis of development facing
many developing countries, which needs to be addressed by Governments and the
international community if the emergency is not to recur. Therefore, in order
to prevent the occurrence or recurrence of emergency situations, support is
required for medium- and long-term social and economic development. The
implementation of commitments to sustainable development, including those
related to economic growth, will contribute to the ability of developing
countries to undertake disaster prevention and preparedness, including support
for food security and strengthening health and education systems in affected
countries, as well as equal access to education and the building up of
national institutions, and the rule of law, as well as for strengthening the
capacity of recipient institutions to manage emergency situations.
1. Continuum from relief to rehabilitation and development
159. Where emergency situations arise, rapid provision of humanitarian
assistance by the international community remains, of course, imperative.
However, this form of assistance must be planned with a view to an equally
rapid transition to rehabilitation and reconstruction and be part of the
continuum concept which aims at resuming development at the earliest
opportunity. At the same time, it should be recognized that the continuum
concept may require different approaches in different situations.
160. Prevention, preparedness, emergency response, economic recovery and
rehabilitation are all part of a comprehensive response to reduce developing
country vulnerability to emergencies. Thus far, however, the international
community has mostly been able only to react to emergencies through the
provision of humanitarian assistance, which can only alleviate human suffering
in a short-term perspective. Expenditure on relief activities should not have
a negative impact on development programmes.
161. In virtually all post-emergency situations, resettlement of refugees,
displaced persons and other disaster victims, as well as the restoration of
physical infrastructure, are some of the major conditions for recovery. In
cases of post-conflict peace-building situations, programmes such as demining,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants as well as confidencebuilding and reconciliation measures are essential for moving forward in the
continuum towards development. Equally important are restoring public
institutions, police and judicial systems and resuming economic and social
development, in preventing the possible resurgence of conflict situations.
162. Although certain intermediate phases can be established, the distinction
between different stages of the emergency-to-development continuum is often
vague. This requires a comprehensive and coordinated response not only to
rehabilitation and reconstruction but also to development needs by the United
Nations system, including the Bretton Woods institutions, the international
community and Governments. The mandates of humanitarian agencies and
development organizations must be delineated clearly in order to counter the
tendency of these agencies and organizations to extend mandates, either from
relief to development or vice versa, without having necessarily the
institutional capacity to take on such new roles effectively.

/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 36

163. In order for the international community to respond rapidly and
effectively to humanitarian emergencies at the various stages of the
continuum, the establishment of an international network of voluntary
humanitarian relief teams that can be deployed rapidly to cope with
humanitarian emergencies, such as the white helmet initiative acting within
the framework of the United Nations Volunteers, could be considered.
2. Early warning, prevention, preparedness and reduction of natural disasters
164. In recent years, with, in many areas, ever larger populations at risk,
disasters have had increasingly stronger impacts in terms of human and
economic losses, impoverishment and long-term displacement of populations.
The commitments of the Yokohama Strategy for a Safer World,28 adopted by the
World Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction, which has defined concrete
actions for disaster reduction, should be implemented.
165. Disaster prevention, mitigation and preparedness are of primary
importance for reducing the need for disaster relief. They should become an
integral part of national strategies and programmes for sustainable
development. There should be greater efforts to enhance national capabilities
for early warning and disaster mitigation, which should be supported with
adequate financial resources and transfer of technologies to developing
countries and, as appropriate, countries with economies in transition.
166. Enhanced subregional, regional and international cooperation are
essential for disaster preparedness. Prevention, mitigation and preparedness
for natural disasters, and actions to implement the Yokohama Strategy, could
be integrated into the country strategy note, where appropriate. A
coordinated and timely preventive response of Governments, non-governmental
and other organizations, and agencies and communities requires strengthening
of the early-warning potential of the United Nations system.
3. Response to other humanitarian emergencies
167. Humanitarian emergency situations have become more frequent, more
widespread, more complex and longer lasting, combining inter-State and
internal conflicts, large-scale displacements of people, mass famine,
disruption of economic, political and social institutions and, in some cases,
natural disasters. A result has been that a growing percentage of development
assistance is being devoted to such complex emergencies. There is a need to
avoid the situation in which such a trend has a negative impact on long-term
development programmes.
168. The response of the international community to complex humanitarian
emergencies has become better coordinated, more effective and more efficient.
The United Nations plays a central role in the international response to this
daunting challenge, working closely with other international agencies. The
creation of the Department of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat
illustrates the determination of the United Nations to respond more

28

Report of the World Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction, Yokohama,
Japan, 23-27 May 1994 (A/CONF.172/9 and Add.1), chap. I, resolution 1, annex
I.
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 37

effectively to this task. The coordinating role of the Department among the
various relevant agencies should be further strengthened, including by
developing formal memoranda of understanding with them.
169. Further progress requires the provision of adequate contingency funds
and the establishment of planning and logistical mechanisms to allow a faster
and more effective response to complex emergencies.
170. Ways also have to be found to address basic needs during complex
emergencies. Issues such as humanitarian needs of displaced persons, which
are not under the direct mandate of humanitarian agencies, should also be
addressed. Coordination and clear mandates and responsibilities, particularly
in the field, are also essential in cases where there is a humanitarian
component to a peacekeeping operation. While peacekeeping, civilian,
humanitarian, economic, social and political activities are all part of the
integrated process of peace-building, special attention should be given to the
observance of the norms and principles of international law, including
international humanitarian law.
171. The effective delivery assistance of relevant non-governmental
organizations and volunteers in situations of complex emergencies should be
further recognized as an important complementary part of the coordinated
international, regional and subregional response and incorporated into the
programming of actions.
4. Refugees and displaced persons
172. The number of refugees and displaced persons has been rapidly increasing
owing to a number of complex factors which include armed conflicts, human
rights violations, political instability, absolute poverty, social
disintegration, lack of resources and environmental degradation. Most of the
refugees are located in or move into developing countries, often imposing an
enormous burden on those States which already face difficult economic and
social conditions. International support for the activities of recipient
countries for refugees and displaced persons is hence a necessity.
173. Some countries with economies in transition also face burdens related to
refugees and displaced persons. There is, therefore, a need for the
international community to support them in order to address those problems.
174. The root causes of movements of refugees and displaced persons should be
tackled in a coordinated and integrated manner. A durable solution to the
plight of the present large numbers of refugees and asylum seekers should be
found. Their needs as regards protection in accordance with internationally
recognized standards and national law, and as regards assistance, must receive
the necessary support. Governments should strive to meet their basic needs
and build their self-sufficiency. The conditions for voluntary repatriation
of refugees and returnees in safety and dignity, and for ensuring adequate
reception arrangements and smooth reintegration, should be created.
H. Participatory approach to development
175. There has been a multiplication of non-State actors in development those of the civil society - who are playing an increasingly important role in
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 38

development. The State has overall responsibility for policy formulation in
the economic, social and environmental spheres, including the correction of
market failures, the provision of public goods and the creation of a
favourable enabling environment for the private sector as well as a favourable
legal and regulatory framework. It should also encourage effective
participation by the private sector and major groups in activities that
complement and reinforce national objectives.
176. Participation is an essential component of successful and lasting
development. It contributes to equity by involving people living in poverty
and other groups in planning and implementation. Participatory decisionmaking, together with the rule of law democracy and transparent and
accountable governance and administration in all sectors of society, is an
important requirement for the effectiveness of development policies.
177. Full participation in society should be achieved through the promotion
and protection by Governments of all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
including the right to development, bearing in mind the interdependent and
mutually reinforcing relationship between democracy and respect for human
rights. Governments should make public institutions more responsive to
people's needs. Therefore, full respect for all human rights and fundamental
freedoms, in accordance with the conclusions of the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action, should be promoted.
178. There is a large potential benefit to be derived from increased
participation. In order for it to be realized, Governments should establish
institutional and legal frameworks and decentralized processes that allow
their people greater involvement in the decisions that affect their lives.
This requires that Governments give adequate support to the administration of
justice as well as to public administration, which should be responsive to the
requirements of their people.
179. Governments are encouraged, where appropriate, to decentralize their
public institutions and services to a level that, compatible with their
overall responsibilities, priorities and objectives, responds properly to
local needs and facilitates local participation. To ensure effective
decentralization and strengthening of local authorities and their associations
and networks, Governments, at the appropriate levels, should review and
revise, as necessary, legislation to increase local autonomy and participation
in decision-making, implementation and resource mobilization and use,
especially with respect to human, technical and financial resources and local
enterprise development, within the overall framework of a national economic,
social and environmental strategy. Governments, when they consider it
appropriate, could work on decentralization programmes with the support of
donors and international institutions.
180. The key to participatory development means fulfilling the potential of
people by enlarging their capabilities, and this necessarily implies
empowerment of people, enabling them to participate actively in their own
development. In order to fulfil their potential, people, especially those who
are vulnerable and disadvantaged, must participate actively in establishing
and maintaining independent organizations representing their interests, within
each country's constitutional framework. Political empowerment is an integral
aspect of participatory development.

/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 39

181. A vigorous civil society is indispensable for popular participation at
all levels and an essential component of any successful development strategy.
Community organizations, business and workers' organizations, non-governmental
organizations and self-help groups must be actively involved. Governments
should view them as important actors and partners in development. Greater
accountability and transparency in the activities of such organizations would
be helpful in this regard. In countries where the participation of civil
society is weak, it should be a major purpose of public policy to strengthen
it.
182. Broadening and strengthening the participation of developing countries
in the international economic decision-making process is also necessary.
I. Actions related to countries in special situations
183. International cooperation for development should take account of the
development experiences and circumstances of countries in formulating and
implementing comprehensive development approaches.
184. Action on many fronts is needed. A combination of grant aid,
concessional loans and technical assistance, which can contribute to the
financing of the necessary economic and social infrastructure, together with
strategies designed, inter alia, to increase export earnings, attract foreign
direct investment and reduce external debt, can provide sufficient conditions
for development.
185. The critical situation of Africa and the least developed countries
requires that priority should be given to those countries in international
cooperation for development and in the allocation of official development
assistance. Those countries should implement at the national level structural
adjustment policies that take into account social development goals, as well
as effective development strategies that create a more favourable climate for
trade and investment, give priority to human resources development and further
promote the development of democratic institutions. These national efforts
should be supported by the international community.
1. Africa
186. The critical socio-economic condition in Africa concerns the
international community as a whole and requires global partnership and
solidarity in order to address and resolve it. Although Africa is faced with
enormous problems, it also has great potential, both in human and natural
resources, for economic growth and development. The obstacles to the
socio-economic development of Africa are well known. Tackling these problems
and paving the way to accelerated and self-sustaining growth and sustainable
development through decisive implementation of commitments and actions have,
however, been lacking.
187. The external debt problems of African countries require further
attention. The measures taken by the Paris Club, including the Naples terms,
should be further implemented in a full, constructive and expeditious manner.
Effective, equitable, development-oriented and durable solutions have to be
found to the problems of external debt and the burden of debt, which continue
to impede the socio-economic development of African countries despite measures
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 40

taken on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis to reduce or reschedule
their debt.
188. The international community should reaffirm its commitment to give full
support to the development efforts of Africa. This requires, inter alia,
measures to contribute to durable solutions to the external debt and debtservicing problems, to increase foreign direct investment, to enhance national
capacity-building, to deal with the shortage of domestic resources for
development and to facilitate the integration of the African countries into
subregional and regional trade as well as into world trade.
189. The international community should support African countries so that
they benefit fully from the results of the Uruguay Round and to mitigate any
adverse effect of the Final Act. It is essential to implement the measures
decided upon in the Final Act and the complementary provisions specified in
the Marrakesh agreement in favour of least developed countries and concerning
the possible negative effects of the reform programme on these countries and
on the net food-importing developing countries. In this regard, there is
urgent need for financial and technical assistance to African countries to
enable them to evaluate the impact of the Final Act and to identify and
implement adaptive measures to enhance their competitiveness and trade
performance in order to benefit from the Uruguay Round. In addition, it is
essential to support the efforts of African countries to diversify their
economies. New export capacities and opportunities have to be created and
diversification across markets and products should be encouraged. The call
for financing the preparatory phase of commodity diversification projects and
programmes should be pursued. State participants in the African Development
Fund and multilateral institutions are urged to pay special attention to the
diversification of African commodities and to contribute to the preparatory
phase of African diversification projects. In order to support effectively
efforts to diversify commodity exports and boost earnings, the international
community, particularly the major trading partners, should continue to commit
themselves to granting enhanced market access to Africa's exports through
substantial reduction in or removal of trade barriers and through preferential
arrangements, in accordance with the Uruguay Round agreements.
190. There is an urgent need for concerted and better coordinated
international action on the myriad of adverse socio-economic factors that
compound poverty in Africa and hamper its prospects for growth and
development. This includes addressing effectively and comprehensively the
issues of conflict resolution, including post-conflict peace-building and the
continuum from relief to rehabilitation and development; stronger and better
coordinated global actions against major diseases that take a heavy toll in
human lives; and alleviating the effects of natural disasters through
programmes on early warning, preparedness, prevention and mitigation. The
international community should also assist African countries in their efforts
to eradicate poverty and meet basic human needs.
191. The United Nations system also has a major role to play in coordinating
and implementing activities that address the critical situation in Africa,
including through the implementation of the United Nations New Agenda for the
Development of Africa in the 1990s and the follow-up to the outcome of the
Tokyo International Conference on African Development and other related
initiatives.

/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 41

2. Least developed countries
192. Despite the adoption of the Paris Declaration and the Programme of
Action for the Least Developed Countries for the 1990s,29 there has been a
decline in real terms of total official development assistance for least
developed countries and continued marginalization of those countries, and
their number has increased from 41 to 48 without a proportionate increase in
support measures despite national and international efforts. Reversing the
further marginalization of the least developed countries and achieving their
integration in the world economy are essential for their growth and
development and pose a major challenge to the international community.
193. In order to succeed, the full support of the international community is
required. Appropriate economic and social policies are also required and
technical capacity and physical and institutional infrastructures need to be
built up. Special support should therefore be given to the least developed
countries in their development efforts, in order to facilitate their
integration into the world economy, to enable them to participate in and to
allow them to fully benefit from the processes of globalization and
liberalization of trade and the increase in international private resource
flows.
194. In view of their limited domestic resources, the least developed
countries will continue to need enhanced external financial assistance and
other support. Achieving the accepted United Nations target for official
development assistance to the least developed countries of 0.15 per cent of
the gross national product of donor countries is particularly urgent. Donor
countries that have not met this target should make their best efforts to
reach it as soon as possible, and donor countries that have met the 0.15 per
cent target should undertake to reach 0.20 per cent by the year 2000. Further
improvements should be made in aid coordination and effectiveness.
195. Many least developed countries face serious debt problems and more than
half are considered debt-distressed. Most of their debt is owed to official
creditors, both bilateral and multilateral. The serious debt problems of
least developed countries necessitate continued efforts in the framework of
the international debt strategy. This strategy includes concrete measures to
alleviate the debt burden and economic policy measures, which will be critical
to the revitalization of growth and development. Those least developed
countries should continue to benefit from substantial debt relief schemes.
Paris Club creditors are invited to continue to implement fully,
constructively and expeditiously the very concessional treatment under the
Naples terms, and the Bretton Woods institutions are encouraged to expedite
the ongoing consideration of ways to address the issue of the multilateral
debt, including those concerning the least developed countries.
196. The international community should support least developed countries so
that they benefit fully from the results of the Uruguay Round and to mitigate
any adverse effect of the Final Act. It is essential to implement the
measures decided upon in the Final Act and the complementary provisions
specified in the Marrakesh agreement in favour of the least developed
countries and concerning the possible negative effects of the reform programme

29

See Report of the Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries, Paris, 3-14 September 1990 (A/CONF.147/18), part one.
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 42

on these countries and on the net food-importing developing countries. Urgent
steps are needed to provide enhanced market access to major markets for
products originating from least developed countries. There is also scope for
further improvement of the Generalized System of Preferences schemes and other
supportive measures in favour of least developed countries.
197. In 1990, through the adoption of the Declaration and Programme of Action
of the Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, the
international community agreed on measures to revitalize the development of
the least developed countries. At the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development, the International Conference on Population and
Development and the World Summit for Social Development, and within the
framework of other relevant conferences, agreements and conventions, further
commitments have been made to support the efforts of those countries. At the
Mid-term Global Review of the Implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Least Developed Countries for the 1990s,30 concrete measures and
recommendations were agreed upon to implement the Programme of Action. They
should be operationalized and implemented as appropriate. The international
community must give high priority to the full and timely implementation of the
Programme of Action and fulfil all its commitments in favour of the least
developed countries.
3. Small island developing States
198. The international community, international organizations and the United
Nations system should cooperate in the implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States27 and
of Agenda 217 and support the economic transformation of those States. This
requires adequate, predictable, new and additional financial resources,
transfer of environmentally sound technologies, including on concessional and
preferential terms as mutually agreed, and promoting fair and
non-discriminatory trading arrangements. Appropriate exchanges among small
island developing States and between them and other States with similar
development experiences are also to be encouraged. The Global Environment
Facility should constitute an important channel of assistance to small island
developing States in responding to their special needs and vulnerabilities.
199. The sustainable development of small island developing States requires
concrete action by the international community to address the constraints to
their development outlined in the Programme of Action and in Agenda 21. It
also requires a supportive international institutional framework, including a
strong monitoring and review role by the Commission on Sustainable
Development. Appropriate support should be given to the information network
for small island developing States, known as SIDSNET, and the technical
assistance programme, known as SIDSTAP, which are important instruments for
technical cooperation and for promoting information exchange.
4. Landlocked developing countries
200. Specific action at national, bilateral, subregional, regional and
international levels should be taken as a matter of urgency and priority to

30

Resolution 50/103, annex.
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 43

address the special development problems and needs of landlocked developing
countries. To that end, international support, through appropriate technical
cooperation and financial assistance by developed countries and multilateral
financial and development institutions, is needed to enhance the capacity of
the landlocked developing countries to participate effectively in the rapidly
globalizing world economy, including global trading, investment and technology
transfer processes.
201. Particular emphasis should be given to the cooperative and collaborative
efforts of the landlocked and transit developing countries in dealing with the
transit problems, inter alia, through improving the transit transport
infrastructure facilities and concluding bilateral agreements to govern
transit transport operations; development of joint ventures in the area of
transit transport; and strengthening of institutions and human resources
dealing with transit transport. Active and consistent efforts are needed
to implement the Global Framework for Transit Transport Cooperation
between Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and the Donor
Community31 endorsed by the General Assembly at its fiftieth session. Since
most transit countries are themselves developing countries facing serious
economic problems, their efforts at developing a viable transit infrastructure
also need financial and technical support.
5. Countries with economies in transition
202. The international community should continue to give attention to the
needs of countries with economies in transition and support in particular
their efforts to integrate into the world economy. A number of international
meetings and conferences, including those held under United Nations auspices,
have recognized the specific needs of those countries in various areas of
development and the necessity to provide them with temporary assistance upon
their request aimed at solutions to the most acute problems. Such
recommendations should be fully implemented by the international community and
the United Nations system. To this end, an appropriate strategy should be
defined for strengthening solidarity with these countries, taking into account
the need to preserve the United Nations system's high priorities in
development, in particular international development cooperation.
J. Means of implementation
203. The effective implementation of the present Agenda, as well as of the
decisions and commitments reached at the recent series of United Nations
global conferences, summits and other meetings, requires the urgent
mobilization and more efficient use of resources for development. It is
critical to generate the political will to mobilize and make available the
necessary resources - public and private, financial and human, national and
international - if all States, the United Nations system and the international
community as a whole are to mount a full and effective response to the Agenda.
In formulating this response, attention has to be given to both the
quantitative and the qualitative aspects of development as well as to timeframes for implementation.

31

TD/B/42(1)/11-TD/B/LDC/AC.1/7, annex I.
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 44

1. Mobilization of domestic resources for development
204. All countries should continue to implement policies and measures to
mobilize domestic resources according to national strategies and priorities
and to achieve an appropriate level of domestic savings. Measures should
include the maintenance of sound fiscal and monetary policies, efficient and
equitable taxation systems, low budget deficits and an efficient allocation of
budgetary resources in which due priority is given to productive expenditure.
205. Political institutions and legal systems that ensure the equitable
distribution of domestic resources enhance the effectiveness and flexibility
of national policy frameworks. Public expenditures offer significant
opportunities for promoting growth and the equitable redistribution of
resources.
206. All countries should explore new ways of generating new public and
private financial resources, inter alia, through the appropriate reduction of
excessive military expenditures, including global military expenditures and
the arms trade and investments for arms production and acquisition, taking
into consideration national security requirements, so as to allow possible
allocation of additional funds for social and economic development.
2. External resources
207. The savings efforts of developing countries, in particular African
countries and the least developed countries, to generate sufficient domestic
savings need to be supplemented by external resources so as to raise
investment to the levels necessary for adequate sustained economic growth.
New and innovative ideas for generating resources for development should be
explored.
(a)

External debt

208. The international community, including the international financial
institutions, is invited to continue to explore ways of implementing
additional and innovative measures to alleviate substantially the debt burdens
of developing countries, in particular the highly indebted low-income
countries, in order to help them to achieve sustained economic growth without
falling into a new debt crisis.
209. In this context, the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative
endorsed by the Interim Committee of the International Monetary Fund and the
Development Committee of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund,
which is designed to enable eligible heavily indebted poor countries to
achieve a sustainable debt situation through coordinated action by all
creditors on the basis of adjustment efforts by the debtor countries, is
welcomed. It is recognized that the implementation of the Initiative requires
additional financial resources from both bilateral and multilateral creditors
without affecting the support required for development activities of
developing countries. The importance of implementing the Initiative's
eligibility criteria flexibly so as to ensure sufficient coverage of the
heavily indebted countries is stressed.
210. All the members of the Paris Club are encouraged to implement fully the
initiatives which aim at substantially reducing the bilateral component of the
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 45

debt burden of the poorest and most heavily indebted countries and at
permitting countries sufficiently advanced in an adjustment strategy to exit
from the rescheduling process. To achieve the first aim mentioned above, the
Paris Club should continue to apply the Naples terms in a full, expeditious
and constructive manner in order to contribute to a durable solution to the
debt problems of these countries.
211. Private creditors and, in particular, commercial banks should be
encouraged to continue their initiatives and efforts to address the commercial
debt of developing countries.
212. The international community should implement fully the appropriate
actions identified in the Mid-term Global Review of the Progress towards the
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
for the 1990s concerning the external debt problems of those countries.
213. Multilateral debt accounts for a high proportion of the external debt of
a number of heavily indebted developing countries. The international
financial institutions are invited to examine further proposals to tackle the
problems of a number of developing countries with regard to multilateral debt,
taking into account the specific situation of each country. Such proposals
need to preserve the preferred creditor status of the multilateral financial
institutions, in order to ensure that they can continue to provide
concessional financing for development to developing countries.
(b)

Official development assistance

214. It is important to reverse the overall decline in official development
assistance flows and to achieve internationally agreed official development
assistance targets as soon as possible. Such assistance should focus on
developing countries, with particular priority given to Africa and the least
developed countries. Some donor countries have achieved or exceeded the
accepted United Nations targets to allocate 0.7 per cent of gross national
product for overall official development assistance and 0.15 per cent of gross
national product for official development assistance for the least developed
countries and are encouraged to continue to do so. Other developed countries
reaffirm the commitments undertaken to fulfil these targets as soon as
possible. Countries that are in a position to do so should strive to augment
their assistance in the framework of development cooperation. Countries
should also honour the commitments made in Agenda 21 to provide resources to
promote sustainable development.
(c)

Role and resources of multilateral financial institutions, including
regional development banks

215. The multilateral financial institutions should continue to play a major
role in development and in promoting the stability of the international
financial system. In their responses to the development needs, priorities and
specific circumstances of developing countries, the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund should continue to adjust to the wide-ranging
changes in global circumstances. Their programmes should respond to the
economic and social conditions, concerns and needs of each country, and should
also explicitly include social development goals, in particular eradicating
poverty, promoting productive employment, enhancing social integration, and
supporting people living in poverty and vulnerable and disadvantaged groups of
society. To this end, they are urged to increase cooperation with other
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 46

development activities of the United Nations system. At the same time, both
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund need an enhanced capacity
to fulfil their roles effectively. In particular, resources for the
International Development Association should be replenished adequately and in
a timely manner.
216. Regional development banks should continue to play an important role in
the financing of development. In this context, the adequate and timely
replenishment of their concessional mechanisms is essential. Regional
development banks should respond effectively to development priorities.
(d)

United Nations financing for development

217. The fulfilment of the role of the United Nations system in development
and in promoting development cooperation requires resources to be provided on
a sound, predictable, continuous and assured basis. The international
community should support the development efforts of the United Nations system
by providing a substantial increase in resources for operational activities
commensurate with the needs of the developing countries and the overall
resources of the United Nations. This requires both political commitment by
all States and an appropriate balance in terms of resources devoted to all
United Nations activities and to development. New approaches to financing the
international development cooperation activities undertaken by the United
Nations, including innovative funding sources, should continue to be examined.
(e)

Private investment flows

218. Special attention should be given by all countries to measures aimed at
promoting international investment flows and enhancing their contribution to
development. In order to encourage domestic investment and to attract foreign
direct investment, it is essential to have in place a stable, supportive,
effective and transparent legal framework. Intellectual property protection
is an essential component of an environment conducive to the creation and
international transfer of technology. Investment agreements which signal that
investment is valued and that all investors will be treated fairly also
promote investment. Governments in the developed countries should facilitate
long-term investment flows to developing countries. All countries should take
measures to ensure that these flows have a positive impact on development,
equitable growth, productive capacity, infrastructure, transfer of technology,
eradication of poverty, trade expansion, employment and social programmes.
219. The globalization and growth of financial markets has given rise to the
need for improved measures to address the negative effects of the volatility
of international capital flows. The prevention of financial crises will
require enhanced early warning mechanisms, including improved and effective
surveillance of national and international financial market developments. If
prevention fails, responding to financial market distress will require
enhancing the capacity of multilateral institutions to respond in a quick and
coordinated fashion. Financial mechanisms need to be developed for this
purpose as well as to meet the challenges of the twenty-first century. In
this context, the international community should explore ways to broaden
appropriate enhanced cooperation and, where appropriate, coordination of
macroeconomic policy among interested countries and monetary and financial
authorities and institutions, so as to enhance preventive consultation
arrangements between such institutions as a means of promoting a stable
international financial environment conducive to economic growth, particularly
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 47

in developing countries, taking into account the needs of developing countries
as well as situations that may have a significant impact on the international
financial system.
3. Qualitative aspects of development cooperation
220. The quantitative efforts set out above should be complemented by
measures to improve the qualitative aspects of international development
cooperation, particularly a better focus on its distribution; greater national
capacities to coordinate national and international resources; improved
national ownership of externally financed programmes; international
cooperation based on national priorities, involving other development
partners, including civil society; and strengthened national capacities to
plan for, manage, monitor and evaluate the impact of development cooperation.
221. To translate the Agenda for Development into practical action, it is
essential that further steps are taken to enhance the performance of the
United Nations in development. Maintaining adequate levels of funding for
United Nations operational activities must be coupled with continued
improvements in their performance, including monitoring and evaluation and the
measurement of output rather than input.
4. Capacity-building
222. If development activities are to have a lasting impact, the future
provision of technical cooperation must focus on strengthening national
capacities rather than using international expertise, which is often
expensive, and procuring equipment tied to aid. The United Nations system
needs to scrutinize whether its activities contribute to the promotion of
national ownership and capacity-building. Such promotion should be the
central objective of its field-level activities.
223. The international community, including the United Nations system, shall
give preference, wherever possible, to the utilization of competent national
experts or, where necessary, of competent experts from within the subregion or
region or from other developing countries, in project and programme design,
preparation and implementation and to the building of local expertise where it
does not exist.
224. National execution should be the principal modality for the
implementation of programmes by the United Nations system. The pace at which
national execution is utilized by recipient countries must depend upon their
needs and capacities. Effective national execution also requires both the
United Nations system and other actors involved in the provision of technical
assistance to give increased priority to assisting recipient countries in
building or enhancing the necessary capacity to undertake services at the
field level.
225. The need to promote capacity-building and national execution should be
taken into account in the design stage of development programmes. Governments
will need to take a lead role in identifying such needs at the planning stage
and in ensuring that there is adequate national ownership of the programmes as
well as in maximizing the efficiency of projects and programmes by keeping
overhead costs to a minimum.
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 48

226. The United Nations system must also be prepared to address the capacity
requirements of different national development partners, including, in
addition to Governments, members of civil society, such as the private sector
and non-governmental organizations.
227. When building national capacities a number of issues will need to be
taken into consideration. These include the articulation of clear development
goals, strategies and priorities that are nationally prescribed and supported,
where necessary, by external partners; effective performance of functions
through a well-trained human resource base; competent organizations and
management effectively to utilize and retain skilled people; a policy and
institutional environment that can facilitate the performance and
accountability of the public sector and other national institutions; and
sensitivity to the overall social, economic and cultural environment in which
capacity development is to take place.
228. Technical and economic cooperation among developing countries is an
instrument that can make important contributions to building national
capacities through exchange of information, experiences and expertise.
III. INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES AND FOLLOW-UP
A. Strengthening of international cooperation for development
229. The international community is entering a new and challenging phase in
invigorating institutions in support of international cooperation for
development. Globalization, liberalization and interdependence have become
key features of the world economy. In addition, economic growth and progress
in a growing interdependent world are influenced by the process of
globalization. Particular attention should be accorded to national and
international action to broaden the benefits of the process of globalization
and to avoid the risk of marginalization of developing countries, in
particular the least developed countries, in the world economy. For
developing countries, the most important challenge is the realization of
development, which, among other things, calls for economic growth and
favourable external conditions. International cooperation for development is
more than ever acknowledged as a necessity that derives from recognized mutual
interest. Therefore, it is necessary that such cooperation be strengthened.
In this effort the United Nations occupies a central position and key role.
230. The United Nations system has a crucial role to play in international
cooperation for revitalizing development. In this regard, the United Nations
has convened a number of global conferences on major issues. From these
conferences, a consensus has emerged on a multidimensional, comprehensive and
integrated approach to development which recognizes, among other things, that
economic development, social development and environmental protection are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing components of sustainable development.
Fulfilling the goals and commitments reached at major international
conferences, particularly on international cooperation for development, is
essential if development is to materialize to its fullest extent and in all
its facets. There is, therefore, a need to revitalize the system of
international cooperation for development, which plays an important role in
realizing those goals and commitments.

/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 49

231. Among the many actors in international development, the United Nations,
because of its unique universal character and impartiality and because of its
physical presence in many parts of the world, plays a central role in
promoting international development cooperation. Through the present Agenda,
recommendations are made for a stronger and more effective and efficient
United Nations so that it and the United Nations system as a whole can better
contribute to development in all countries, in particular the developing
countries, through the strengthening of its role in all relevant fields of
international development cooperation. Institutional issues must, therefore,
be addressed while safeguarding the transparent, democratic and truly
universal character of the Organization and taking into account the overall
ongoing processes of reform of the United Nations.
B. Role of the United Nations in development
232. In accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, the Organization
aims at the creation of conditions of stability and well-being which are
necessary for peaceful and friendly relations among nations, based on respect
for the principles of sovereign equality of all its Members, equal rights and
self-determination of peoples, and at achieving international cooperation in
solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or
humanitarian character. The role and functions of the United Nations in
international economic and social cooperation, as defined in the Charter and
as further elaborated in various international agreements, including in the
outcomes of major United Nations conferences, range wide and deep and should
be fulfilled.
233. Among the key characteristics of the United Nations are its universal
membership and comprehensive mandate. The United Nations occupies a unique
position for addressing the challenges of promoting development in the context
of the globalization of the world economy and deepening interdependence among
nations. It must play a central and more active and effective role in
promoting international cooperation for development and providing policy
guidance on global development issues. The responsibilities of the United
Nations in the economic, social and related fields should be fulfilled, taking
into account the importance of its activities in these spheres vis-à-vis those
in other fields.
234. The United Nations constitutes a unique forum for building international
consensus on global priorities for which there exists no substitute. Forging
consensus and commitments through, inter alia, various international
conferences on international economic, social and related issues is one of the
most important functions of the United Nations system. To this end, the
capacity of the United Nations and its various bodies to undertake analytical
and policy-oriented work in the economic and social fields must be fully
utilized.
235. The United Nations is also singularly well placed to forge international
consensus in the field of development through intergovernmental processes and
instruments. Furthermore, the United Nations plays a prominent role in
raising public awareness and in promoting and advocating internationally
agreed principles and commitments, and their implementation, in this context.
It also implements concrete programmes which aim to respond to developmental
and humanitarian needs and to promote social justice and the protection of the

/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 50

environment through its activities at the field level and through the
collection and dissemination of information.
236. The United Nations has the unique mandate to address issues of peace and
development in an integrated manner. In addition, the United Nations has a
vital role to play in mobilizing the international community to respond in a
comprehensive and coordinated way to rehabilitation and reconstruction as well
as to longer-term development needs in connection with humanitarian emergency
situations. At the same time, a balance should be ensured between those
activities and the Organization's consideration of and actions on development
issues.
237. The United Nations, in cooperation with the Bretton Woods institutions,
other bodies of the United Nations system, including its specialized agencies,
and the World Trade Organization, has a key role in fostering greater
coherence, complementarity and coordination in economic policy-making at the
global level, including macroeconomic policy issues, and in ensuring the
principles of transparency and effective participation and representation, as
well as the effective implementation of internationally agreed policies and
goals. In this context, the respective competencies of these institutions
should be taken into account.
238. An important feature of the United Nations is its operational activities
for development in the field. Their fundamental characteristics should be,
inter alia, their universal, voluntary and grant nature, their neutrality and
their multilateralism, as well as their ability to respond to the needs of the
developing countries in a flexible manner. The United Nations development
system should take into account the specific needs and requirements of the
countries with economies in transition and other recipient countries.
Furthermore, because of its mandate, the Organization is well suited to
promote a balanced approach to development. Therefore, the challenge for the
United Nations and its funds and programmes is to effectively support
Governments, particularly those of the developing countries, in their efforts
to address increasingly complex issues of development in an interdependent
world.
239. The Organization will become more effective and relevant in responding
to the needs of the Member States only as a result of ensuring adequate and
predictable funding; high-quality performance in the field of international
cooperation for development; transparency and full accountability to its
Member States; revitalization of its institutional structures; avoidance of
overlapping and duplication; and responsiveness to changing conditions and
trends.
240. There is a need for a clear relationship between the policy work of the
United Nations and its operational role.
C. Enhancing the role, capacity, effectiveness and efficiency of the United
Nations system in development
241. Over the past 50 years the United Nations system has grown and expanded
in the economic, social and related sectors. Through its activities, the
system has contributed significantly to the development process. The
Organization should respond more effectively to changing development needs,
particularly to the needs of enhancing international cooperation for
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 51

development and promoting the development of the developing countries.
Strengthening system-wide coordination of activities and institutions will
contribute to enhancing the role, capacity, effectiveness and efficiency of
the United Nations system in development. In this context, building
collaboration between national Governments and regional and other multilateral
agencies in support of country-driven processes should be taken into account.
242. Essential to improving the coordination and focus of the development
activities of the United Nations system is to ensure that it is guided by a
clear set of priorities and strategies identified by the General Assembly,
with the support of the Economic and Social Council, that incorporate the
outcomes of recent major international conferences. Also essential is that
the Council has the capacity to fulfil its role in overall coordination in the
economic, social and related sectors and in guidance of operational
activities.
243. Efforts are needed to continue the process of enhancing the
effectiveness and efficiency of the Assembly, the Council and its subsidiary
bodies, the United Nations Secretariat and other parts of the United Nations
system as well as the framework for operational activities. Furthermore,
achieving greater coordination, coherence and complementarity among related
activities and improving linkages between them will also contribute to
strengthening the organizational structure of the United Nations system.
244. Ensuring complementarity and avoiding overlapping and duplication of
work between the Assembly and the Council, including its functional
commissions, is of particular importance for an effective and coordinated
follow-up to major United Nations conferences.
1. General Assembly
245. The General Assembly is the highest intergovernmental mechanism for the
formulation and appraisal of policies in the economic, social and related
fields and the main forum where Governments pursue the development dialogue in
its political context. This dialogue aims both at promoting an integrated
view of matters relating to the economic, social and related fields, thus
fostering the deeper political understanding needed for enhanced international
development cooperation, and at generating impulses for action and launching
initiatives. The Assembly should exert greater policy leadership on
development issues inasmuch as the Charter of the United Nations provides the
Assembly with broad mandates concerning these issues.
246. Measures have to be identified to enhance the ability of the debate in
the General Assembly to generate substantive solutions to specific policy
problems and to take an integrated approach to development. To facilitate
discussions based on an integrated approach to development issues, the
possibility should be explored of choosing a principal theme or themes in
order to focus substantive debate under each "cluster" in the agenda without
prejudice to the right of delegations to raise any other specific issue in the
debates.
247. In the strengthening and revitalization of the Assembly, this body
should consider, in the context of all its Main Committees, promoting the use
of innovative mechanisms, in accordance with its rules of procedure, such as
panel discussions with delegations and interactive debates with the active
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 52

participation of Secretariat and agency representatives as well as outside
experts.
248. Better use should be made of the forum of the Assembly to deal with
major economic, social and related issues. The Assembly has the overall
responsibility for ensuring the implementation of the results of United
Nations conferences and facilitating and reviewing progress achieved. In this
context, the Assembly should provide policy guidance and carry out, on a
periodic basis, an overall review of the implementation of the outcomes of the
conferences. Such conferences should be complementary to the Assembly's indepth consideration of major issues of concern to the international community.
249. At the same time, for the Assembly to perform fully its Charter role,
measures also have to be taken in addition to the strengthening of the
Assembly itself to ensure that priorities set by the Assembly are fully
implemented and followed up by the entire United Nations system. The policy
guidance role of the Assembly in promoting international cooperation to solve
international problems of an economic and social character should be fully
exercised in all areas of development, including macroeconomic issues.
250. The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, as a principal
organ of the Assembly, has a contribution to make in strengthening
policy-oriented debates in the Second Committee.
2. Economic and Social Council
251. In accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Economic
and Social Council must continue to strengthen its role as the central
mechanism for coordination of the United Nations system and its specialized
agencies and supervision of subsidiary bodies, in particular its functional
commissions, in the economic and social fields. The ongoing efforts to reform
the Council call for more effective procedures and review of its work
programme and working methods and should result in an increased capacity of
the Council to provide overall guidance and to monitor and coordinate the
United Nations development system. These reforms should be allowed to take
root and be built upon.
252.

In this context, the Council should:

(a)
Consider, in a high-level segment with ministerial participation,
major issues for international cooperation in the economic, social and related
fields. The high-level segment should be used for improving the synergy
between the economic and social sectors of the United Nations system. In
doing so, the Council should also contribute towards enhancing the interaction
between the United Nations, the Bretton Woods institutions and the World Trade
Organization;
(b)
Ensure a coordinated follow-up to the implementation of major
United Nations conferences through its subsidiary machinery and provide
overall guidance and coordination to the United Nations system as a whole in
the economic, social and related fields. A strengthened coordination function
also requires a closer interaction between the Council and the Administrative
Committee on Coordination, which should include in its reports to the Council
action-oriented recommendations to improve United Nations system-wide
coordination on issues for consideration by the Council;
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 53

(c)
Fully exercise its role as the overall coordinating body of all
United Nations development funds and programmes. This should include
providing guidance to the Executive Boards of funds and programmes and
monitoring the implementation of General Assembly policies and guidelines,
including operational aspects of the follow-up to major United Nations
conferences. The Council should promote greater coherence and closer
interaction between the work of its subsidiary bodies and the work of the
United Nations funds and programmes;
(d)
Encourage its subsidiary bodies to improve their working methods
as mandated by the Assembly;
(e)
In the context of its general segment, whose primary function is
that of an action-oriented review of the activities, reports and
recommendations of its subsidiary bodies, avoid a repetition of the debates
held in those bodies and focus attention on major policy issues that require a
prioritized and coordinated response from the United Nations system as a
whole.
253. The Bureau of the Council should play an active role by meeting
regularly, including by convening open-ended informal consultations of the
Council. The Bureau shall brief the Council on its deliberations and shall
not have the authority to make decisions on any substantive matters. The
Bureau should be encouraged to continue its role as facilitator.
(a)

Subsidiary bodies of the Economic and Social Council

254. The Council should fully exercise its authority vis-à-vis its subsidiary
bodies. Better guidance by the Council to its functional commissions and
expert groups and bodies is particularly important. The functional
commissions should in a coordinated way be able to give the best possible
support to the Council in its role of providing overall coordination and
guidance and in the follow-up to major United Nations conferences. It is
therefore crucial to ensure that these commissions, groups and bodies can
effectively serve as catalysts for action.
255. In the case of the functional commissions with primary responsibility
for the follow-up to and review of the implementation of the outcome of a
major conference, the Council shall ensure the harmonization and coordination
of their agendas and work programmes by promoting a clearer division of labour
among them and providing clear policy guidance to them. Within their
respective mandates, functional commissions should focus on the core issues
relating to the Conference for which they are responsible and obtain inputs
from other relevant bodies on related issues.
256. The Council shall undertake a review of its functional commissions,
expert groups and bodies as mandated by the relevant sections of annex I to
General Assembly resolution 50/227. Following this review, which the Council
should complete by the fifty-second session of the General Assembly, the
Council should continue to monitor the effectiveness and efficiency of its
subsidiary bodies.
(b)

Regional commissions

257. The regional commissions play an important role in bringing the work of
the United Nations closer to specific development situations and concerns of
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 54

countries and regions. This would include fostering economic cooperation,
economic integration and economic development by providing the Assembly,
through the Council, with substantive analytical and policy-oriented work, and
assisting countries in each region in the implementation and monitoring of
recommendations of conferences as well as other commitments. The United
Nations should also give a stronger focus to regional problems and prospects
in the socio-economic fields in a cost-effective manner. For this purpose,
the regional commissions should be more fully utilized, in accordance with
their respective mandates. In this context, the results of the review
mandated by the Assembly should be taken into account. The Council shall
ensure the active participation of the regional commissions in its examination
of the follow-up to major conferences. The Council shall also encourage the
regional commissions, under the guidance of their member States, to continue
to undertake their own management and functional assessment for adjusting
their priorities, mandates, tasks and structures, taking into account the fact
that numerous other regional institutions have been created.
3. United Nations funds and programmes
258. United Nations funds and programmes are important vehicles for advancing
development cooperation. There is need for a substantial increase in
resources for operational activities for development on a predictable,
continuous and assured basis commensurate with the increasing needs of
developing countries, which should be addressed urgently and expeditiously.
Innovative sources of funding could be an additional element for the provision
of resources for operational activities for development. The urgent and
specific needs of the low-income countries, in particular the least developed
countries, should receive priority allocation of grant resources of programmes
and projects provided through the funds and programmes.
259. The United Nations operational activities for development should be
implemented by the funds and programmes in accordance with Assembly
resolutions adopted, particularly in the context of the triennial policy
review of operational activities. The Council should provide overall guidance
to the funds and programmes in accordance with policies and priorities
formulated by the Assembly. The funds and programmes should build capacities
for national execution in recipient countries and should seek out, as
appropriate, the expertise of the specialized agencies with a view to
improving the quality of services and carrying out cooperation activities more
effectively and efficiently. Memoranda of understanding that clearly outline
individual responsibilities and areas of cooperation have proved useful and
should be encouraged between related funds, programmes and specialized
agencies.
260. The roles of the funds and programmes should be periodically reviewed
with a view to ensuring their responsiveness to the needs of Member States and
improving the quality and impact of United Nations operational activities.
The efficiency, effectiveness and impact of the operational activities of the
United Nations system must be enhanced by, inter alia, a substantial increase
in their funding on a predictable, continuous and assured basis, commensurate
with the increasing needs of developing countries, as well as through the full
implementation of relevant Assembly resolutions. At the same time,
operational activities should be country-driven, carried out for the benefit
of recipient countries at their request and in accordance with their own
policies and priorities.

/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 55

261. The United Nations system has made a serious effort to improve the
impact of its development assistance at the country level. Efforts have been
and continue to be made to improve the functioning of funds and programmes at
the country and headquarters levels. However, further simplification and
harmonization of rules of procedure used by the United Nations development
system in its operational activities is called for, in particular by the
promotion of greater consistency in the presentation of budgets at the
headquarters level, as well as in sharing administrative systems and services
in the field, where possible, and in developing common databases in
consultation with national Governments. The country programming cycles of the
United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Population Fund and
the United Nations Children's Fund should also be harmonized.
262. National plans and priorities constitute the only viable frame of
reference for the national programming of operational activities within the
United Nations system, which should be country-driven. In this context,
individual mandates and complementarities of the organizations and bodies of
the United Nations development system should be taken into account. Also, the
country strategy note, which remains a voluntary initiative of the recipient
countries, should be formulated by interested recipient countries with the
assistance of and in cooperation with the United Nations system, under the
leadership of the resident coordinator, in all recipient countries where the
Government so decides. Reform efforts, in accordance with relevant Assembly
resolutions, should aim at, inter alia, enhancing the effectiveness and
efficiency of the delivery of United Nations assistance at the country level
including through the resident coordinator system. The Secretary-General, in
support of the intergovernmental process, has an important role to play in
this respect. The resident coordinator, in full consultation with
Governments, should facilitate a coherent and coordinated United Nations
follow-up to major international conferences at the field level.
4. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
263. The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development is the focal
point within the United Nations for the integrated treatment of development
and interrelated issues in the areas of trade, finance, technology, investment
and sustainable development. Having a comparative advantage in tackling
trade-related development issues, the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development should continue to facilitate the integration of developing
countries and countries with economies in transition into the international
trading system, in a complementary manner with the World Trade Organization,
and to promote development through trade and investment in cooperation and
coordination with the International Trade Centre, relevant institutions of the
United Nations system and other international organizations.
264. The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, as part of the
United Nations system and as a contributor to its revitalization, has adopted
far-reaching reforms, as embodied in the Midrand Declaration and the document
entitled "A Partnership for Growth and Development",32 adopted by consensus at
the ninth session of the Conference, thus adapting itself to new economic and
institutional modalities created by the process of globalization, the
conclusion of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations agreements

32

See A/51/308.
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 56

and the creation of the World Trade Organization. These reforms should be
implemented, take root and be built upon, in accordance with the decisions
taken at the ninth session of the Conference.
265. The efforts of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
facilitate the integration of developing countries, in particular the least
developed countries, particularly those in Africa, into the global economy and
the international trading system are important for the successful
implementation of the Agenda for Development. The tenth session of the
Conference, to be held in Thailand in the year 2000, should provide an
opportunity to assess progress made and to advance the global partnership for
growth and development.
5. Specialized agencies of the United Nations system
266. Specialized agencies, as defined in Chapter IX of the Charter, play a
vital role in furthering the implementation of various aspects of the global
consensus on international cooperation for development and in promoting and
securing the international cooperation needed. Activities, priorities and
basic programmes of specialized agencies should be periodically assessed in
order to ensure that they remain relevant to the interests of their Member
States. In accordance with Article 58 of the Charter, the Organization shall
make recommendations for the coordination of the policies and activities of
the specialized agencies. The Secretary-General is invited to make
recommendations thereon.
267. Mechanisms should be elaborated to enable the Economic and Social
Council, within its mandate, to provide guidance to the specialized agencies
and to transmit institutional priorities as formulated by the Assembly. The
specialized agencies and the United Nations funds and programmes should engage
in a focused dialogue with the Council with a view to identifying how their
activities can be adjusted in response to such priorities. The Council should
also provide appropriate recommendations in order to ensure coherence and
complementarity of efforts of all bodies, taking into account the role of the
funds and programmes.
268. Efforts are also called for to enhance the transparency of the
operations of the agencies. Cooperation and coordination on themes of common
interest among the specialized agencies, and where appropriate between these
agencies and other bodies of the United Nations system, need to be
strengthened. The effectiveness and efficiency of activities of the Council
could also be improved by increasing interaction with specialized agencies,
including the provision of regular reports to the Assembly, through the
Council, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter. In this
regard, it will be essential to effectively monitor the follow-up to the
conclusions of the Council by the different entities of the United Nations
system.
269. Cooperation and coordination within the United Nations system in
providing effective support in the field of industrial development is
essential. In this context, the ongoing process of reform and revitalization
pursued by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization should lead
to better defining and enhancing its role and to increasing the relevance,
effectiveness and impact of the activities of the United Nations system in the

/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 57

field of industrial development in line with the priorities of its Member
States.
6. Secretariat
270. The structure and functioning of the Secretariat and the support
services that it provides in the economic, social and related fields are
important and must be strengthened and improved in order to increase the
effectiveness of the United Nations in the field of development. They cannot
be considered in isolation from the overall management structure, desired
lines of authority and decision-making processes of the Organization. In
particular, a dispersion of efforts and resources leading to unnecessary
overlapping of responsibilities and fragmentation of the decision-making
processes in the Secretariat should be avoided. Furthermore, the relationship
of the Secretary-General with the specialized agencies is crucial and needs to
be further enhanced.
271. Ways and means should be explored in accordance with priorities set by
the Assembly to reallocate the savings resulting from reform and improved
overall cost effectiveness with a view to strengthening United Nations
development activities. The Secretary-General is requested to present
proposals to this end.
272. It is acknowledged that the Secretary-General, as the chief
administrative officer of the Organization, is responsible for the functioning
of the Secretariat in accordance with the Charter. The restructuring of the
Secretariat is a vital part of the revitalization of the United Nations role
in the economic, social and related fields. In order for the United Nations
to act more effectively in support of development with greater coherence,
coordination and complementarity, further reform should be aimed at:
(a)
Ensuring a comprehensive and effective implementation of the
objectives of the Agenda for Development and of the relevant objectives of the
Charter and the mandates entrusted by the policy-making organs;
(b)
Rationalizing the structure of the Secretariat in such a manner
that would improve the effectiveness and efficiency of its work, avoid
duplication, meet the requirements of Member States and ensure accountability
in its operations;
(c)
Ensuring transparency and effective implementation of recruitment
procedures, principles and practices; ensuring the exclusively international
character of the staff; and securing the highest standards of efficiency,
competence and integrity as well as a more effective application of the
principles governing the recruitment of staff, including recruitment on as
wide a geographical basis as possible, respecting the relevant articles of the
Charter;
(d)
Ensuring that any reorganization of the economic and social
departments of the Secretariat and other proposals for Secretariat reform
preserve and promote the independence, intellectual diversity and visibility
of the United Nations in policy analysis;
(e)
Ensuring that initiatives for Secretariat reform consider measures
already adopted and allow for these to take root. The restructuring of the
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 58

Secretariat should be conducted in a manner that effectively meets the
requirements of Member States and takes fully into account the development
concerns of all Member States, in particular the developing countries;
(f)
Giving consideration to decentralization, as appropriate, from
Headquarters to the regional and field levels, including the regional
commissions, in order to enhance the capacity of the United Nations to provide
stronger focus on regional problems and prospects in a cost-effective manner,
taking into consideration the ongoing process of restructuring and
revitalization of the United Nations in the economic, social and related
fields.
7. Reporting
273. Reports to intergovernmental bodies should be concise and actionoriented. Where necessary, intergovernmental bodies should make efforts to
rationalize and simplify reporting procedures. All documentation should be
provided within the specified timetables and in all the official languages of
the United Nations.
8. Inter-agency coordination
274. Better inter-agency coordination within the system is essential to
support the goals of the Agenda for Development. This includes coordination
and cooperation on themes of common interest and identification of respective
strengths and weaknesses in order to ensure a more effective and efficient
role of the United Nations system while taking into account respective
mandates. In this context, the Administrative Committee on Coordination
should have an enhanced function for inter-agency coordination purposes for
the United Nations system. The Committee should bring system-wide
coordination issues to the attention of the Economic and Social Council and
make recommendations thereon. Further efforts should be made to enhance the
role of the Committee and its standing committees to ensure that the United
Nations system operates in a coherent, coordinated and complementary manner.
A systematic exchange of information and an appropriate distribution of tasks
should be ensured within the Committee machinery and with any specific
inter-agency mechanism, including ad hoc inter-agency thematic task forces set
up in the context of the follow-up to conferences. Full information for the
Member States on the work of the Committee should be made available and wider
distribution of the report of the Committee should be pursued.
9. Participation of non-governmental organizations
and other major groups
275. The constructive contribution of non-governmental organizations and
other major groups, including the private sector, to the implementation of the
Agenda for Development should be encouraged. The existing mechanisms for the
involvement and participation of non-governmental organizations in United
Nations activities should be fully utilized and, as appropriate, be further
improved, taking into account the relevant rules of procedure of the United
Nations and the outcome of the meetings of the Open-ended High-level Working
Group of the General Assembly on the Strengthening of the United Nations
System.
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 59

D. Interaction between the United Nations and other multilateral
development institutions, including the Bretton Woods
institutions and the World Trade Organization
276. Increased interaction and cooperation between the United Nations and the
multilateral development institutions, including the Bretton Woods
institutions and the World Trade Organization, are necessary to respond to the
challenges of development. Also, cooperative working relations between the
United Nations and other international organizations should be strengthened.
Examples of such cooperation already exist. There is a need to develop
further effective and innovative approaches to this interaction and
cooperation.
277. The strengthening of collaboration between the United Nations and the
Bretton Woods institutions requires an integrated approach, encompassing a
closer policy dialogue at the intergovernmental level on relevant areas of
international development policy issues, taking into account their respective
competencies. In support of this dialogue, closer relationships should be
developed between the United Nations, through the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, and the Bretton Woods institutions, in particular
the Interim Committee of the International Monetary Fund and the Development
Committee of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. In this
regard, the Assembly should play a more active role in global economic
matters, including the deliberations on macroeconomic issues.
278. International financial and trade institutions should be more closely
involved in the preparations and deliberations, when appropriate, of the highlevel segment of the Council. Their heads should actively contribute to the
discussion on the topic chosen for that segment. Decisions already taken by
the Council to ensure their closer involvement, through, inter alia,
furnishing relevant reports, should be implemented.
279. A further opportunity to consider global issues of high priority and to
identify areas where these institutions can mutually support their respective
efforts in promoting development could be provided by high-level special
meetings of the Council.
280. Concrete modalities for strengthening the exchange of information on
development issues between the United Nations and the Bretton Woods
institutions should be explored. Similar modalities may also be explored with
the World Trade Organization. Joint meetings between the Secretary-General
and the executive heads of the United Nations funds and programmes, the World
Trade Organization and the Bretton Woods institutions and other relevant
organizations on selected themes, including those identified by the Assembly,
should be encouraged.
281. At the field level, the United Nations development system and the
Bretton Woods institutions, acting pursuant to their respective mandates,
should cooperate more closely, including in the areas of capacity-building and
field operations, in accordance with priorities determined by recipient
countries. Under the overall guidance of national Governments, they should
expand, whenever appropriate, their collaboration in co-financing of field
programmes and projects and explore innovative ways to combine and maximize
their resources. In consultation and agreement with Governments, efforts
should be made to promote complementarity between the country strategy notes,
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 60

where they exist, the policy framework papers of the Bretton Woods
institutions and the World Bank's country assistance strategies. In
channelling financial and technical assistance through multilateral
development finance institutions, donor countries are encouraged to take into
account the respective roles and functions of the United Nations programmes
and funds and the Bretton Woods institutions so as to ensure the
complementarity of development assistance.
282. In post-emergency situations, the United Nations and the Bretton Woods
institutions must support the transition from emergency to rehabilitation,
reconstruction and long-term development. To this end, coordination between
the United Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions should be improved.
E. Follow-up and implementation
283. The intergovernmental follow-up to the Agenda for Development shall be
undertaken by the General Assembly as the highest intergovernmental mechanism
and the principal policy-making and appraisal organ of the United Nations
system. The Assembly has called for the renewal of the dialogue on
strengthening international cooperation for development through partnership,
which should serve as an important mechanism through which the
intergovernmental follow-up and assessment of the Agenda and its
implementation will be conducted. Such dialogue should also be used as an
opportunity to discuss new and emerging issues concerning international
cooperation for development.
284. The Economic and Social Council, within its mandate, shall assist the
Assembly in overseeing United Nations system-wide implementation of the Agenda
and by providing recommendations in this regard. At the same time,
Governments as well as regional economic integration organizations have an
important role to play at their respective levels in the follow-up to the
Agenda.
285. Closely related to the follow-up to and implementation of the Agenda is
the urgent need for an integrated, interrelated and coherent implementation of
and follow up at the national, subregional, regional, and international levels
to the recommendations and commitments of recent United Nations major
conferences and agreements on development. The progress of the implementation
of the results of those conferences should be reviewed so as to identify
progress achieved as well as obstacles hindering their full and effective
implementation. While Governments have the primary responsibility for the
implementation of the declarations and programmes of action adopted by
international conferences, the international community, in particular the
United Nations system, including the multilateral and regional financial
institutions, has an important role in contributing to, assisting in,
facilitating and reviewing the progress of the implementation of the results
of those conferences at all levels and in further promoting their goals and
objectives.
286. A strong political commitment by the international community is needed
to implement a strengthened international cooperation for development as
reflected in the present Agenda. The mobilization of domestic and
international financial resources for development from all sources is an
essential component for the comprehensive and effective implementation of the
Agenda. In this connection, enhanced efforts should be made for the
/...

A/RES/51/240
Page 61

mobilization and provision of new and additional financial resources for the
development of developing countries. Despite an increase in private capital
flows, official development assistance remains an essential source of external
funding. Developed countries reaffirm the commitments undertaken to fulfil as
soon as possible the agreed United Nations targets of 0.7 per cent of their
gross national product for overall official development assistance and of 0.15
per cent of the gross national product for official development assistance for
the least developed countries. Donor countries that have met the 0.15 per
cent target will seek to undertake to reach 0.20 per cent. Further efforts
are also needed to improve the effectiveness of official development
assistance and to focus such aid on the poorest countries.
287. Due consideration should be given to modalities for conducting an
intergovernmental dialogue on the financing of development, taking into
account the recommendation by the Secretary-General.

/...
