S/PV.7490

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7490th meeting

Thursday, 23 July 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. McCully/Mrs. Schwalger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(New Zealand)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Baublys
Mr. Ibrahim/Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-22882 (E)
*1522882*

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10. 15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bangladesh, Brazil, Cuba, Egypt,
Guatemala, Iceland, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Maldives, Morocco, Namibia, Norway,
Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates and Zimbabwe to participate in this
meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to the Palestine Liberation Organization and
the Palestinian Authority, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
individuals to participate in this meeting: Mr. Carl
Hallergard, Minister Counsellor in the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, and His
Excellency Mr. Fodé Seck, Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: Let me begin by extending my
warmest wishes to all of our Muslim colleagues and

2/65

23/07/2015

their families on the occasion of Eid Al-Fitr and the end
of the Holy Month of Ramadan.
In a region currently torn by religious radicalism,
age-old sectarian rivalries and geopolitical realignments,
one conflict has endured for over 65 years. Some see it
as the core problem in the region; others dismiss it as
unrelated to the current turmoil. Either way, the IsraeliPalestinian conflict is increasingly entangled in the
tectonic shifts of the Middle East. Given the region’s
massive transformation, it is imperative — perhaps
more than ever before — that a permanent settlement
be found, based on the concept of two States, Israel
and a sovereign, contiguous and viable Palestine, living
side by side in peace, security and mutual recognition.
Despite continuing security coordination in the
West Bank, today the two sides are further apart from
that goal than ever. Support for the two-State solution
among both Palestinians and Israelis is fading away.
The current situation on the ground is not sustainable,
as the two-State solution continues to be under threat,
including from settlement construction, security
incidents, occupation-related violence and the lack of
Palestinian unity. In the absence of a political process,
the rise of violent extremism and terrorism in the region
presents a danger as much to the legitimate aspirations
of Palestinians for statehood as to the security of Israel.
In the current environment of mistrust, we in
the international community must work with Israelis
and Palestinians alike to create the conditions on
the ground, regionally and internationally, that will
facilitate a return to meaningful negotiations on the
basis of an agreed framework and within a reasonable
time frame. Both parties must undertake steps on the
ground that demonstrate their continued commitment
to a two-State solution, including through the
implementation of existing agreements and by avoiding
unilateral actions. Advancing the two-State solution
requires a fundamental change in policy with regard to
the occupied Palestinian territory. I welcome the recent
decision by Israel to add 8,000 new work permits for
Palestinians from the West Bank, bringing the number
of permits issued for employment in Israel to a new
high of approximately 60,000. That and other similar
initiatives should be sustained and expanded, while
much more needs to be done for improving the quality
of life for Palestinians.
Unilateral actions in the West Bank — including
settlement construction, so-called legalization of
outposts, demolitions and evictions — must stop. While
15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

settlement expansion has slowed of late, planning for
related infrastructure has not ceased. I am concerned
by recent reports about the imminent approval of new
residential units in the occupied West Bank. Such a
decision would inevitably damage the prospects for
peace and increase the risk for political escalation. I urge
the authorities to reconsider that action. Settlements are
illegal under international law and undermine the very
essence of the viability of a future Palestinian State.
Meanwhile, the Palestinian people rightly expect
their leaders to act to advance unity and empower their
Government to take control of the border crossings
in Gaza, implement civil service integration, pay
public-sector salaries and ensure that the governance
framework between the West Bank and Gaza is
integrated under a single authority. Those efforts will
pave the way for much-delayed elections to take place.
I call on all Palestinian groups to avoid in-fighting
and find common ground on the basis of nonviolence
and reconciliation in order to achieve national unity,
which is critical for the two-State solution. The
Secretary-General stands ready to work with the
Security Council and with our partners in the Middle
East Quartet on a reinvigorated effort to create the
conditions for the return to meaningful negotiations.
In that context, I note the proposed establishment of
an international support group that could contribute
to such efforts. In the past month, as part of an active
outreach effort, Quartet envoys engaged constructively
with Egypt, Jordan and the League of Arab States. I take
this opportunity to encourage the leadership of Israel
to endorse the Arab Peace Initiative as an important
contribution to a resolution of the conflict.
The date of 8 July marked the one-year anniversary
of the outbreak of conflict between Israel and Hamas.
Gaza’s painstaking emergence from last summer’s
conflict is undermining belief among the population
that genuine progress can be achieved. The activities of
Salafi jihadists and other extremist groups are a cause
for concern, not only in Gaza but also in neighbouring
Sinai, where there are reports of their active support of
militants on the Egyptian side of the border.
On 18 July, six cars were blown up in Gaza City.
Palestinian Salafist militants launched a rocket at
Israel on 16 July, which exploded in an open area near
Ashkelon. In response, Israel conducted four airstrikes
against militant infrastructure targets in Gaza.
Militants also fired a rocket from the Sinai on 3 July,
which landed in Israel close to the Egyptian border. All

S/PV.7490

of that highlights the potential for violence to expand
beyond the borders of the Sinai.
The Secretary-General calls upon all actors in Gaza
to provide information as to the possible whereabouts
and conditions of two Israeli civilians who entered Gaza
sometime over the past year and remain unaccounted
for, as well as to take prompt action to facilitate their
safe return to their families.
Those, and other incidents, underscore the fragile
dynamics within Gaza that, without positive change,
will continue to provide fertile ground for extremism
to flourish.
Last month, the Palestinian Authority and Israel
reached a welcome agreement on a new mechanism to
allow Palestinians in Gaza access to needed construction
material for the reconstruction of fully destroyed
homes and for new construction. Close to 700 families
have already been cleared, and over 120 of them have
purchased the required construction materials. Given
that development, I take this opportunity to once again
urge donors to fulfil their pledges, in particular those
allocated to housing construction and to addressing
Gaza’s urgent energy and water needs.
I also welcome the recent agreement to install an
additional scanner for containers at the Kerem Shalom
crossing. Thiat should enable a substantial increase in
exports from, and imports into, Gaza.
The lifting of the Gaza closures within the
framework of resolution 1860 (2009) remains an
important objective for the United Nations. Absent that,
the United Nations continues to work with Israeli and
Palestinian authorities to support vital efforts to rebuild
the lives of people in Gaza.
Turning to the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
while the frequency of security incidents decreased as
compared with last month, the situation remained tense.
Israeli security forces conducted some 186 search-andarrest operations, resulting in the arrest of some 300
Palestinians. Meanwhile, Palestinian security forces
also arrested more than 100 people in the West Bank. I
continue to be concerned by the situation of Palestinian
prisoners held in Israel, including those on hunger
strike. All those held in administrative detention should
be promptly charged and tried in a court of law, or
released without delay.
In total, during the reporting period 50 Palestinians
were injured and four were shot and killed by Israeli

15-228823/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

security forces, including two at checkpoints near
Nablus and Ramallah. Two members of the Israeli
security forces were stabbed and injured, one seriously.
Clashes between Palestinians and Israeli civilians in the
West Bank also continued, resulting in the death of one
Israeli and injury to eight Israelis and nine Palestinians,
including one child.
Just as such incidents contribute to the lack of hope
and anger, which feed a continuing cycle of violence
and highlight the imperative to seek a resolution to the
conflict, so too do the demolitions and displacement
in the West Bank. On 12 July, Israel announced that it
would seek to execute demolition orders of structures in
the Palestinian village of Susiya, in Area C. That comes
ahead of a hearing scheduled for 3 August on a directly
related planning-approval process. The SecretaryGeneral joins the United States and the European
Union in expressing deep concern about the demolition
and displacement plans for Susiya. My Deputy Special
Coordinator visited the community earlier today. We
hope that the ongoing dialogue between the authorities
and the herding community will protect the rights of
the persons affected.
Against that backdrop, intra-Palestinian talks
to form a national unity Government have faltered. I
note the efforts of President Abbas and Prime Minister
Hamdallah to reshuffle the current Government, and
call on them to proceed without delay to appointing the
new ministers. The reshuffling comes at a particularly
sensitive time, as the Palestinian Authority faces
significant financial challenges — including a 2015
budget deficit of approximately $500 million in 2015.
That gap cannot be closed through fiscal measures
alone, and I urge donors to rapidly scale up their direct
budget support. In that respect, it is also important to
revive the functioning of the Israeli-Palestinian joint
economic committee.
While it is first and foremost up to the Palestinian
authorities to take the lead, the United Nations stands
ready to support the President, the Government and all
factions in their efforts to reunite the West Bank and
Gaza, in line with the intra-Palestinian unity agreement
of 23 April 2014. Palestine is one, and the United Nations
will work determinedly to advance unity through its
legitimate institutions.
Allow me to briefly turn to the rest of the region
and to note that the United Nations broad engagement
continued during the reporting period. Following

4/65

23/07/2015

consultations with Syrian, regional and international
parties, next week the Secretary-General and his
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura will brief the
Security Council on their recommendations for moving
the political track forward.
In Yemen, Special Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed is extending his good offices to all parties to
restart negotiations on a political transition.
In Libya, the United Nations remains engaged
in facilitating talks aimed at ending the current
political and security crisis through the formation of a
Government of national accord.
In Iraq, the United Nations is working to promote
political dialogue in the hopes of encouraging national
reconciliation.
In Lebanon, concerns are growing that political
differences are preventing the effective functioning
of State institutions, despite Prime Minister Salam’s
commendable efforts to run the Government. There
has been no progress in efforts to end the presidential
vacuum. The Secretary-General’s Special Coordinator
for Lebanon, Sigrid Kaag, continues to urge Lebanon’s
leaders to put the country’s stability and national
interests ahead of partisan politics and elect a President
without further delay.
Meanwhile, the situation along the Lebanese border
with Syria has remained stable, with the Lebanese
Armed Forces continuing their operations to prevent
the infiltration of armed extremist groups from Syria.
In the south, the situation along the Blue Line has
remained generally calm, despite almost daily Israeli
overflights over Lebanese territory. We encourage both
parties to continue to make effective use of the liaison
and coordination mechanisms of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon.
I am deeply concerned about the current
unprecedented financial crisis at the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). If the current $100 million gap is
not closed in the next weeks, there is a serious risk that
UNRWA schools — which educate 500,000 children
throughout the Middle East — will not open. That will
have grave implications for Palestinian refugee children
in Gaza, the West Bank, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria,
and for the stability and security of a region already in
turmoil. I urge donors to step up support for UNRWA
at this critical time.

15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Let me return to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
and to reiterate our collective resolve to prevent a
further deterioration of the situation, to uphold the twoState solution and to create the conditions for a return
to meaningful negotiations. Prime Minister Netanyahu
and President Abbas recently spoke and reaffirmed
their desire for peace. That is a welcome sign, but
words need to be translated into concrete and sustained
actions on the ground.
Let me also be abundantly clear: measures
undertaken to improve the situation must not be
considered an end unto themselves, but part of a
broader political framework with the goal of achieving
a final-status agreement. Now is the time to act
decisively to reverse the growing perception that the
two-State solution is on life support and that it is slowly
dying a death by a thousand cuts.
A comprehensive agreement will require committed
engagement with key Arab States, including through
the Arab Peace Initiative. The Secretary-General stands
ready to support both sides in order to overcome their
divisions and to rise to the challenge of forging a path
forward towards a peaceful future.
In conclusion, let me place on record my deep
appreciation for the support that the Security Council
and the Secretariat have given on the ground to the
excellent team of the Office of the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process.
I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome
Mr. Robert Piper of Australia as the new Deputy
Special Coordinator, who will also serve as the Resident
Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator for the
Occupied Palestinian Territory.
The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for a very
comprehensive, clear and constructive briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I congratulate New
Zealand on its presidency of the Security Council and
I thank you, Minister for Foreign Affairs McCully,
for presiding over this important debate, which is a
reflection of his country’s responsible, principled
position vis-à-vis this issue and its commitment to
uphold the Security Council’s mandate to contribute to
international peace and security.
We also reiterate our deep appreciation to the
delegation of Malaysia for its skilled leadership of

S/PV.7490

the Council in June, including the critical debate on
children and armed conflict (see S/PV.7463), and also
express our appreciation for Malaysia’s efforts as Chair
of the Security Council Working Group on that topic.
I also thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his
briefing and his initial efforts in his important post.
We reaffirm our support for his mandate, as well as
our readiness to continue cooperation towards the
fulfilment of our common objectives, foremost among
them being to secure a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace.
Regrettably, we are no closer to that peace today than
we were when we met in the Chamber a year ago (see
S/PV.7222), when my delegation appealed desperately
for the Council’s intervention to halt Israel’s slaughter
of innocent Palestinian children, women and men and
the wanton destruction of homes, schools, hospitals
and vital civilian infrastructure, which terrorized
and traumatized the entire civilian population in the
Gaza Strip and left hundreds of thousands of lives and
entire communities shattered and in ruins. On this day,
23 July, a year ago, we informed the Council that the
death toll from Israel’s aggression had already reached
660 Palestinians and was rising. We alerted the Council
to the shocking fact that, even at that stage, two weeks
into the Israeli offensive, one third of the casualties
were children, more than half of them under 12 years
old, which exposed the brutality of the occupying force
and the false Israeli claims about respect for civilian
lives and international humanitarian law.
Those facts were later corroborated by the
Independent Commission of Inquiry appointed by the
Human Rights Council and by the Secretary-General’s
report on children and armed conflict (S/2015/409),
which confirmed that by the end of Israel’s assault
on Gaza the occupying forces had killed at least 551
children, ranging from week-old babies to 17-yearolds, and killed 299 women among the more than 2,251
Palestinians killed, the majority civilians. The reports
also confirmed that over 11,000 Palestinians were
injured, including 3,540 women and 3,436 children,
with injuries so severe owing to the lethal weaponry and
wide-impact explosives used by Israel that an estimated
10 per cent of the injured civilians will suffer life-long
disabilities. The Independent Commission of Inquiry
also found that Israel persisted with its onslaught even
after early knowledge of the high casualty figures,
indicating a deliberate decision on the part of the Israeli

15-228825/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Government and military officials to inflict such harm,
a fact also confirmed by the testimonies of numerous
Israeli soldiers instructed to kill without mercy anyone
they encountered in Gaza — man, woman or child.
Despite those facts, our pleas to the Council were
to no avail. One year since the horrific devastation
mercilessly and deliberately inflicted on Gaza by
Israel, the occupying Power, not a single Israeli official
or soldier has been held accountable for those crimes,
committed so wantonly before the eyes of the world,
the vast human and physical wounds remain unhealed,
and hopes are rapidly fading for any relief from that
appalling injustice.
Families remain traumatized by that indescribable
loss, including 1,500 children orphaned by the killing
of their mothers and fathers, and more than 110,000
people remain homeless, forcibly displaced by Israel’s
massive destruction of homes, and dependent on aid
for their survival. As Israel’s blockade continues in
collective punishment of Gaza’s 1.8 million Palestinians
and continues to obstruct reconstruction and recovery,
humanitarian conditions are worsening beyond
measure, as unemployment and food insecurity are
rising to unprecedented levels and become ever more
difficult to alleviate as donor support becomes harder
to secure. At this time, I must draw attention to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which provides
assistance to at least 70 per cent of Gaza’s population,
the majority of whom are Palestine refugees. The
Agency now faces the most severe funding crisis since
it began operations, 65 years ago, threatening not only
its vital services in Palestine but also in Syria, Lebanon
and Jordan at a precarious time in the region. We
appeal for international support for UNRWA’s essential
humanitarian work and stabilizing presence as a matter
of urgency, and we appeal to the United Nations to act
immediately to address the crisis.
While Gaza is being suffocated and dehumanized,
the rest of occupied Palestine continues to be ravaged
by Israel’s vicious settlement campaign, settler terror
and repression, the confiscation of Palestinian land, the
demolition of Palestinian homes and the construction of
Israeli settlements, the wall and related infrastructure
persist, in grave breach of international law, in violation
of Security Council resolutions, and in flagrant
disrespect of the authoritative International Court of
Justice advisory opinion on the Legal consequences of
the construction of a wall in the occupied Palestinian

6/65

23/07/2015

territory (see A/ES-10/273), handed down 11 years
ago. The dire situation now faced by Palestinians in
Khirbet Susiya in the southern hills of Al-Khalil, who
are being threatened with the destruction of their entire
community and forced displacement, as extremist
settlers and illegal settlements further encroach on
their land and rights, as well as the plans for the forced
transfer of thousands of Palestinian Bedouins from
areas in and around occupied East Jerusalem, are just
two examples of that rabid Israeli colonization.
The Israeli occupying forces also continue to cause
civilian casualties through military raids and attacks
on protesters. The killing of 17-year-old Mohammed
Al-Kasbah, who was shot by Israeli soldiers in early
July at the Qalandiya checkpoint, brought unbearable
tragedy to yet another Palestinian family, this time to
a family that had already lost two of their other young
sons, Samer, age 15, and Yasser, age 11, to the brutality
of the occupation. Moreover, not a single day passes
where Palestinian civilians are not intimidated, arrested
and detained, including children, adding to the nearly
6,000 illegally imprisoned by Israel under inhumane
conditions and subjected to constant abuse and torture.
The plight of our prisoners and detainees has again
been highlighted by the 55-day hunger strike of Khader
Adnan, who was recently released from detention,
only to be detained immediately after his release in a
vulgar display of Israel’s total control of every aspect
of Palestinian life.
Israel launched its war in the summer of 2014 and,
bearing in mind all the illegal actions perpetrated
thereafter, it had intentionally aimed to sabotage the
prospects for peace, by intensifying its collective
punishment of the Palestinian people and stripping
them of any hope for an end to the cruel occupation
and for the realization of their inalienable rights and
national aspirations.
That is why — despite the global calls for a just
solution based on two States within the pre-1967
borders, despite the historic compromise made by
the Palestinian leadership more than a quarter of a
century ago, despite over two decades of negotiations
and despite the passage of more than 48 years since
the adoption of resolution 242 (1967) — the dangerous
political impasse continues and peace remains elusive.
That is the direct outcome of Israel’s illegal, combative
behaviour, by which it continues to deny the Palestinian
people their rights and to entrench its occupation in
violation of international law and all norms of morality

15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and decency. It is also a direct outcome of the Israeli
Government’s rejection of peace and its bad faith
and obstruction of all attempts to revive negotiations
based on clear and credible parameters rooted in
Security Council resolutions. In reality, it has not only
undermined the efforts to salvage the two-State solution
but is actively destroying it.
As a result, the humanitarian and security situation
continues on a downward spiral and tensions continue
to rise, threatening total destabilization, which we have
repeatedly drawn the Council’s attention to, in vain.
As the region experiences unprecedented turmoil and
extremism, imperiling entire States and endangering
international peace and security, we reiterate that
continuing destabilization poses grave risks that must
be averted. Human lives must be saved and the potential
of peace be restored.
While some believe that regional crises necessitate
turning away from Palestine to focus on other matters,
many also believe that solving the conflict now is
imperative for the future of the Middle East and
beyond. The latter rightly believes that a just, peaceful
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict — the core
of the Arab-Israeli conflict — would open doors for a
new era in the region — one of stability, cooperation
and collective action for our common goals and also
our common problems. The promise of the Arab Peace
Initiative, one of the most important peace initiatives
the region has ever witnessed, is at the centre of that
belief. Regrettably, that Initiative has never been
reciprocated by Israel, which has continued to distort
and reject it.
Yet the State of Palestine remains committed to
the pursuit of peace, committed to international law,
as reflected in our decision to accede to the core
humanitarian and human rights law instruments, as well
as to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, and committed to the purposes and principles of
the United Nations, whose resolutions we uphold and
for which we seek respect.
We insist that a just peace is the only remedy for the
conflict and the violence, deprivation and instability
it engenders. We firmly reject claims that “now is not
the right time” for a solution. The time is actually long
overdue.
In 2015, as we witness the distress and instability
in Palestine and the region as a whole, we do not
have the luxury to continue delaying peace. The

S/PV.7490

Palestinian people can no longer delay realization of
their fundamental human rights, which they have been
so wrongly denied, nor accept rationales asking them
to endure further violations, suffering and indignities,
while the occupying Power is placated and appeased,
not even held accountable for its most egregious crimes.
Palestine seeks peace and coexistence with Israel,
but that must be based on freedom and justice. That
requires a complete end to the foreign occupation and
the colonial, racist policies that have fueled it for nearly
half a century. International law and human rights, not
military might and violence, must be the core of that
peace. Interim solutions or other palliatives to ease
or manage the situation will not suffice. The plight
of the Palestinian people — from occupied Palestine
to our refugee camps in the region and especially in
Syria, where that catastrophic conflict has brought
death, destruction, starvation and displacement to
Palestinian refugees along with the Syrian people who
are suffering so gravely — is an existential crisis that
urgently demands a just solution.
We therefore reiterate our call on the Security
Council to uphold its Charter duties and to act now
to adopt a resolution aimed at breaking the political
impasse and ushering in the achievement of lasting
peace and security. In that regard, we continue to
welcome and support the French initiative and call on
Council members to move forward now on reaffirming
the parameters for peace, based on the internationally
recognized terms of reference enshrined in the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles and
the Arab Peace Initiative, as well as on a clear time frame
for an end to the Israeli occupation, with international
monitoring and support for the implementation of a
peace agreement.
The foundations for peace must be firmly set
before this opportunity is lost to us and the two-State
solution is relegated to the archives of history. Israel
must be compelled to cease all of its illegal policies and
measures, whether the blockade or aggression against
Gaza, or the colonization and de facto annexation of the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, or the collective
punishment of the Palestinian people, all must be halted
and compliance with the law must be demanded.
Also, Israel must be held responsible for its crimes.
We recall here the Independent Commission of Inquiry’s
findings on actions triggering criminal liability by
Israeli occupying forces, commanders and Government
leaders and the imperative of accountability. Peace and

15-228827/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

accountability are not mutually exclusive; both can and
must be pursued, for impunity will always obstruct
peace and peace cannot exist without justice.
The Security Council should heed the global calls
to fulfil its responsibilities, which were echoed in the
appeals made to Council members during the 20 July
Arria Formula meeting on the Gaza crisis, which was
co-chaired by Malaysia and Jordan and was the first
Arria Formula meeting on Palestine since 1997. That
meeting highlighted voices from the ground and calls
for redress of the unsustainable situation in Gaza,
underscoring that this crisis and underlying issues must
be addressed immediately to avert another explosion
and must be addressed as an integral part of the overall
efforts to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. We
note that we recognize the necessity for Palestinian
unity and assure the Council of our ongoing efforts
to achieve reconciliation and empower the national
consensus Government to fulfil its duties.
Significantly, the Arria Formula meeting also
reaffirmed the universal view that a continued failure
to achieve a just solution and the continued denial of
Palestinian rights, including of Palestine’s rightful
place among the community of nations, have severely
undermined international law and the international
system itself, including the credibility of the Security
Council. We therefore appeal again to the Council
and the international community to uphold the rule of
law and find the political will to achieve peace and to
make it a living reality that will finally bring relief to
our long-suffering people, the region and the global
community.
Despite so many failures and setbacks, the
Palestinian people still look to the Security Council
to act with conscience to contribute to the attainment
of peace and the realization of their rights, including
to independence in their State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, on the basis of the 1967 borders,
stressing that the Palestinian demand for freedom is
non-negotiable and is a prerequisite for lasting peace
and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I should first like to
congratulate New Zealand for its able stewardship
of the Security Council this month. I thank Foreign
Minister McCully for being here today to preside
over this meeting, and I also wish to thank the United

8/65

23/07/2015

Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing today
and his ongoing efforts to help ease the situation in this
volatile region.
Ten years ago this month, Israel disengaged from
the Gaza Strip, and I would like to remind the Council
that we also dismantled four settlements in the West
Bank in order to show that there is a political horizon.
We removed thousands of Israeli families from their
homes, uprooted entire communities and withdrew
every unit of the Israeli Defence Forces. Not a single
Israeli civilian or soldier remained in Gaza.
We in Israel have always been told, including in
this prestigious Chamber, that the obstacles to peace
are the settlements and the Israeli presence in Judea and
Samaria. If only Israel would pull back, if only Israel
would leave the Palestinians to run their own affairs,
there would be peace. If Israel would only listen to the
international community, the border between Israel and
the Palestinians would be like the border between the
Netherlands and Belgium.
So we did.
Ten years after we withdrew from Gaza, the territory
we left has become a safe haven for terrorists. Hamas,
an internationally recognized terrorist organization,
has used and abused the people of Gaza to continue its
war against Israel. Apparently it did not get the memo
that an Israeli withdrawal was supposed to end the jihad
against its people. Since the disengagement, terrorist
groups have fired 15,000 rockets and mortars at Israeli
citizens. They have dug terror tunnels underneath the
border to attack Israeli towns and communities.
Yet, despite all of this, When Hamas joined the
Palestine Liberation Organization Government, the
UN gave its warm blessing. When Hamas refused to
adopt the Quartet principles and refused to recognize
Israel’s right to exist, the Council looked the other way.
And just recently, when Israel revealed to the world
that senior Hamas members Abdullah Kishta and Wa’al
Faraj collaborated with the Islamic State in Iraq and
Sham (ISIS) in northern Sinai to carry out a large-scale
attack on Egyptian military bases, not a single voice of
condemnation was heard from this Chamber.
To this day, Hamas refuses to accept the three
conditions of the international Quartet. It refuses
to recognize Israel, it refuses to abide by previous
agreements, and, obviously, it refuses to renounce
15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

violence. The Quartet, not Israel, established these
conditions, and Hamas flouts them.
Gaza was supposed to be a model of a stable,
self-governing society. Instead, it became the model
for lawlessness, violence and destabilization. Gaza
was supposed to be the pilot project for Palestinian
governance in the West Bank, but the pilot crashed the
plane.
Since then, a similar model has proliferated all
over the Middle East. From the Mediterranean to the
Caspian, States that we knew yesterday are no longer
here today, and others are on the verge of disappearing
tomorrow. We live in a time in which nation States are
disintegrating before our eyes. New political structures
have not been established, and bands of religious
zealots are rushing in to create new theocratic States
in this vacuum.
Iraq, Syria, Yemen and Libya no longer exist as we
knew them. Now we have the kingdom of Al-Qaida, the
republic of Jabhat Al-Nusra, Houthistan and, of course,
the Islamic State. This is not the Middle East we learned
about from our high-school geography teachers; those
borders are now unrecognizable. The Google map of
the region must be updated every day based on which
terror group seized control of which area during the
previous night.
In the Sinai peninsula, terrorists have declared war
on Egypt. Earlier this month, Ansar Beit al-Maqdis,
an ISIS branch in Egypt, carried out an attack on 15
Egyptian military positions in northern Sinai, killing
more than 70 Egyptians. Let it be clear: these groups
are not only looking to terrorize Egyptians, they are
trying to destabilize the entire region.
These emerging radical factions differ in their
ideologies, in their interests and in their goals, but they
all share one thing in common: they seek to impose
their radical religious beliefs on all who come under
their control. In the new lawless Middle East, there is
only one law — submit or die — and sometimes you are
not even given the choice.
A butterfly flutters its wings in one place and
causes a storm halfway around the world. When
the earth shakes in the Middle East, you can feel the
vibrations under your feet from Europe to Asia. In
one day last month, we witnessed terror attacks on
three continents — a day of bloodshed during which
terrorists murdered 65 innocent people in Tunisia, in
Kuwait and in France.

S/PV.7490

Many in the international community were captive
to their dreams of a new Middle East, but we can no
longer just hit the snooze button. It is time to wake up.
We are, all of us, engaged in a large-scale war over
the future of the Middle East and the rest of the world.
What will our region look like? Will it progress to an
era of democracy and human rights or regress to a
collection of fundamentalist States? Which countries
will remain standing? Will it be the countries we have
known for a century? Or will much of the Middle East
become known simply as the United Islamic Empire?
The trends are against us. If we do not wake up in time,
we will get all the answers wrong.
Israel does not have the luxury of waiting for the
rest of the world to wake up. Before the West had to
deal with the Islamic State halfway around the world,
Israel had to deal with the Hamas terror State on our
doorstep. It is now exactly one year since Operation
Protective Edge. One year ago, Israel was forced to
protect its people after Hamas terrorists kidnapped
and killed three Israeli youths, launched hundreds of
rockets and mortars at Israel, and rejected or violated
every truce offered to the parties.
The Israeli Defence Forces faced a cruel and
cynical enemy that knows no red lines and that has
violated every code of morality the civilized world
holds dear. Hamas launched its indiscriminate attacks
from residential areas that it had turned into military
staging grounds. Hospitals, schools and United Nations
facilities were used as weapons depots, playgrounds
were used as launching pads, and innocent children
were used as human shields. Firing rockets on civilians
from behind civilians is a double war crime, and the
international community should say so loud and clear.
While the rockets constituted terror from above,
Hamas also sought to unleash terror from below. In
Gaza, there is no money to rebuild hospitals or to pay
teachers, but there is a lot of money to dig and expand
terror tunnels. When Hamas finishes its work, Gaza
will be the first city in the world to have a modern
infrastructure underground before having a basic
infrastructure aboveground.
As we sit here today, one year after last summer’s
conflict, we must ask: what has really changed? We can
start answering the question by looking at the Hamas
military parade in Gaza this month, where Hamas
publicly displayed two newly developed rockets. For
anyone who did not get the message, Hamas explained
that “until now the enemy has only seen a small part

15-228829/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of our true power”. Hamas has intensified its efforts
to repair its network of terror tunnels and smuggle,
stockpile and develop new weapons.
A year after the operation, the United Nations has
done nothing to weaken Hamas, but plenty to criticize
Israel. Two weeks ago, the United Nations Human
Rights Council’s Commission of Inquiry published
its report on last summer’s conflict. Let me give the
Council an example of how professional, insightful and
thorough this report was. The authors of the report said,
“The Commission cannot conclusively determine
the intent of Palestinian armed groups with regard
to the construction and use of these tunnels.”
Would I have a suggestion? Maybe these tunnels
were intended to be the new metro system in Gaza. In
that case, as the previous Ambassador to the Court of
St. James, I give Council members a tip: do not forget
to mind the gap. Perhaps the United Nations is simply
suffering from a severe case of tunnel vision. After
all, this is the same United Nations that appointed
as the head of the Commission William Schabas, the
law professor who conveniently forgot to mention his
prior paid consulting job with the Palestine Liberation
Organization.
I am holding in my hands a 200-page-long Israeli
report that details the systematic and widespread
atrocities committed by Hamas and analyses Israel’s
military response. If someone at the United Nations had
read this report, he or she would have had a broader
perspective on the threat Israel faces and recognized
Hamas for what it really is — an internationally
recognized terrorist organization. When Palestinians
in the Yarmouk refugee camp were massacred by ISIS
and the Secretary-General said, “the refugee camp is
beginning to resemble a death camp”, we did not hear
any call for a commission of inquiry from the Human
Rights Council.
The United Nations prides itself on taking a balanced
approach to international affairs. That is very interesting.
Saudi Arabia has for months been carrying out massive
and indiscriminate air strikes in Yemen. Those strikes
have hit United Nations facilities, hospitals, schools and
civilian neighbourhoods and left entire families dead,
yet — surprise, surprise — no commission of inquiry,
no board of inquiry. This is the same United Nations
that made it clear to us — Israel — that it is standard
operating procedure to automatically establish a board
of inquiry any time a United Nations facility is hit.

10/65

23/07/2015

That is a balanced approach indeed. When it comes
to investigating the results of war and conflict, it seems
the United Nations believes, to paraphrase George
Orwell, that all people are equal, but some people are
more equal than others.
Israel’s struggle against the Hamas rulers of Gaza
does not prevent us from playing a key role in helping
the people of Gaza. Hundreds of trucks enter Gaza every
day, carrying thousands of tons of food, humanitarian
aid, medicine and more, all without restrictions. Since
October 2014, Israel has supplied Gaza with 1.3 million
tons of construction material.
While Israel is fully committed to the
implementation of the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism
and will continue to cooperate with the United Nations
in this important mission, the Palestinian Authority
(PA) not only refrains from taking part in the effort,
but it puts obstacles in the way of those who do so. The
PA is quick to condemn Israel at the United Nations,
but on the ground it refuses to assume responsibility
for the people of Gaza. The Palestinian Authority has
no authority over the Gaza Strip, and apparently it does
not want any.
Last September, the Security Council tried to adopt
a draft resolution to address the situation in Gaza. While
Israel agreed to the draft resolution, the Palestinian
President dragged his feet, obstructed the process and
eventually rejected the proposition altogether. The
draft resolution would have restored PA governance
over the people of Gaza, granted the PA control over
the crossings into Gaza and disarmed Hamas. The draft
resolution would have given control over Gaza back to
the PA, but Mahmoud Abbas rejected it.
The Palestinian leadership is apparently too busy
settling scores with political rivals in the PA to worry
about what happens in Gaza. Just look at how Abbas
treated the former Prime Minister of the Palestinian
Authority, Salaam Fayyad — a Palestinian leader
esteemed and respected in the international community.
Abbas seized the funds of Fayyad’s non-governmental
organization, Tomorrow for Social Development,
and froze his accounts. The Palestinian Authority
never misses an opportunity to avoid responsibility.
The international community should not shy away
from criticizing the PA and pushing it to assume
responsibility.
Avoiding responsibility has its price. Last month,
there were numerous terror attacks, including two that

15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

were fatal. Dani Gonen and Malachi Rosenfeld were
shot and killed by Palestinian terrorists as they went
about their daily lives. May their memory be a blessing.
Those murderous attacks are just part of an increase
in the terror attacks we have witnessed recently. Yet
the leadership of the PA remains silent and fails to
condemn the murder of innocent people.
Three days ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2231 (2015), which endorses the nuclear
agreement with Iran. The agreement is bad for Israel,
bad for the region, and bad for the world. It is a historic
mistake that brings Iran closer to achieving its 30-year
goal of attaining nuclear weapons and fuels its drive for
imperial expansion. The resolution took the first step to
lift the sanctions without waiting to see if Iran complies
with even one single obligation in the agreement.
What makes the international community so sure
that Iran will live up to its end of the bargain? When
the nuclear deal was struck with North Korea, good
and well-intentioned people believed that it would
prevent North Korea from developing nuclear weapons.
Sometimes, good intentions lead to wishful thinking.
Iran is the source of instability in the Middle East.
In Syria, Lebanon, Yemen, Iraq and other countries,
Iran has deployed its Revolutionary Guards in order to
expand its empire. Iran is also the godfather of terror
around the world. Countries from Bulgaria to Argentina
have experienced the horror of Iranian terror at first
hand. For years, Iran has armed and financed Hizbullah
in Lebanon and Hamas in Gaza — two groups that
make clear their goal of wiping Israel off the map.
Many members of the Security Council described
the agreement as the opening of a new chapter. I am
sorry to ruin a good book, but Iran’s supreme leader,
Ayatollah Khamenei, has a different story to tell.
Council members may have signed a deal with the
poster boys of Iran — Zarif and Rouhani — but in
Iran the Ayatollah and his Revolutionary Guards are
the ones calling the shots. Khamenei declared that
even after the agreement is signed, Iran will continue
to support terrorists in the Middle East and around the
world. If that was not clear enough, listen to what Iran’s
Deputy Foreign Minister had to say two days ago:
“We have told the P5+1 ... that we will supply arms
to anyone and anywhere ... and will import weapons
from anywhere we want ... we clarified this point
during the negotiations.”

S/PV.7490

It is worth noting the fact that Israel and many
States in the Arab world share grave concerns over the
implications of the agreement on the stability of the
Middle East. When Israel and the Arab world share
the same concerns, the world should pay attention.
Instead of contributing to a solution in our region, this
agreement has strengthened the source of the problem;
it has given the source of the problem, Iran, the money
to act on the basis of its destructive ideology and the
time and opportunity to develop a nuclear arsenal.
The agreement grants Iran not one, but two paths to
the bomb: it can acquire the bomb by cheating, or by
keeping the deal for 10 years, and then assembling its
bomb immediately. And 10 years go by in the blink of
an eye.
Under the terms of the agreement, Iran may
continue significant enrichment not needed for civilian
use, as well as continue research and development
on advanced centrifuges that will significantly
reduce the break-out time for a bomb. Enforcement
is largely dependent on Iran’s goodwill: inspections
are not “anywhere, any time”. The deal gives Iran the
ability to delay inspections of undeclared sites for 24
days — enough time to hide a smoking gun; and there
are insufficient limitations on Iran’s weaponization
activities. Iran already has the enrichment capability
to produce a bomb and the means for suitable delivery:
without limitations on weaponization, the way is paved
for Iran to assemble a bomb.
Now, in the summer of 2015, the countdown to
Iran’s becoming a threshold nuclear State has begun.
In five years, the embargo against conventional
weapons will end. In eight years, it can acquire missile
technology; in 10 years, unlimited centrifuges. That
is not disarmament. It is a timetable for Iran to build
nuclear weapons. In future years, the consequences
of that mistake will become clear to everyone, but for
Israel tomorrow is already too late.
Ten years ago, Israel took a significant step with its
disengagement from Gaza. A decade later, in the light
of regional developments, the international community
must take steps of its own. It must disengage from
illusions, from its constant bias against Israel and
from murderous terror groups. The time has come to
disengage from old habits, but engage with the values
that we all cherish.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of New
Zealand.

15-2288211/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Right across the Middle East, grave issues continue
to demand the Council’s attention. The humanitarian
situation in Yemen continues to deteriorate. The civil
war in Syria rages on. In Iraq, sectarian divides provide
space for groups like the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant to prosper. A basis for lasting peace between
Israelis and Palestinians remains elusive.
Against that difficult background, this week is also
an apt moment to reflect on positive developments in the
region. The Security Council’s adoption of resolution
2231 (2015), on Monday, following years of negotiation
among the permanent, the European Union and Germany
and Iran, represents a major victory for diplomacy.
While much work remains to implement the agreement,
and even more to build sustained trust between Iran and
the international community, reaching an agreement at
all represents a huge achievement. Great credit is due to
those most directly involved. The parties’ willingness
to commit to political solutions and exercise political
courage in the face of significant challenges lies at the
heart of that diplomatic achievement.
The question now is whether the same political
courage and commitment can be brought to bear on
finding political solutions to the other issues afflicting
the region. Can stakeholders cooperate to end the
conflicts in Syria, Iraq or Yemen, or to create a pathway
towards a two-State solution for Israel and Palestine?
I believe the answers must be, “Yes”. But the burden
of those expectations must not sit with those nations
alone. The Council must face up to its responsibilities;
it must show some political courage of its own.
We all know that the situation in Syria has remained
deadlocked for too long. The region cannot afford for
the conflict to continue — nor can the Council, for its
credibility is at stake. The human cost of the conflict
is unacceptable and unsustainable. We welcome the
Special Envoy for Syria’s efforts and look forward to
hearing more from him next week. But New Zealand
believes that the Secretary-General’s good offices
alone cannot broker a political solution in Syria. Key
players in the region and those on the Council need to
recognize their responsibilities to do so.
In Yemen, the humanitarian situation continues
to deteriorate alarmingly. The failure of the United
Nations-convened talks in Geneva to reach agreement,
followed by the failure represented by the recent
humanitarian hiatus, have had immediate impacts.
They risk undermining the Council’s confidence in the
commitment of the parties to reach a political solution.
12/65

23/07/2015

Again, we look forward to hearing from United Nations
Special Envoy for Yemen Ahmed about prospects for
progress. Above all, we need to find a way to stop the
fighting in order to address the massive humanitarian
needs.
We are mindful that Iraq is facing ongoing challenges
on a number of fronts. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s request for a strategic assessment of how the
United Nations can extend support to Iraq. We believe
the Government’s focus on further strengthening
national reconciliation efforts is essential.
In Libya, the recent initialling of the Libyan political
agreement by the Tobruk-based Libyan Government
and a significant number of Libyan factions represents
an important first step in what we hope will be a long
journey towards a lasting Libyan peace. We now urge
all members of the Tripoli-based General National
Congress to stand on the right side of history: to fully
commit to the Libyan political process and initial the
agreement. There must also be consequences for those
who decline to do so.
New Zealand has expressed its views on the Middle
East peace process in this Chamber since January.
The status quo is unsustainable and doing nothing
is not viable. To that end, the Middle East Quartet’s
re-engagement in capitals on that issue in recent
weeks is encouraging. The Security Council must also
reengage. New Zealand has stated clearly that it sees a
window of opportunity in the latter part of this year,
when the Council should create a return pathway to the
negotiating table and support the parties once they are
there. That time is now close at hand.
Therefore, in this month’s Middle East debate, the
Council can reflect on a truly significant milestone on
the Iran nuclear issue — the result of patient diplomacy
and a commitment by all parties to reaching a political
solution to settle differences. Those very same qualities
urgently need to be applied to the other pressing
challenges in the region. My country, New Zealand,
believes that the Council has a responsibility to settle
for nothing less.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Foreign Minister McCully for convening this meeting,
and Special Coordinator Mladenov for his informative
briefing and for all his essential work.

15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

When the Security Council convenes every
three months for an open debate on the Middle East,
our discussion inevitably returns to a similar set of
themes. They are the gut-wrenching and ever-growing
humanitarian catastrophe in Syria; the urgent need
to breathe new life into the efforts to achieve a twoState solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict; and
the importance of finding political solutions to those
profound challenges, which have an impact far beyond
the borders of any one country, or even the region.
The longer those conflicts drag on, the greater the
humanitarian consequences that must be addressed,
and the deepening humanitarian crises exacerbate the
conditions in which enmity and violence thrive, making
it even harder to reach those durable political solutions.
That has been the pattern in Syria. This month we
cross the calamitous threshold of 4 million refugees
from the conflict, making Syria the largest refugee
crisis in a quarter-century. Another 7.6 million Syrians
have been displaced within the country’s borders, and
approximately half of all Syrians, 12.2 million people,
need humanitarian assistance. Yet the international
community is not just failing to keep pace with the
urgent needs of this population, we are falling further
and further behind. Just a quarter of the 2015 United
Nations appeal for Syria has been funded — one quarter,
for the greatest humanitarian crisis in a generation. The
shortfall has immediate and profound consequences
for Syrians in need. As a result of the funding gap,
the World Food Programme has been forced to cut its
food assistance for more than 5.5 million Syrians, and
750,000 Syrian refugee children are not in school. The
shortfall also has considerable repercussions for Syria’s
neighbours, which have shown immense generosity and
compassion in taking in millions of Syrians, and whose
Governments and communities are left to fill in the
gaps when the international community fails to step up.
As we have said all along, this humanitarian crisis is
man-made. It is fuelled by the widespread atrocities of a
regime, seemingly unsatisfied by the carnage wrought
by its barrel bombs and use of chemical weapons, that is
now dropping entire Dumpsters filled with explosives
on neighbourhoods, and that did not even suspend its
bombings on the celebratory holiday of Eid Al-Fitr. As
one resident of Aleppo told a reporter, “Here, Eid means
Assad’s bombs”. According to recent reporting, when
residents fled an upsurge in fighting in the city of Dar’a
in late June, the regime expanded its aerial bombing to
target the open fields and villages where civilians took
shelter. At least four hospitals in the villages where

S/PV.7490

civilians fled were hit by aerial bombs, including one
strike that reportedly killed five children in a hospital
in the village of Taibeh. A doctor who leads a makeshift
12-bed clinic in Idlib province described the horror that
followed air strikes on a nearby town on 4 June. More
than 130 wounded, many of them children, arrived
within hours. The doctor said,
“Bodies were everywhere — on the tables, in the
hallways, on the floor. The floor was full of blood.
Medical staff and volunteers picked their way
between the wounded, doing what they could.”
Overwhelmed and able to provide only basic
treatment, the clinic had to turn away 50 people. The
doctor said, “The only choice we have is to replenish
our supplies, gather our hopes and prepare for the next
tragedy”.
The humanitarian crisis is also fuelled by the terror
of violent extremist groups such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which in May released
a video of children executing 25 soldiers in Palmyra,
and which, just last week, posted footage of a child
decapitating a Syrian army captain. A 14-year-old
Yazidi boy who was abducted by ISIL and forced into
one of their so-called cub training camps, designed to
indoctrinate children as young as 4 or 5 years old, said
that he and more than 100 other child recruits were
given dolls on which to practice beheadings. In Dayr az
Zawr, ISIL recently beheaded women for the first time,
for the alleged crime of sorcery.
We must do more than name these challenges and
call for them to be addressed. Instead, it is on us to
come up with solutions that are pragmatic, principled
and effective. For example, while it is important to call
on Syria’s neighbours to keep their borders open to the
Syrians fleeing violence and persecution — thousands
of whom are trapped at the border and struggling to
survive — we also have a responsibility to help those
neighbouring countries shoulder the immense costs of
hosting massive refugee populations. We must condemn
every use of chemical weapons in Syria, but also develop
a way of identifying those who perpetrate, organize,
sponsor or otherwise have a hand in such attacks, as the
proposed joint investigative mechanism of the United
Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons would do, so that those responsible
can one day be held accountable. And after two months
of consultations with stakeholders, the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura, continues
to work diligently to create a path towards a resolution

15-2288213/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of Syria’s crisis. His efforts deserve the Council’s full
support.
In the Israeli-Palestinian context, we risk falling into
a similar pattern, especially with regard to rebuilding
Gaza. Only 28 per cent of the funds pledged for Gaza’s
recovery at the Cairo conference in October have been
disbursed. That means that around $2.5 billion that
was committed to assisting the people of Gaza nine
months ago has not materialized. As has been said, we
are seeing a similarly profound gap in funding for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which currently
has a more than $100 million shortfall. UNRWA
officials say — and we have heard the same thing again
today — that if the shortfall is not met they will be
forced to close its more than 700 schools, which serve
some 500,000 students, nearly half of them in Gaza.
Countries concerned about the humanitarian situation
in Gaza must follow through on their commitments
to the people who live there, and do their part to fill
UNRWA’s significant budget deficit. The United States
has disbursed 95 per cent of the $400 million we
pledged at the Cairo conference, and we provided more
than $398 million to UNRWA in 2014, more than any
other bilateral donor.
Of course, it has to be said that addressing Gaza’s
immediate humanitarian needs deals with the symptoms
of conflict but not the root causes. We continue to
believe that achieving a two-State solution through
negotiations remains the best path forward, not only
for resolving many of the issues in Gaza but also for
Israel’s security, Palestinian aspirations and security,
and regional stability. We continue to look to the Israeli
Government and the Palestinians to demonstrate,
through policies and actions, a genuine commitment to
a two-State solution. Only then can trust be rebuilt and
a cycle of escalation avoided in the future.
In conclusion, on Monday the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2231 (2015), endorsing the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. If implemented, the
deal would cut off all pathways for the Islamic Republic
of Iran to develop the fissile material required for
a nuclear weapon, while putting in place a rigorous
inspection and transparency regime for verifying Iran’s
compliance. The true measure of the deal, of course,
will be in its implementation. But also important, for
the purposes of this debate and the Security Council
in general, is what the Plan of Action tells us about
how to tackle some of the world’s most seemingly

14/65

23/07/2015

intractable problems. The first thing it tells us is about
persistence. The deal was reached after two years of
talks and gruelling negotiations between the P5+1
nations, the European Union and Iran. The second is
pragmatism. The deal does not tackle every concern
we have about Iran’s destabilizing actions, but rather
focuses on the gravest single threat to the region. The
third is enforceability. The Plan of Action does not trust
that Iran is not pursuing a nuclear-weapons programme;
it puts in place rigorous verification measures that
have the force of a unified international community
behind them. The Security Council should take it as
its challenge to apply those lessons to the other serious
crises facing the region.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for presiding over
this important meeting, and to thank Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing today and his efforts in general.
The prospects in our region are dire. We are faced
with challenges that are complicated, interlinked and
unprecedented in their variety and extent. People in
the region suffer daily from the repercussions of longstanding crises and conflicts. A failure to deal with their
root causes will unquestionably make them worse and
feed the sources of terrorism and extremism in a way
that is a threat to the entire world. The international
community must not waste time. The most recent
détente regarding some of the issues in the region, and
the international cooperation accompanying it, must
be expanded on in order to launch a wider and more
comprehensive dialogue on all the controversial issues
in the region and to resolve the Palestinian question,
which is at the core of the conflict in the Middle East.
Peace is not just a choice we call for over and over;
it is the only way. We must work to create the conditions
for the resumption of serious and comprehensive
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians, eliminate
the obstacles that stand in the way of such negotiations,
entrench the two-State solution — creating a fully
sovereign, independent Palestinian State on national
Palestinian soil, along the lines of 4 June 1967 and with
East Jerusalem as its capital — as well as to ensure
security and safety for all the peoples and States of the
region.
Jordan has major genuine direct national interests
in achieving peace. Direct negotiations that are both
serious and commited, with a set time frame towards the
two-State solution, must be resumed. Comprehensive
peace must be achieved. And all fundamental
15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

issues — Jerusalem, refugees, security, borders, water
and others — must be addressed in accordance with
the international terms of reference, international law
and the Arab Peace Initiative in all its elements, so
as to achieve vital Jordanian interests related to those
matters. Such negotiations must be accompanied by a
serious commitment, in words and deeds, to avoid any
unilateral measures that may threaten or prejudice the
results of the negotiations. That includes settlement
activity, which the entire world agrees is illegal, as
well as the forced expulsion of Palestinians and the
demolition of their homes and confiscation of their
land.
As a member of the Security Council, Chair of
the Ministerial Council of the League of Arab States
and as a member of the Arab ministerial committee on
negotiation and contact with major Powers, Jordan is
committed to resuming serious negotiations between
Israelis and Palestinians to achieve and international
agreement on a framework for negotiations through
every possible means.
The United Nations and regional and international
parties must improve all facets of the lives of
Palestinians. They must take the necessary steps on the
ground to support the Palestinian economy — whether
by investing in the private sector, supporting the rule of
law or facilitating the movement of people and goods.
Jordan calls on the international community to put an
end to the exacerbation of the social, economic and
humanitarian suffering in the Gaza Strip, which is part
and parcel of the future Palestinian State. The Israeli
siege on the Gaza Strip must be lifted, and reconstruction
must be revitalized. We call on the international donor
community to support the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) to fulfil its mandate — in the Gaza Strip,
the West Bank and, indeed, the countries that host
Palestinian refugees. UNRWA faces an unprecedented
financial shortfall, about which we have repeatedly
warned. That shortfall will lead to reduced the services
provided by the Agency, in particular to Jordan, which
hosts the largest number of Palestinian refugees.
The Middle East region is known for its conflicts
and instability. However, we know full well that our
region is very rich in resources. Our young people
want to live in security and to enjoy well-being. They
want to preserve their identity and historic and cultural
background. The international community must work

S/PV.7490

to achieve comprehensive peace in the region and a
solution to the Palestinian question.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join colleagues around
the table, Sir, in warmly welcoming you to the Security
Council today. On behalf of my delegation, I thank you
for convening and presiding over this meeting. Your
presence here today clearly demonstrates the importance
New Zealand attaches to the subject of today’s open
debate. I also thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
for his briefing, which should strengthen our collective
resolve to put an end to the saga of the tragic plight of
the Palestinians.
On Monday, 20 July, Malaysia was honoured to
co-host with Jordan an Arria Formula meeting of the
Council to reflect on the situation in Gaza one year
after the Israeli military offensive. I wish to thank
Ambassador Dina Kawar of Jordan for co-chairing the
meeting, as well as Council members for their active
participation. The last such meeting was held in 1997.
Speakers at the meeting came from the academia and
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and did
not represent any political stripe. The thrust of their
presentation was on the dire humanitarian consequence.
The stories of victims whose misfortune it was to live on
the wrong side of the border tugged at the heartstrings
of the presenters and led them to tell stories of anguish
and despair, of continuous misfortune and suffering and
of broken dreams and hopes. I would like to share my
own reflections and impressions on the Arria Formula
meeting and some of the pertinent points raised, which
I hope will help us to provide a sharper focus on the
consequences of the Palestine-Israeli conflict in the
Council.
According to the World Bank, by May 2015
the continuing Israeli blockade had reduced Gaza’s
gross domestic product by 50 per cent. Meanwhile.
Meanwhile, the unemployment rate hovers at around
44 per cent, the highest in the world. According to the
NGOs, basic construction materials — such as gravel,
steel bars, cement, wood of certain thickness, along
with a wide range of spare parts, computer equipment
and vehicles — are classified as dual-use items, and
their importation into Gaza is severely restricted
by Israel. As of June 2015, less than 1 per cent of
construction materials required for reconstruction had
so far entered Gaza. Also according to them, since the
offensive not a single destroyed house has been rebuilt.
Awaiting construction are 12,580 housing units, while

15-2288215/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

17,817 families — roughly 100,000 persons — remain
displaced. At the current pace, it will take 19 years for
Gaza to be rebuilt. And there was recognition across
the board from Council members that the humanitarian
situation in Gaza was increasingly dire. Malaysia
subscribes to the view that the situation of hopelessness
only feeds strongly into the narratives of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant/Daesh in their recruitment
drives and represents a time bomb for the region unless
drastic and immediate action is taken to address it.
The situation in Gaza cannot be looked at in
isolation from the larger issue of the occupation and the
attempts by the occupying Power to cement its control
over the occupied Palestinian territory. The date of
9 July 2015 marked 11 years since the International
Court of Justice rendered its unanimous advisory
opinion on the Legal consequences of the construction
of a wall in the occupied Palestinian territory (see
A/ES-10/273) — on the illegality of the construction
of the Israeli separation, or apartheid, wall. We
remained dismayed and outraged, in equal measure,
that the Court’s opinion continues to be flagrantly
disregarded by Israel — not to mention the fact that to
date no reparations have been made to those affected
by the continuing construction of the system of walls
and fences. We condemn the Israeli Supreme Court’s
approval, earlier this month, of the construction of a
new section of the apartheid wall in southern Jerusalem.
At the same time, expansion of illegal Israeli
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory
continues in complete disregard of international law
and the overwhelming disapproval of the international
community. At a time when Muslims are rejoicing after
Ramadhan, Israeli authorities decided to demolish
more homes in a village in the south of Hebron. Israeli
security forces continue to use unnecessary force to
arrest or detain Palestinian children, some as young as
11. According to a recently released report by Human
Rights Watch, Israeli security forces have choked
children, thrown stun grenades at them and beaten them
in custody. Furthermore, detained children are being
tried before military courts — in gross violation of
international law and human rights law. Ninety-five per
cent of children released from Israeli jails have suffered
from torture and ill treatment during interrogation and
detention.
It defies logic and common sense to believe
that these are the actions of a sincere partner for
peace. The expansion of settlements, the continuing

16/65

23/07/2015

blockade against Gaza, the continued construction of
the apartheid wall and the systematic and continuing
denigration and subjugation of an entire people,
backed by overwhelming military superiority, reveal a
concerted attempt by Israel to alter the situation on the
ground — leading to a one-State reality.
We call upon the international community and
the Council to find the political will to halt that trend,
which drives Palestinians and Israelis further away
from a two-State solution and ensures that the flames of
enmity between the two sides will never die out. While
we remain committed to existing initiatives aimed at
solving the conflict, we believe that new initiatives such
as the proposed French draft resolution to reinvigorate
the Middle East peace process must be given serious
consideration.
At a time when the Middle East is rocked by raging
conflict from Syria to Yemen, driven to a certain extent
by extremist ideologies and ideologues, it is easy to
forget that, according to the key narratives propagated
by extremists and terrorists, such as Al-Qaida, Daesh
and their ilk, those groups claim that they are also
fighting against injustice and oppression in occupied
Palestine. Ensuring a just, comprehensive and final
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would
contribute tow depriving those groups, their supporters
and affiliates of such a false narrative.
In conclusion, Malaysia remains convinced that the
United Nations must continue to play a central role in
the achievement of a two-State solution for Palestine
and Israel. Malaysia continues to believe that the time
has come for the international community, and for the
Council in particular, to lead the way and end the status
quo in the occupied Palestinian territory. The Council
must find the collective will to shoulder its Charter
responsibilities in resolving this long-standing conflict,
which is as old as the Organization itself.
My delegation associates itself with the statements
to be delivered by the representatives of Iran and
Kuwait on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank New Zealand for having convened this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East. I would also
like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing.
The Middle East is at a critical juncture today,
characterized by the impasse in the Israeli-Palestinian
peace process, the continuation of the deadly conflict
15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in the Syrian Arab Republic, its deadly spillover into
other countries — most notably Lebanon — and the
conflict in Yemen.
Concerning the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, it
is glaringly apparent that without a final, just and
equitable solution to the conflict that ensures Israelis
their security and Palestinians an independent and
viable State, efforts to establish an effective and
sustainable peace in the Middle East will be illusory.
However, the issue of Palestine has been on the
United Nations agenda for more than six decades.
The Palestinian people see no hope resulting from
the efforts undertaken to put an end to the Israeli
occupation and give them a sovereign State within the
pre-June 1967 borders. The interminable negotiations
between the Israelis and Palestinians have worsened the
current impasse in the peace process of the last several
decades. The impasse also highlights the inability of
the international community to put the peace process
back on track. The status quo is becoming increasingly
intolerable, both for the Palestinian people and for
a large majority of the international community. The
impasse in the peace process — we need to call a spade
a spade — is attributable to Israel’s refusal to accept a
two-State solution, that is two States living side by side
in peace and security.
Of course, peace initiatives cannot succeed if
colonization activities continue on a large scale, if
the separation wall continues to facilitate the seizure
of land from the Palestinians, if international law and
the relevant Security Council resolutions continue to
be flouted by setting in concrete topographic changes
from one day to the next, if the collective punishment
and strident repression of the Palestinian people
continue to be commonplace, if the blockade against
Gaza continues, and if incursions by Israeli forces into
holy sites, such as the Al-Aqsa Mosque, continue to
increase. I could go on.
All of those actions only increase tensions and
weaken the possibilities for dialogue between the
two sides. The negotiation process therefore requires
an appropriate political environment and measures
that encourage mutual trust. To that end, it is the
international community’s responsibility to intensify
its efforts to help both parties take the difficult and
courageous decisions needed to engage — in good
faith — in dialogue. In that regard, the Security
Council must fully assume its responsibilities in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the

S/PV.7490

United Nations, the Madrid principles, the Quartet road
map, the Arab Peace Initiative and other agreements
recently reached between the parties, in order to achieve
a viable peace — one that will allow the Palestinian
people to live in an independent and sovereign State.
Accordingly, we urge both sides to resume dialogue,
and we commend any initiative that seeks to relaunch
the peace process by clearly establishing a framework
for future negotiations with a deadline, which would
put an end to the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territories.
Even without a negotiated solution, the accession
of the State of Palestine to international organizations,
treaties and conventions — with the ultimate aim being
its full membership in the United Nations — could be
an alternative and should be encouraged. At any event,
the two-State solution should, under no circumstances,
be called into question, because it is the only option
possible for satisfying the legitimate aspirations of
the Palestinians and for taking into account Israel’s
security concerns.
Concerning Syria, Chad is deeply concerned by the
continuing violence and worsening of the humanitarian
situation in that country. The situation has been
exacerbated by the use of chemical weapons and other
banned material, as well as by atrocities committed by
terrorist groups tied to the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria and Al-Qaida. We are horrified to see the degree
of self-destruction in Syria and to witness Syrians
killing one another with such violence. The number
of wounded and killed increases every day. Civilians
are being deliberately attacked in contravention of
international humanitarian and human rights law. The
various vital components of the infrastructure in that
country have been practically destroyed. We condemn
all violence — whatever its origin. The perpetrators of
human rights violations must be identified and brought
to justice. The scale of the violence, the inability of
the international community to facilitate a cessation
of hostilities between the parties and the absence
of a political perspective have further worsened the
suffering of the civilian population, who have been
abandoned to their sad destiny. Confronted with that
serious situation, the international community must
not sit idly by; it must take all steps necessary to
stop the violence and bring the parties back to direct
negotiations in order to arrive at a just and sustainable
political solution within the framework of the Geneva
communiqué issued on 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522,
annex). In that regard, we commend and support the

15-2288217/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

23/07/2015

untiring efforts of Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, to find a way out of
the crisis.

Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, and we encourage him to
continue his work to find a solution to the crisis.

With regard to Lebanon, we commend the efforts
of the Lebanese Government to fight incursions into
its territory by the terrorist groups Daesh and Jabhat
Al-Nusra. We call on all parties to the Syrian conflict
to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon. Moreover, we encourage all Lebanese actors
to dissociate themselves from the Syrian conflict and
to adhere to the Baabda Declaration of June 2012 so as
to protect Lebanon from repercussions of the regional
crisis.

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of New Zealand for coming and to congratulate
New Zealand on its presidency of the Council for July. I
would also like to thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.

Lebanon still has to suffer the collateral effects
of the Syrian crisis and faces a great many security,
humanitarian and economic challenges. The longstanding vacancy in the presidency is undermining
the stability of Lebanon and considerably hinders the
proper functioning of State institutions. The political
actors in Lebanon need to focus first and foremost
on stability and national interests and to demonstrate
flexibility to elect as soon as possible the country’s
President in order to better respond to the multiple
challenges with which the country is confronted. We
urge the international community to continue to assist
Lebanon to surmount its difficulties and to reinforce its
resilience in the region.
I conclude with the situation in Yemen. We are
concerned by the ongoing conflict between the proGovernment forces and the Houthi rebels and by the
ongoing degradation of the humanitarian situation.
In the absence of a genuine humanitarian truce, the
civilian population is trapped in the crossfire and is
lacking practically everything. We call on all parties to
the conflict to avoid the deliberate targeting of civilians
and the country’s vital infrastructure and to respect
international humanitarian law and human rights. We
also call on the parties to engage in good faith in an
inclusive dialogue so that they can reach a peaceful
and lasting solution to the crisis, in conformity with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 2216 (2015), and with the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
as well as with the outcome of the National Dialogue
Conference. From that point of view, the international
community should intensify its efforts to relaunch
the political process so as to avoid the erosion of the
legitimate institutions and the total foundering of the
country. We reiterate our support for the efforts of

18/65

In the Middle East, since last summer, and even
more since the recent visit of French Foreign Minister
Laurent Fabius to the region, France has been noting
with concern that a two-State solution is becoming
unrealizable. Day after day the continuance of the
illegal settlements threatens the possibility of a twoState solution. The political void fuels the risk of an
explosion, as illustrated by the proliferation of acts
of violence. The Security Council’s Arria Formula
meeting on July 20 recalled that in Gaza the blockade
perpetuates misery and despair, which strengthen
extremism and expose the territory to a regular
renewal of violence. If we want to end that negative
and dangerous cycle — dangerous for the people of the
region but also to international peace and security — it is
urgent to reconstitue political prospects for the creation
of a viable and independent Palestinian State, living in
peace and security alongside the State of Israel.
How to make progress? First, by recognizing
that the peace process as we have practised it for
more than 20 years is insufficient. It is illusory to
hope that the Israelis and the Palestinians can resume
negotiations and, above all, conclude them without
broad international support. France is determined to act
to promote a credible resumption of the peace process.
It concerns our security as well as the stability of the
Middle East.
For my country, determined action to promote
peace must be based on two pillars: the collective action
and mobilization of the international community, on
the one hand, and the definition of a framework for
negotiations, on the other hand. This is something to
which the Council should contribute. The international
community must act collectively. That does not call
into question either the historical role of the United
States nor the existence of the Quartet. Rather, it has
to do with involving more partners, beginning with
the European Union, the League of Arab States and,
especially, the permanent members of the Security
Council, in order to assist the parties to make, but also
to implement, the difficult compromises that will be
15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

necessary for peace. That is the essence of the proposal
to create an international support group, which has
received backing from most of our partners.
Nearly 50 years after the adoption of resolution
242 (1967), it is essential to put the Council back at
the heart of the conflict resolution — not to impose a
solution on the parties, but to establish the framework
for negotiations. When the time comes, it will be the
Council’s responsibility to adopt a consensual and
balanced draft resolution that will set the parameters of
the final status and define a timetable for negotiations.
We are currently working to assemble the conditions
for such an initiative, which will be meaningless
if we do not receive the guarantees that it will be
both widely supported and implemented. Without a
political perspective, there is a risk that the parties
will strengthen their unilateral strategies, which would
be in nobody’s interest. It is therefore time for the
international community to renew its efforts for peace.
In Syria, four years after the start of the uprising,
the human toll of the conflict is terrible, with more than
220,000 people killed, more than half of the population
refugees or displaced persons, 12.2 million people in
need of emergency humanitarian assistance, including
5.6 million children, and 440,000 persons besieged.
Indiscriminate attacks by the Syrian regime through
the daily use of barrel bombs are the main cause
of civilian casualties. Following the Arria Formula
meeting organized by France and Spain on the issue of
barrel bombs, it is essential that the Security Council
remains mobilized to put an end to the utilization of
that inhumane weapon. As Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura often reminds us, there is no possible solution
to the conflict as along as Bashar Al-Assad remains in
power. There is no future with an ultra-minority clan
that drowns the country in blood and continues to play
a disturbing and dangerous game with Daesh.
To arrive at a solution, France for a number of
months has been advocating a relaunch of the political
process in Syria. On 29 July Mr. De Mistura will
present to the Council the findings of consultations
carried out over the past two months. We hope that
those consultations will enable concrete proposals to
operationalize the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex)with a view to a genuine political transition.
Finally, the situation in Lebanon is a source of
concern on all fronts. The country is threatened by
the Syrian crisis. It is infiltrated by terrorist groups,
there is a massive presence of refugees, and Hizbullah

S/PV.7490

is involved in Syria. It is also threatened by tensions
between Hizbullah and Israel that could potentially
lead to an escalation, with the risk of a new war in the
Middle East that it cannot afford. It is also threatened by
the presidential vacancy, which is all the more harmful
since the country faces huge domestic challenges.
In that context, it is important for the international
community to strengthen its support of Lebanon by
helping it to take on the humanitarian challenge posed
by the presence of Syrian refugees, by suppoting the
Lebanese armed forces, by maintaining the capacity
of United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon to prevent
tensions in the south of Lebanon, by renewing the
Force’s mandate in August and, lastly, by urging
Members of Parliament to rapidly elect a President,
as the Council called for under France’s presidency in
March.
As a way to contribute in all of those areas, France
believes that it would be useful to convene a meeting of
the international support group at the ministerial level in
New York, during the upcoming meeting of the General
Assembly in September. The international community
must not, and cannot, lose interest in Lebanon at a time
when the challenges are greater than ever.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank you, Mr. Minister, for convening this
open debate. I also wish to thank Mr. Mladenov for his
briefing.
Spain aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I will focus my
statement today on three main points: the Middle East
peace process, Yemen and Syria.
It is perhaps timely to assess the impact on the region
of the recent agreement with Iran. What is certain is
that the nuclear agreement resolves a question that has
been weighing on the entire Middle East region; that is
why we must now decisively resume consideration of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The process is at a particularly difficult juncture.
Both parties have declared themselves committed to the
two-State solution; but we are still far from agreement
on the conditions for undertaking negotiations.
We must therefore make progress on two tracks:
confidence-building measures and re-establishing a
negotiating framework.
In terms of confidence-building on the part of
the international community, that involves reacting to

15-2288219/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

measures that can be said to be moving backwards — for
example, the demolition of homes and humanitarian
facilities in Area C. That also involves recognizing
the progress made, including the fact that no new
settlements have been built in recent months.
At the same time, we must work towards Palestinian
reconciliation and the establishment of a national unity
Government under the authority of President Abbas.
Currently, there is risk of a de facto split in Gaza when
it becomes part of the future Palestinian State. We
believe that intra-Palestinian reconciliation is essential
to the continued viability of the two-State solution.
We must accelerate Gaza’s reconstruction. One
year after Operation Protective Edge, according to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), almost no progress
has been made in the reconstruction of homes. The
figures provided today regarding UNRWA’s financial
resources are of serious concern. Also worrisome is the
scenario described recently during the Arria Formula
meeting, where the true suffering of the people in Gaza
was highlighted.
The measures taken by the Israeli Government — the
so-called economic peace — are positive, but we must
not lose sight of the ultimate goal, which is the lifting of
the blockade, with appropriate security guarantees for
the State of Israel.
Not only do the settlements in the West Bank and
the Gaza blockade gradually erode the peace process,
they also heighten the risk of radicalization. The
presence of the groups affiliated with Daesh in the
Gaza Strip that have been identified in recent months
should lead all parties to reflect on the urgent need
to address the pressing political, humanitarian and
security challenges.
With respect to the creation of a new political
framework, there are no prospects for a solution without
the involvement of the international community. We
believe in the efforts made in coordination with the
countries of the region to reaffirm the validity of the
Arab Peace Initiative. Nevertheless, no initiative will
exempt the Security Council from its responsibility.
Sooner or later, as the representative of France just
noted, the Council will have to propose a proper
framework to the parties for a return to negotiations
based on conditions and a specific time frame through
a consensus-based resolution. Our Vice-Minister for
Foreign Affairs, who visited the region just a few days

20/65

23/07/2015

ago, has sent that message to both the Israeli and the
Palestinian authorities.
Specifically, there are three messages. There is no
alternative to the two-State solution. Intra-Palestinian
reconciliation is urgent. And the Security Council must
play a key role. The next quarterly open debate, in
October, will provide an opportunity to assess the ways
in which the Council can contribute to promoting the
peace process in the Middle East.
I would also like to refer briefly to Yemen. The
Security Council must not remain indifferent to the
humanitarian tragedy that is facing the Yemeni people.
We have repeatedly called for a humanitarian pause,
without conditions. Humanitarian actors on the ground,
such as Doctors Without Borders, have continued to
warn us of the growing challenges in providing the
assistance that has become more urgent each day. A
neutral and more flexible mechanism is also essential
for monitoring imports of food, fuel and other basic
materials. We call on all parties to the conflict to respect
international humanitarian law. At the same time, we
look forward to the prompt mediation by the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General of a dialogue between
the parties towards a political solution in Yemen.
In conclusion, I would like to address Syria.
The fifth year of the conflict in Syria is casting a
devastating shadow. The humanitarian tragedy has
reached absolutely intolerable limits. We all know
the numbers, and saw them again today. However, we
cannot forget that each number represents a person, a
family or a story of unspeakable suffering that we have
failed to prevent.
The same is true of the grave violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law. We
condemn most emphatically the absolute contempt
shown for the most basic rules of international
humanitarian law. Those responsible must know
that they will be held accountable for their actions.
In any case, we should not fail to note the specific
obligation of the Syrian Government, in its capacity
as the Government, to protect its citizens, as well as
its full responsibility for its unjustified, barbaric and
indiscriminate attacks against its own people.
Spain has drawn attention, on many occasions, to the
urgency of making progress towards a political solution
in Syria, as it is the only way to end the conflict. We
reiterate once again our firm commitment to a solution
based on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex).

15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7490

In that regard, we support the work achieved by Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura
during the weeks of consultations with all of the
relevant stakeholders. We highly value the participation
of regional actors in the consultations, as we believe
they are absolutely essential to achieving peace in
Syria. We therefore look forward with great interest to
Mr. De Mistura’s briefing to the Council next week.

negotiations through bilateral channels and in various
international forums, first and foremost through the
Middle East Quartet of international mediators. We
deem important the intensification of new contacts of
special representatives in regional capitals. The United
Nations International Meeting in Support of IsraeliPalestinian Peace, held in Moscow in July, was most
useful.

We call on the parties to the conflict, the States of
the region and the members of the Council to shoulder
the responsibility of uniting their efforts, over and
above all of the differences, to achieve a common goal:
peace and stability for the Syrian people. Syria and its
people must be our priority. We especially appeal to the
moderate opposition. An open and constructive attitude
is essential on the part of the various groups in order to
pave the way towards a reasonable meeting point upon
which to build a future for Syria.

The Security Council could also play a substantive
role in promoting a settlement. We are convinced that
the international community can shift the situation
relating to Palestinian-Israeli affairs and stop the drift
towards a one-State reality. This is something that
neither the Israelis nor the Palestinians want to see.

Failure to act on all fronts will dangerously increase
the risk of an institutional vacuum that will only benefit
Daesh and other terrorist groups and further aggravate
the instability of the entire region. It is our duty to
prevent that. The Council cannot continue any longer
to shirk its obligations — enough of merely making
statements. We have heard too much talk, including
again today. It is time to become involved and to make
a genuine commitment to a negotiated political solution
that is pluralistic and democratic. It is the only way to
guarantee sustainable security and stability in Syria
and a place for all Syrians to belong.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia has consistently advocated in favour
of the speedy achievement of a just Palestinian-Israeli
settlement on the basis of agreed international law,
including the implementation of the Madrid principles,
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, the Arab
Peace Initiative and previously reached agreements.
Mutually acceptable agreements are required to ensure
the establishment of an independent, contiguous and
viable Palestinian State coexisting in peace with all of
its neighbours. We believe that this would represent not
only the realization of the aspirations of the Palestinians
but also an excellent guarantee of security for Israel.
Negotiations must resume as soon as possible. We
believe that the measure of their success would be the
parties’ abandonment of unilateral actions that prejudge
the outcome of the final settlement. This concerns first
of all the Israeli settlements in the occupied territories.
We will continue to help to facilitate the resumption of

The situation in the Middle East and North Africa
is, without exaggeration, catastrophic. The region is
in the throes of large-scale bloody conflicts, in Syria,
Yemen, Iraq and Libya, which fuel one another and
create conditions for the overflow of instability into the
neighbouring countries in Africa, the Mediterranean
and Central Asia. A number of States in the region are
on the brink of losing their territorial integrity. There
have been migratory flows on an unprecedented scale,
with hundreds of thousands of refugees. Many countries
that up until recently had seemed prosperous are now
facing the consequences of these conflicts. Also
unprecedented is the scale of terrorism in the region.
Terrorist acts resulting in dozens of casualties erupt in
one part of a region and then another, reaching all the
way to Europe. What can neighbouring countries do if
even other continents have to deal with the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters who go to the Middle East?
The result of, first, the invasion of Iraq and then the
external interference in the conflict in Syria, including
flirting with the armed opposition, was the emergence
of a new threat, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
which, having firmly established itself in these two
countries, has now basically started its march across
the planet.
We are convinced that we can effectively counter this
scourge only if we act together, taking a comprehensive
approach that is free of double standards and based on
international legality, relying on the prerogatives of the
Council. All of the countries of the region must now
set aside their differences, which have always existed
and probably will remain on certain issues, so that they
can ensure that all efforts are geared to fighting the
common threat.

15-2288221/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

An important contribution in that respect
is the series of Security Council resolutions on
counterterrorism. Pride of place should be accorded
to resolution 2199 (2015), which is aimed at stopping
financial flows to ISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusa, especially
those from the oil trade. We call on all Member
States to responsibly implement this approach and to
take decisive steps to stop this criminal activity. We
commend the recommendations put forward by the
Al-Qaida Monitoring Group in this regard.
Criminal proceeds are in turn used in the
commission of new crimes. Terrorists have already
been working on how to synthesize, manufacture
and use chemical warfare agents. The danger of this
was mentioned by the Russian delegation as early as
November 2014, when we proposed that the Security
Council adopt a presidential statement on the subject
of chemical weapons in the hands of terrorists. News
of the development of chemical weapons by ISIL and
other terrorist groups in Syria and in Iraq indicates that
this trend is on the increase. Perhaps we should go back
to the idea we expressed last year.
The unprecedented increase in the terrorist threat
is something that can be explained not only by the
financial support of the caliphate and its allies but also
by the fact that their fighters are ideologically highly
motivated. Of course this problem has many dimensions.
But we believe that a key factor in this regard is the
unresolved Palestinian-Israeli conflict, which creates
the conditions and arguments for recruiting new people
into terrorist entities.
Today we can speak about joint actions to combat
terrorism in the Middle with a certain amount of
optimism. Very recently the world witnessed a major
diplomatic achievement: the signing of an agreement
on the situation surrounding the Iranian nuclear
programme, which was supported by a unanimously
adopted Security Council resolution. This demonstrated
that when there is political will, when we are realistic
and respect one another’s legal interests, we can resolve
the most difficult issues.
Secondly, we hope that this will help countries
in the Middle East and the Persian Gulf refrain from
taking destabilizing steps, prevent the region from
becoming involved in an arms race, make it possible
to jointly seek solutions to security issues, and improve
the situation in the wider region.

22/65

23/07/2015

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the convening by New Zealand of this
open debate on the question of the Middle East. China
welcomes the fact that the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of New Zealand has travelled to New York to personally
preside over the meeting. I thank Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his briefing. I also listened attentively to
the statements made by the representatives of Palestine
and Israel.
Recently, the situation between Palestine and Israel
has remained tense. The Middle East peace process
remains bogged down. China has always believed
that achieving independent statehood for Palestine
and peaceful coexistence between Palestine and Israel
through peace talks is the only viable way to address
the Israel-Palestine question. There is no winner in this
conflict. Force will only exacerbate hatred and hostility.
All questions should be resolved through negotiation.
Palestine and Israel must both be committed to taking
the strategic option of peace talks, strengthen their
confidence in peace, maintain their patience with
regard to peace talks, demonstrate their determination
to achieve peace, and resume as soon as possible and
promote the peace talks.
We hope that the Israeli Government will take
credible measures to create the conditions for peace
talks, including steps to halt the construction of
settlements, release the detained Palestinians and
completely lift the blockade against Gaza. At the same
time, Israel’s legitimate security concerns should also
be seriously addressed.
Resolving the Israeli-Palestinian question will
require joint efforts by both parties and the international
community as a whole. China hopes that efforts will be
made to fully tap the potential of existing mechanisms
in the Middle East peace process. China also supports
the Security Council in its efforts to play its rightful
role on this question, actively respond to the legitimate
demands of Palestine and the Arab countries and take
concrete measures to promote peace talks, bring about
an end to occupation and promote reconstruction in
Gaza.
China has always firmly supported the Palestinian
people’s just cause of struggling for the restoration
of their legitimate national rights. China supports the
establishment of an independent State of Palestine with
full sovereignty on the basis of the 1967 borders with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7490

China wishes to see Palestine and Israel enjoy
common peace and security. China is open to all
initiatives conducive to resuming the dialogue and
negotiations. China has always, through its own ways
and means, actively promoted peace among the parties
concerned. China has long provided assistance within
our capacity to support capacity-building in Palestine
and ease the humanitarian situation in Gaza. We are
ready to work with other parties in the international
community to make more contributions to the
achievement of peace between Palestine and Israel, in
favour of stability in the region.

Nigeria is concerned about the lack of progress in
the Middle East peace process. The status quo does not
offer a sustainable solution to the question of Palestine.
What is required is a genuine effort on the part of
Israel and Palestine to return to the peace process.
We urge the leadership on both sides to take the steps
necessary for achieving lasting peace. We call on States
with influence over the parties to encourage them
to re-engage in dialogue on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid terms of
reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map and the agreements existing between them.

The question of Syria is central to the situation
in the Middle East and to international peace and
stability in general. Finding a comprehensive, lasting
and appropriate solution to the question of Syria is
consistent with the common interests of the people
of Syria and the countries of the region and the
international community as a whole. The situation
in Syria is now at crucial juncture. The international
community should be unwaveringly committed to
seeking a political settlement, setting forth clear targets
and making concerted efforts.

We reaffirm our unwavering support for a twoState solution, with Israel and Palestine existing side
by side in peace and security. Nigeria welcomes the
meeting of the envoys of the Middle East Quartet held in
Cairo at the end of June, during which they considered
ways to revive negotiations and advance the two-State
solution. We look forward to positive outcomes from
the Quartet’s outreach to Arab States. The engagement
of Arab States is vital to the search for lasting peace in
the Middle East.

The priority tasks at this moment should be, first,
to promote early and unconditional participation by
all sides in the negotiations and dialogue with a view
to reaching a settlement plan that is suitable to the
situation of the country and accommodates the interests
of all sides. Secondly, the good offices of the countries
of the region, particularly those with influence, must
be actively carried out; those countries must fully
play their role. Thirdly, it is essential that the broadest
possible participation of all stakeholders be ensured,
and it is necessary that the United Nations, and the
Security Council in particular, remain unified with
respect to the question of Syria.
China has always supported the United Nations
in playing a leading role on the question of Syria. We
recently welcomed Special Envoy De Mistura to China
and encouraged him to continue to play an active role in
seeking the political settlement of the question of Syria.
China will continue to play an active and constructive
role in bringing about a comprehensive, just and
appropriate settlement of the question of Syria.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I also thank Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his briefing and commend him for his
effective leadership. We take this opportunity to assure
him of our full support.

With respect to the conflict in Syria, Nigeria is
pleased to note the sustained efforts of Special Envoy
De Mistura in holding discussions with the warring
parties. We commend the Special Envoy for his hard
work, patience and perseverance. It is important, and
indeed urgent, that the parties find a convergence of
views to enable a resumption of negotiations. We
encourage Special Envoy De Mistura not to relent in
his efforts, and we assure him of our continued support.
Our position remains that a military solution to the
conflict in Syria is unattainable. Only a negotiated
solution can bring lasting peace to the country.
Turning to Yemen, Nigeria calls for a total
cessation of the hostilities that have left thousands of
civilians dead, injured and displaced. A permanent
ceasefire is the necessary first step towards improving
the humanitarian situation in the country. A ceasefire
would also boost the chances of moving the peace
process forward. We encourage the parties to cooperate
fully with the Special Envoy Ould Cheikh Ahmed in
his efforts to find a lasting solution to the conflict in the
country. We reaffirm our support for a political solution
on the basis of the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the
comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

15-2288223/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

23/07/2015

Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of New Zealand, Mr. McCully, and
thank him for presiding over this important debate.
We would also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his
briefing and wish him success in his difficult task.

colonizing the territory, and it has done so against the
backdrop of the international community’s inaction, in
flagrant violation of international law, the Charter of
the United Nations and the right of self-determination
that empowers the Palestinians to enjoy an independent
State within internationally recognized 1967 borders.

Our delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

A year ago, the Gaza Strip and its population were
the victims of the brutal and disproportionate Israeli
military attack known as Operation Protective Edge.
During the 52-day campaign Israel indiscriminately
bombed the population of Gaza and destroyed its
civilian installations and facilities, including schools
and hospitals. As a result of that military aggression,
2,220 people were killed, including 551 children, more
than 11,000 were wounded and 12,600 homes were
destroyed.

The conditions of political instability in the Middle
East are alarming due to the high level of violence
that has ravaged the region. The actions of terrorist
organizations are taking on an ever-more relevant
role. Foreign interventions, military invasions and
interference in the internal affairs of States have
triggered conflicts and wars that have undermined
political stability in the region and led to the collapse
of the State and its institutions in many countries in
conflict. This institutional collapse and political
instability have created the conditions that have allowed
for the incursion of terrorist groups, which have spread
their extremist and intolerant ideology and subjected
the peoples of the region to unacceptable violence and
brutality in their zeal to impose their world view on
others.
One of the fundamental problems conflict is that
political instability in the Middle East has been fomented
by opposing geopolitical interests and visions, which
in order to fulfil political or military objectives, have
funded and supported the military actions of non-State
armed groups which eventually become terrorist
groups. The peoples of the Middle East continue to pay
a high cost in human lives and suffering, which has
been the result of the opposing interests of major power
brokers that deal militarily in the Middle East as if it
were great chessboard.
In this climate of political instability and ongoing
tension, the situation of the Palestinian people and
the prolonged conflict becomes fundamentally
relevant. This conflict must be resolved in order for
a comprehensive political process — one that will
ultimately lead to a lasting peace in the region — to be
started.
More than half a century ago, with support from
the colonial Powers of the time, the pillaging of lands
that for centuries had been occupied the Palestinian
people began. Since then the occupying Power, Israel,
has been moving forward in an ongoing process of

24/65

Venezuela calls for those responsible for those war
crimes to be brought to justice so that they are held
accountable for their criminal actions. The occupying
Power, in addition to proceeding with the ongoing
destruction of civilian infrastructure and Palestinian
homes, has devoted its efforts to attacking the future
of the new Palestinian generation. The children and
young people in the occupied territories are the focus of
constant violence. They are detained and imprisoned on
an ongoing basis by the Israeli military forces merely
because they are Palestinian. Once again, Israel’s
actions show its contempt for human rights and how
it uses violence as a policy to maintain its colonial
presence.
Time is of the essence for the occupying Power.
Time allows it to continue to implement its strategy of
disregard for the human rights of the Palestinian people.
The ultimate goal is to take over all the Palestinian land
and to expel those who still still survive there. It will
do so through its systematic settlements policy. That
situation has persisted since the Nakba of 1948 until
today.
The central problem is that Israel, because it has
the political and military support of the great centres of
power, feels that it has sufficient force to undermine all
attempts to reach a negotiated solution to the conflict. It
feels, all the while, that it can disregard the resolutions,
appeals and urgent calls of the Security Council, and
even of the General Assembly. The occupying Power
boycotts every peace initiative that comes along,
protected by that support. That plunges the Palestinian
people into a situation of tension and desperation,
which may at any moment unleash a military escalation
15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in this conflict. Israel appears to be constantly trying
to engender military conflicts in order to continue to
acquire more territory through the use of force.
Our country advocates the immediate cessation of
the settlements policy, of which the Palestinian people
is the victim. The policy of demolishing Palestinian
homes and constructing Israeli settlements in the
occupied territories, in violation of all international
legal texts, must cease. On that count, we call on the
international community to exhort Israel to cease that
ongoing practice. We also call for end to the process of
expelling Palestinians and colonizing Palestinian land.
The Security Council has been deliberating the
issue of Palestine for more than 50 years, yet to date we
have been unable to put a stop to the illegal situation
prevailing there. We wonder how long the Security
Council will continue to fail to agree on decisive action
to uphold the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people
to their territory. It is time for the Council to take a firm
stance in favour of peace, justice and hope for a people
who are appealing for a lasting and comprehensive
solution, a solution that would recognize two States: the
State of Israel and the State of Palestine.
That topic cannot be avoided or evaded. The
Security Council is the natural forum in which to debate
and find a solution to those issues. We support the action
of the Palestinian authorities to assert their sovereignty.
Palestine’s support for various legal instruments in
the field of human rights and criminal law, such as
the Rome Statute, are a concrete manifestation of its
commitment to respect international law.
We are committed to the cause of peace in the
Middle East. In that regard, we support all initiatives
that assist the Palestinian people in exercising their
right to self-determination. Venezuela reiterates that
the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road map and
the announcement made by France to promote a draft
resolution that paves the way for peace negotiations
and ending the occupation — all have a common
denominator, namely, to achieve a definitive solution
to the conflict.
The current reality is entirely untenable. Israel
continues to use force indiscriminately against a
population that has been entirely ignored and abandoned
in terms of its struggle to enjoy its rights. The resolution
of the Palestinian issue is of vital importance in these
times in order to ensure that violent extremism, for
example the activities of the Islamic State in Iraq and

S/PV.7490

the Levant, Al-Qaida and the Al-Nusra Front, among
others, do not become entrenched in the Palestinian
territories. That would only exacerbate the already
conflict-ridden situation in the Middle East.
The seventieth anniversary of the United Nations
imposes a moral and political obligation upon us to
redouble our efforts to end the colonialism and foreign
occupation that the Palestinian population has been
a victim of. They have been illegally expelled from
their lands. We call for the incorporation of Palestine
as a full-fledged Member of the United Nations.
A recommendation by the Security Council to the
General Assembly to incorporate Palestine as a fullfledged member of the United Nations would send a
positive signal. It would represent the Organization’s
commitment to resolving the Israeli-Palestine crisis on
the basis of a two-State solution.
The intransigent attitude of Israel and its actions
behind the backs of the international community have
had a negative impact on the region, as can be seen
in Palestine, Lebanon and the Golan Heights. In that
regard, Venezuela condemns actions that violate the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon and are
in violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We
call on Israel to end those illegal practices. Moreover,
we condemn the measures that Israel has applied in the
Syrian Golan Heights. The intention of those measures
has been to change the legal, demographic and physical
status of that territory. Once again, we call on Israel
to withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan, in
accordance with international law.
To conclude, a few days ago the Security Council
unanimously adopted a resolution in support of the
agreement reached among the P5+1 and Iran on Iran’s
nuclear programme. We sincerely commend the
countries involved in that agreement, as it represents
a victory for diplomacy and peace over war and
intolerance. We call on members of the Council to
ensure that the same political judgment and that same
sensible approach prevail in the resolution of conflicts
in the Middle East. Those conflicts have shattered
hundreds of thousands of lives. We must work more
intensively to promote peace and to ensure that less
hate and war exist in the world. We must work for the
peace of the Syrian people, the Iraqi people, the people
of Lebanon and the people of Yemen. We must work
for peace and a just solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.

15-2288225/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First,
I would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of New Zealand. We are also grateful for the briefing
by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Personal Representative of
the Secretary-General.
The status quo must be overturned. Reactivating
the negotiations is an unavoidable challenge, and the
Council has a responsibility to contribute. It is urgent
that we reopen the doors to dialogue, and we believe
that the Council can create the conditions for that by
promoting effective negotiations that can help the
parties to arrive at a peaceful solution. That effort will
require a collective commitment that can create bonds
of trust and eliminate cycles of violence.
We are concerned about the actions and decisions
of certain actors that could suggest a retreat and hinder
the resumption of negotiations. We note with concern
the policy of expanding settlements, since a peace
process is not viable while that policy of occupying
territory continues. It is also imperative to end the
economic blockade of the Gaza Strip.
The two-State solution is the only alternative that
offers guarantees to both parties. A negotiating process
is not sustainable if it does not recognize Palestine’s
desire to exercise its right to self-determination or
provide Israel with the safeguards it needs to ensure
its existence. In accordance with our commitment to
inclusive and democratic dialogue, we will support
initiatives that can pave the way for a peace process
based on defined parameters and within a specified
time frame.
With regard to Lebanon, we acknowledge the
efforts the Lebanese authorities have made to host
Syrian refugees, fight terrorism and strengthen State
institutions. We hope the country’s political leaders
will end the current situation of the vacant presidency.
With regard to Syria, we condemn the persistent
flouting of international humanitarian law and the
violations and abuses of human rights committed by all
parties to the conflict, and we reiterate the importance
of accountability. Chile supports the SecretaryGeneral’s calls for ensuring humanitarian access,
which will enable assistance to reach, in particular,
people in areas that are hard to access. Those efforts
require the cooperation of all parties involved, which is
vital if conditions are to be created that will allow the
Syrian people to live in dignity and peace. However,
we realize that only a political solution can end the

26/65

23/07/2015

humanitarian and security crisis in Syria, and we are
therefore eagerly awaiting the report that Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura will present to the Security Council
in the next few days.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate, and I welcome Mr. Nickolay Mladenov’s
presence and compelling briefing. The timing of this
open debate, a year after the conflict in Gaza, is sadly
fitting. Today is an important moment to remember all
those who lost their lives, recommit ourselves to doing
all we can to prevent further violence and extend that
commitment beyond Gaza to Syria and elsewhere in the
Middle East region.
As we heard in the moving Arria Formula meeting
earlier this week, the painful consequences of the
fighting in Gaza continue to this day. It is increasingly
clear that urgent action is needed to preserve the twoState solution and alleviate the impact of the occupation.
The British Foreign Secretary saw that at first hand
during his recent visit. Improving conditions in Gaza
and the West Bank is a vital first step.
Israel’s recent plans to construct more than 900 new
settlement housing units in the West Bank are clearly
contrary to the goal of peace, and so are the plans to evict
Palestinians from the village of Susiya. We are pleased
that Israel has taken some steps to ease restrictions in
Gaza, but increasing exports and doubling the water
supply are not enough. The humanitarian situation
remains unacceptable. More than 100,000 people are
still displaced. Power outages last for up to 12 hours a
day, and 120,000 people are still without a water supply.
We need to see rapid progress in improving living
conditions, the quality of life and the economic outlook
in Gaza. The movement of people between Gaza or the
West Bank and Israel should be eased. Exports from
Gaza should be allowed to increase to 2007’s levels. The
water supply should be doubled again, and restrictions
on fishing, electricity and waste-water treatment should
be eased.
Action is needed from both sides. We call on
the Palestinian Authority, led by President Abbas, to
take concrete steps to return to Gaza. We urge him to
advance reconciliation and demonstrate clearly that he
is the leader of all Palestinian people.
The international community has a vital role to
play, too. All of us should urge donors to fulfil their
financial pledges in order to aid reconstruction efforts
15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in Gaza without delay. Of all the international pledges
made in Cairo, only 27 per cent have so far been met.
The United Kingdom is playing its part. We support
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East in its vital work, as
well Mr. Mladenov’s calls for donors to step up. Since
last summer we have been one of the largest donors to
Gaza, providing more than $26 million in emergency
assistance, and we pledged an additional $31 million at
the reconstruction conference in Cairo.
Together we must work harder than ever to
create conditions on the ground to foster a return to
meaningful negotiations. In so doing, we can bring real
improvements to those on both sides who have suffered
for far too long. And the Council must be ready to play
its part when those conditions have been created.
That same approach is also desperately needed
in Syria. For too long we have been briefed on the
indiscriminate use of barrel bombs by the Al-Assad
regime. The recent briefing from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs made it clear
that attacks on hospitals are still commonplace. That is
barbaric and unacceptable. For too long we have heard
distressing reports of the use of chemical weapons.
The Council will soon have the chance to send a clear
message to Al-Assad on that issue, and I hope that all
members will support the draft resolution on a joint
investigative mechanism when it is presented to the
Council.
It is clearer than ever that there can be no military
victory in Syria; only a political solution can end the
bloodshed. I look forward to the briefing next week
by Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. It is vital that
we redouble our support for his efforts to bring about
an inclusive political transition that operationalizes
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). A
Government that acts on behalf of all Syrians, one
strong enough to defeat the threat of extremism, is long
overdue.
The consequences of not dealing with the crisis in
Syria can be seen in the camps across neighbouring
countries. Millions of Syrians are now reliant on
the generosity of Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey and the
international community. Lebanon has accepted nearly
1.2 million Syrian refugees, increasing its population by
nearly a quarter. We must recognize and help to alleviate
the pressure that has created. The United Kingdom
has given $296 million to support Lebanon. We are
making a real difference by providing food, shelter and

S/PV.7490

medical aid to the most vulnerable in refugee and host
communities. But we are concerned that the Lebanese
crisis response plan remains desperately underfunded.
All of us must work with donors, particularly in the
Gulf, to help meet the basic needs of host communities
and refugees. It is crucial that the Lebanese Government
elect a President without any further delay, so that it
can meet the needs of all Lebanese people.
I would like to conclude as I began, by focusing
on the timeliness of this debate. On Monday, the
Council unanimously agreed on resolution 2231 (2015),
on Iran’s nuclear programme, bringing more than
a decade of negotiations to an end. It is good for the
region and good for the international community. We
hope and expect that the agreement will herald a new
era of positive Iranian engagement in the region. In
reaching the agreement, the five permanent members
of the Council, together with our German and European
Union colleagues, showed a unity of purpose that is
sometimes sadly lacking in other Council business
on the Middle East. It is that spirit of cooperation and
determination that we will need to harness for our work
on the Middle East peace process and Syria. We have
seen the consequences of our failure to do so for too
long.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): At the outset, we would like
to extend a warm welcome to you, Sir, as well as our
thanks for presiding over this debate. We also thank
Mr. Mladenov for his insightful briefing and extend our
support for his work.
We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
We are deeply disappointed at the lack of any
meaningful progress in the resolution of conflicts
affecting the Middle East. As the political, economic
and social situation across the region continues to
deteriorate, the Security Council remains unable
to present a unified front in tackling these issues.
Certainly, the Security Council achieved unanimity in
endorsing the agreement concluded by the permanent
members, Germany and the European Union with the
Islamic Republic of Iran — a remarkable diplomatic
achievement, above all if we take into account that
diplomacy in the Middle East has a deplorable record
of defeats in the past 20 years or more. As we stated
(see S/PV.7488) in the debate following the adoption
of resolution 2231 (2015), now our best expectation is
that the agreement on the Iran nuclear programme will

15-2288227/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

trigger a game-change by creating new dynamics in
the whole region and ending the extreme and stressful
conditions of war, terrorism, sectarianism, intolerance
and oppression.
It is high time that the permanent members of the
Security Council uphold their privileges as great Powers
as entrusted in the Charter of the United Nations and
take full advantage of the psychological and political
boost afforded by the treaty concluded with Iran by
decisively reaching out to other regional Powers and
countries of the Middle East, with a view towards
addressing and resolving proxy wars and serious crisis
situations affecting the region, namely, the fight against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, and its terrorist
affiliates, the Syrian war, the conflict in Yemen, the
Palestinian issue and the extreme sectarianism between
Sunni and Shia communities in the region.
A lack of consensus among Council members
prevails on all Middle East crises, weakening
the Council’s ability to find solutions to intricate
international problems and undermining its credibility
as the main organ in charge of international peace and
security. The consequences of such a state of affairs
are bleak, with the proliferation of armed groups and
terrorist organizations across the region carrying out
deadly attacks against civilians and religious and ethnic
minorities, destroying universal cultural heritage and
committing the most egregious violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law.
The conflict between Israel and Palestine remains
in a deadlock, with the parties — even with assistance
from the international community — unable to
disentangle the deadly web that keeps both peoples
unable to reach out to one another and start a new era
in their relations. It is clear that international public
opinion despairs at the hesitation and lack of purpose
that the Security Council has demonstrated over the
years on this extremely sensitive issue. Nonetheless,
there has been consensus for quite some time — in the
Security Council and in the international community
at large — that a peaceful and lasting solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict should be based on the
two-State solution, the State of Israel and the State of
Palestine within the 1967 borders, living side by side
as good neighbours in peace and security, as the only
viable option for a comprehensive peace settlement
between Israelis and Palestinians.
The great Powers, the permanent members of the
Security Council, should commit to their leadership
28/65

23/07/2015

status by pushing the parties to the conflict, and the
entire international community as a whole, to support
a solution to the Palestinian question based on one
resolution, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Oslo
Accords. We believe that the permanent members, being
vested with special priviliges in the Security Counicl
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
have the inalienable right to do so. We furthermore
believe that such privileges should not be upheld merely
for the defence of national interests and circumstantial
alliances, but should be used instead for strengthening
peace and security and, in this case, to make a meaningul
contribution to solving the Palestinian question.
More than 20 years have elapsed since Israelis
and Palestinians were close to a comprehensive
peace settlement through mutual concessions and
political will, permitting both peoples to live together
in freedom, peace and security. It is our conviction
that, in the present circumstances, only the Security
Council — if united — can play the role of an honest
broker, provide political and security guarantees to the
parties, engage the international community and the
countries of the region, play a leading role in putting
Israelis and Palestinians on the right track and make a
decisive contribution to the attainment of peace.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I thank Special
Coordinator for Middle East Peace Process Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union later today.
The vision of a democratic, robust, and prosperous
Middle East remains unfulfilled. Radicalization, the
spread of terrorism, the proliferation of weapons,
declining economies, and uprooted people make it
incumbent upon the international community to look
for an urgent way to end the conflicts.
The situation in the Palestinian territories continues
to raise our greatest concern. The reality on the ground
gives little reason for hope. Recent rocket attacks by
militant groups underline once again the volatility
of the current deadlock, which risks escalating
even further. Continuing settlement expansion and
demolitions severely erode the prospects for a viable
two-State solution, plunging the parties even deeper
into the circle of violence and mutual mistrust.
Gaza needs immediate and genuine reconstruction
and development. For the first time, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Near East is about to run out of funds, overwhelmed
by mounting challenges. There are growing risks of
further radicalization in the Gaza Strip. Improving
humanitarian and economic conditions in Gaza could
be a key factor in prospects for peace itself.
We welcome the recent steps taken by Israel to
ease restrictions in Gaza. But the immediate and
unconditional lifting of the closure on the Strip and the
free flow of people and goods, while addressing Israel’s
legitimate security concerns, are necessary for genuine
relief and recovery.
We call on Israel to enable accelerated Palestinian
construction, as well as socioeconomic development, in
Area C. We furthermore call on the Israeli authorities
to halt plans for forced transfers of the population
and the demolition of Palestinian housing. We also
urge Palestine and Israel to make efforts to improve
political, economic and security conditions of life
for the Palestinian people. Such actions will serve to
strengthen the prosperity and security of both Israelis
and Palestinians.
We look forward towards renewed engagement in
the peace process by the United States, with strong
involvement by the European Union, the League of
Arab States, the Quartet and regional actors. There
is no other solution but an immediate resumption of
peace negotiations to seek a final political settlement
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid principles — including the principle of land for
peace — the road map, and the Arab peace initiative,
leading to two democratic and sovereign States living
side by side within established borders.
Syria has become the worst humanitarian crisis and
a State failure. Just under a quarter of a million Syrians
have been killed, and more than half of the population is
displaced. Impunity reigns, justice and accountability
are absent and the political process runs on empty. The
Syrian Government has failed in its responsibility to
protect its people. It has been a perpetrator of crimes
against its very own people. Chlorine gas attacks are
fast becoming a daily reality. They persist because
perpetrators continuously escape justice. Only by
attributing responsibility to specific individuals,
entities and Governments that are responsible for
chemical weapons attacks can we make them stop. The
Council must take action in that regard.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs has taken steps to alleviate the suffering of the

S/PV.7490

people, but obstacles to humanitarian aid and medical
assistance are too numerous. Progress on accountability
for appalling crimes is nowhere in sight. It is up to the
international community to live up to its responsibility
to protect. A political solution is the only way forward,
and we look forward to the briefing by Staffan de
Mistura to the Council next week.
In Lebanon, the longer the crisis of institutions
remains unresolved, the greater the threat of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant to Lebanon’s integrity and
stability. The international community must continue
to assist the country in strengthening its institutions
and its army and managing the impact of the influx of
Syrian refugees.
I conclude with Yemen, which continues to suffer
from casualties of more than 3,500 dead, 16,000
injured and nearly 1.3 million displaced. Four out of
five Yemenis are in need of humanitarian assistance. A
reliable flow of humanitarian aid into Yemen is urgently
needed, while avoiding excessive restrictions on both
United Nations and commercial shipments. All Yemeni
parties should engage in dialogue without preconditions
and rally behind United Nations-facilitated processes.
The alternative is State fragmentation, the rise of
sectarianism and empowerment of terrorist groups.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): Allow me to begin,
Mr. President, by commending the excellent work
done by your delegation during your presidency of the
Security Council for this month. Through you, I would
like to extend our deepest appreciation for the job well
done by Malaysia during its presidency of the Council
for the previous month. I would also like to extend our
deep appreciation to Mr. Mladenov for his sobering
briefing.
We meet today while the Middle East faces new
challenges, but the Middle East is still tormented by
the Israeli occupation. One year ago, Israel unleashed
its military operation against Palestinian civilians in
Gaza — 51 days of continuous Israeli raids, killings,
massive destruction and disproportionate and
indiscriminate use of force. The words of an Israeli
soldier from the report entitled This Is How We Fought
in Gaza say it all: “By the time we got out of there, it
was all like a sandbox”. That is what they did to the
people, while also maintaining their blockade on Gaza.

15-2288229/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

23/07/2015

Today the situation in Gaza continues to deteriorate.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
reports that not one of the 12,620 totally destroyed
units has been rebuilt, while the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East states that 880,000 Palestine refugees rely on
quarterly food assistance. The International Monetary
Fund sounded the alarm when it declared that the
unemployment rate had reached 46 per cent.

community. The latest endeavour in this regard was
the adoption of the Lebanese crisis response plan.
Yet it is alarming that only 21 per cent of the plan
has been funded. Time and again, we have reiterated
that it is imperative to counter the refugees’ despair
by widening the humanitarian space, based on the
principle of shared responsibility, and by intensifying
resettlement programmes. Those refugees and their
host communities should not be forgotten or ignored.

Makarim Wibisono, the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967, captured the essence of Israeli
practices in the West Bank and East Jerusalem when
he said that occupation policies constrain Palestinian
life and push Palestinians to leave their land and
homes, especially in Area C of the West Bank and
East Jerusalem. Suffice it to mention that in 2014
the Government of Israel demolished 493 Palestinian
structures in Area C, and today it threatens to demolish
the village of Susiya village, near Hebron. In the first
quarter of 2015, the same Government authorized the
continued construction of settlements in the West Bank,
with a 219 per cent spike in completed housing and a
93 per cent rise in starts. That is a typical approach by
Israel: not to miss an opportunity to negate the twoState solution by stalling the process and seizing land.

This month coincides with the commemoration
of many atrocities around the world: the twentieth
anniversary of the genocide in Srebrenica, the ninth
anniversary of the Israeli war on Lebanon, which
ended with the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006), and
the first anniversary of the most recent Israeli war on
Gaza. For all the victims — women, children and the
elderly — our message and actions today should be:
“Never again”.

In the midst of this desolation, the historic agreement
between the Vatican and the State of Palestine is a ray
of hope. It should summon the moral audacity of the
international community to finally break the political
stalemate and to translate the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people into realities. Indeed, the Security
Council should do much more to establish a new,
credible and comprehensive framework for negotiations
to be concluded in a defined time frame and based on
the well-known parameters set by the relevant United
Nations resolutions — in particular General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) — the Madrid principles and the
Arab Peace Initiative.

This quarterly debate is important in that it gives
us an opportunity to take stock of developments in the
Middle East peace process. More important, however, is
the response by the Security Council. We have seen that
the Council has at best been a standby witness to phases
of escalation and relative calm, which has become
characteristic of this unsettled issue. The effectiveness
of the Council has consequently been brought into
question. We join others in urging the Council to step
up its efforts and take the lead in resolving this problem.

During this month, the total number of Syrian
refugees has exceeded 4 million — the biggest refugee
population from a single conflict in a generation,
according to High Commissioner for Refugees António
Guterres. More than 1.2 million of those refugees fled
to my country and are registered with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. The
situation of those refugees and their host community
remains extremely challenging. My Government
continues to work relentlessly with the international

30/65

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India
Mr. Mukerji (India): I thank you, Foreign Minister
McCully, President of the Council, for convening of this
quarterly open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. I also thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing.

India’s deep association with and continuing
commitment to Palestine is rooted in our modern
history, which goes back to our own struggle for
independence. India’s position on the issue of Palestine
has always been firm and clear. We reaffirm our support
for the cause of Palestine and our solidarity with the
Palestinian people for their struggle for a sovereign,
independent, viable and united State of Palestine within
secure and recognized borders, side by side and at peace
with Israel, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Apart from its political support to the Palestinian
cause, India continues to support its development
and nation-building efforts by consistently extending
15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

technical and financial assistance. Earlier this
month, a new school for girls, the Jawaharlal Nehru
Secondary School for Girls, was inaugurated in Asera
Al-Shamalyeh. It is a part of India’s larger capacitybuilding initiatives in Palestine.
We contribute $1 million annually to the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian
Refugees in the Near East. We pledged and contributed
$4 million in response to the National Early Recovery
and Reconstruction Plan for Gaza. We have undertaken
important bilateral development projects in health,
education, skills development and vocational training,
as well as providing budgetary support to the Palestinian
Government. We are also implementing development
projects in Palestine jointly with Brazil and South
Africa, within the framework of the India, Brazil and
South Africa group, and have pledged $1 million for
a new project to reconstruct the Atta Habib Medical
Centre in Gaza.
This debate is taking place a year after the
unfortunate escalation of the Gaza conflict. We are
particularly worried that since July 2014 there has been
a downward trend in the peace process, despite efforts
for serious negotiations between the parties, which
have remained inconclusive. Unilateral actions by the
parties are unfortunately moving them farther apart.
India remains firmly convinced that dialogue remains
the only viable solution that can effectively address
the issue. The imperative need is for restraint so as to
avoid provocation and unilateral actions and to enable
a return to the peace process. We remain hopeful and
urge both sides to resume the peace process soon for a
comprehensive resolution of the Palestinian issue.
We express our deep concern about the activities of
outlaw, radicalized and extremist groups in the Middle
East region, especially in the northern parts of Iraq and
Syria, which are critically impacting peace and stability
in the region. The violence perpetrated against civilians,
especially against women and children, on the basis
of religion, ethnicity and sectarianism strikes at our
common humanity. All parties and stakeholders in the
region must undertake efforts to curb those dangerous
trends. We believe that the consolidation of political
processes and solutions, while building durable State
institutions, will be an effective way of addressing such
extremism and radicalism in the region.
We are also concerned at instances of the targeting
of United Nations peacekeepers in the region by outlaw
terrorist groups. The Security Council resolutions

S/PV.7490

that proscribe terrorist groups operating in the region
must be fully implemented. The early and effective
prosecution of such groups is essential. Only such
action endorsed by the Council will deter such groups
in other parts of the world from committing acts of
terror.
Mrs. Schwalger took the Chair.
With new flash points, such as in Yemen, the
Middle East region is becoming more volatile, and
the stability of the region is being threatened. Besides
having implications for peace and stability as well as for
the humanitarian situation, the conflicts also impose
serious economic costs on the region and the whole
world. Particularly with major shipping lines passing
through the Strait of Bab el-Mandeb, the situation
in Yemen has a considerable impact on the cost of
shipping, and in turn on regional and global trade, apart
from the pressing humanitarian situation and the loss of
lives we are witnessing. We therefore urge all parties in
Yemen to return to the negotiating table forthwith.
India welcomed the conclusion of the negotiations
on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on the
Iran nuclear question on 14 July. Now the Security
Council has also endorsed the Plan of Action. India
has maintained that diplomatic dialogue is the only
effective way to resolve issues.
On Syria, we reiterate our support for a Syrian-led,
comprehensive political solution to the ongoing crisis,
in alignment with the Geneva communiqué of 2012
(S/2012/522, annex). The humanitarian crisis arising
out of the situation has to be addressed effectively. It
is with that conviction that we pledged and contributed
$2 million to the United Nations Syrian humanitarian
assistance response plan in 2014, and pledged another
$2 million during the third International Humanitarian
Pledging Conference for Syria held in March in Kuwait.
We are also hopeful for and supportive of the efforts
made by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, Mr. de Mistura, aimed at carrying the political
process forward. We urge all parties to demonstrate the
requisite political will, exercise restraint and commit
to seeking common ground in accommodating their
differences.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and

15-2288231/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber. I would like to appeal to speakers to deliver
their statements at a normal speed so that interpretation
may be provided properly.
I also wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank the President for convening this very
important debate. We would also like to thank the
Malaysian delegation, which served as President of the
Council in June.
I speak as one of the major concerned parties under
this agenda item.
A number of delegations’ statements have been
dominated by a strong dose of surrealism and lack of
contact with reality. Those statements have not respected
the reference points under the mandate given to the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process.
The Special Coordinator chose this morning to avoid
dealing with Yemen, Libya and Iraq and to completely
ignore the importance of taking up the occupied Syrian
Golan, which is at the heart of the mandate and the
agenda item. The regional mandate for establishing the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process (UNSCO) was outlined in
the Secretary-General’s report on the expansion of the
mission’s operations. Under that regional mandate, as
noted on the UNSCO website, the Special Coordinator:
(spoke in English)
“will encompass previous functions and also be
the focal for overall United Nations assistance
to the Middle East peace process. The Special
Coordinator’s dual diplomatic and United Nations
development assistance coordination functions will
principally cover Jordan, Syria, Lebanon and the
Palestinian authorities areas.”
(spoke in Arabic)
In distorting the point of the agenda item and
while attempting to reduce the pressure on Israel,
our colleague the representative of the United States
departed from the rules of diplomacy to transform her
statement into a sort of press release, with aggressive
remarks directed against my country, littered with

32/65

23/07/2015

mistakes and doubtful claims from her country’s
intelligence services. She did so rather than focus on
the content of the agenda item, which is to bring peace
and put an end to the Israeli occupation of the occupied
Arab territories so as to create a Palestinian State. I
would like to take this opportunity to also remind my
United States colleague that Vice-President Biden,
when meeting recently with university students, said
that the United States’ problem in Syria was that allies
in the region were sponsoring terrorism there.
The United Nations has a historic, legal and moral
responsibility to implement the relevant resolutions
in order to settle the conflict so that an independent
Palestinian State can be established, fully sovereign,
on its national territory, in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 181 (II) A and B, of 1947,
and Security Council resolution 69 (1949), which
determined the conditions for Israel’s membership in
the United Nations. Those conditions are that Israel
must honour the resolution that created the Palestinian
State and honour General Assembly resolution 194 (III),
of 1948, relating to the return of Palestinian refugees to
their land. However, that is the opposite of what has
happened. The United Nations has implemented just
half of General Assembly resolution 181 (II) A and
B, for the creation of Israel in Palestine. The United
Nations has forgotten the returns question found
in General Assembly resolution 194 (III), of 1948,
which has increased the injustice perpetrated against
the Palestinian people, whose fate has become that of
being held hostage to a ferocious racist occupation,
unprecedented in modern history. At the same time,
Israel launched aggressive attacks, one after the other,
against the peoples and countries of the region, with the
unprecedented military, political and economic support
of its sponsors and protectors, who always call for
freedom and democracy and justice, albeit a false one.
The successive Governments of Israel have
committed crimes against humanity and war crimes, as
described in United Nations reports. There is no doubt
that Israel’s settlement activities have always been a
primary policy of all Israeli Governments, even though
such activities undermine peace — as all are aware,
including Israel’s sponsors — and any possibility
of creating a geographically contiguous and viable
Palestinian State and guaranteeing Palestinians their
right to self-determination.
If we truly want to eliminate the possibility of
war, end the bloodshed and strengthen the possibility

15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of peace in the region and the fight against terrorism
through a serious international alliance, the United
Nations must seriously endeavour, in coordination
with the sponsoring countries, to revive the peace
process. Our region will never see stability without the
achievement of a peaceful, just and holistic solution
based on the relevant United Nations resolutions and
the principle of land for peace.
Some of the delegations that claim to support the
rights of the Syrian people have rushed to demand the
convening of meetings and conferences and parallel
meetings, attempting to confirm fallacious accounts
regarding the situation in Syria. Representatives of
those countries have used the dramatic aspects of those
accounts in addressing the rights of the Syrian people,
while avoiding any mention of ending the Israeli
occupation of the occupied Syrian Golan Heights, in
support of which the Council adopted resolution 497
(1981). It might even seem that recovering the occupied
Golan Heights was not one of the rights of the Syrian
people and that the Golan Heights was not an occupied
Syrian territory, on behalf of which various resolutions
have been adopted each year requesting Israel to
withdraw from the area to the 4 June 1967 borders.
What do those delegations think of human rights
and international humanitarian law? What do they
think of the Israeli settlements in the Golan Heights
and the suffering of the Syrian citizens there, who have
been suffering under the occupation now for more than
half a century? Those delegations deny the oppression
practiced by Israel and the theft of the Golan’s natural
resources. What do they think of the natural gas
in the area? What do they think of the oil? What do
they think of the water? What do they think about the
Syrian citizens who are being held in Israeli prisons,
in violation of the 1949 Geneva Conventions? In that
regard, we must mention Sidqi Al-Maqt, known as the
Syrian Mandela, who suffered for 27 years in an Israeli
prison.
During the current crisis in Syria, Israel has added
a new chapter to its record number of human rights
violations. It has been supporting terrorists in the
separation zone of the Syrian Golan and providing them
with an opportunity to be treated in Israeli hospitals. At
the same time, it is violating the separation agreements
of 1974, imperilling the lives of the members of
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) and violating the 1948 agreements.

S/PV.7490

The truth has been brought to light in the report
of the Secretary-General on UNDOF and reports in
the Israeli media. Israel has allowed free reign to the
Al-Nusra Front to launch attacks against the Golan
Heights, including the killing of 21 civilians in the
village of Hadar, as well as threatening some civilians
and forcing others to reject the support of the Syrian
Government. Such terrorist movements have more
freedom to manoeuvre owing to the situation, which
requires serious and immediate action.
We congratulate the Islamic Republic of Iran
on achieving a final agreement with the P5+1. It is a
historic agreement that strengthens the importance
of diplomacy and political and friendly solutions to
resolving international differences. Absent in the is
the language of intimidation, war and aggression and
the imposition of illegal sanctions such as those that
have targeted the people of Iran for many years, thereby
depriving them of their right to possess the knowledge
necessary to use technology to enhance their wellbeing and promote prosperity.
Syria reiterates the inalienable rights of the States
parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, especially as contained in article IV thereof,
to acquire nuclear technology to “develop research,
production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes”.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to begin by congratulating New
Zealand on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July. We wish you, Madam
President, and your delegation, every success in your
efforts. We also thank the New Zealand presidency for
convening this quarterly open debate on the situation in
the Middle East. I also thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of New Zealand for his presence in the Council
earlier today and for presiding over today’s meeting.
We also thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing.
One year after the launch of the Israeli aggression
campaign targeting Gaza, the Palestinian people and
the international community continue to aspire to
the hope that the Council will work towards ensuring
that justice is done and that the perpetrators of the
crimes carried out during the Israeli campaign are held

15-2288233/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

accountable for their actions. That campaign lasted
51 days, leaving 2,251 Palestinians dead, the majority
of whom were civilians, including 551 children. The
campaign also destroyed approximately 12,000 homes
and damaged over 4,000 others; it also damaged or
destroyed 540 schools and 73 clinics and hospitals.
The Palestinian people always suffer the repercussions
of such aggression. In fact 100,000 people are now
internally displaced in Gaza, owing to the aggression
and the ongoing blockade, which has hindered the
delivery of aid.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia holds Israel
responsible for the deteriorating situation in Gaza. The
suffering imposed by Israel will not end as long as the
international community and the Security Council have
not required Israel to end its aggression and its racist
and oppressive colonial policies against the Palestinian
people. We must not forget those victims. We must
not forget the tens of thousands of wounded and the
hundreds of children who became orphans last summer.
We must not forget that Gaza is continuing to suffer a
humanitarian crisis as a result of the aggression and
the blockade imposed by Israel, which clearly violates
international law.
Israel’s policies will lead only to destruction and
to the end to any hope of achieving a just solution to
the Palestinian cause that will guarantee the creation of
an independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital and in accordance with the Arab Peace
Initiative and the relevant resolutions of international
legitimacy.
The report of the Independent Commission of
Inquiry established by the Human Rights Council
reiterates that Israel violated international law and
perpetrated crimes that could be considered war crimes
in carrying out its aggression against Gaza. Israel
has targeted residential areas and used wide-impact
explosive weapons to target residential areas, hospital,
schools and shelters. The report makes it clear that
Israel has systematically used destruction as a weapon
of war. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia underscores the
importance of Israel’s being duly held to account for the
crimes it perpetrated during the attack on Gaza and for
the war crimes that it continues to perpetrate against
the Palestinian people.
My country finds it strange that Israel is not to be
found on the list contained in the annex to the annual
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict, known as the blacklist. My country believes
34/65

23/07/2015

that this represents a double standard in the report of the
Secretary-General, which sets out the number of people
killed. Palestinian children represent the third-highest
number of children killed since 2014. The number of
schools destroyed in Palestine is the highest in all of
the conflict situations 2014. We therefore believe that
we need to objectively and impartially document what
has happened and ensure that justice is done and that no
double standards come into play.
Bringing about peace and security in the region and
achieving comprehensive peace requires that justice be
done and that Israel be held accountable for the crimes
it has been perpetrating since the beginning of the
occupation. The Palestinian people continue to suffer
under the yoke of the Israeli occupation. Israel continues
to act with complete impunity and to hamper the course
of justice, which has required the State of Palestine,
with the support of the international community, to
resort to the International Criminal Court in order to
obtain the justice that it has been denied for so many
decades now.
Palestine is a party to the Rome Statute, and we
commend this peaceful step. We also look forward to the
accession of the State of Palestine to the United Nations
as a fully sovereign State in the near future. The Israeli
acts of aggression against the people of Palestine are
one of the principal reasons for the continuation of the
conflict and the death of any hope to try to find a lasting
solution to the Palestinian situation. Israel continues to
impose arbitrary obstacles on Palestinians who wish
to go to the Al-Aqsa mosque to pray. We condemn the
fact that Israel is preventing Muslims from exercising
their legitimate right to pray at the Al-Aqsa mosque.
Israel bears full responsibility for the deterioration
in the situation in Jerusalem, and all of the negative
consequences of the racist Israeli policies in Jerusalem
are to be condemned.
We condemn also all attempts to try to change the
historic and religious identity and legal status of places
of worship, and we call on Israel to immediately halt
all actions leading to a demographic transformation of
the city of Jerusalem, including the settlement process,
the destruction of Palestinian homes, the deprivation
of the Palestinians of their right to a residence, and
their eviction from their homes in contravention of
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
My country supports all international efforts to
adopt a resolution that seeks a final solution to the
15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian cause and bring to an end the occupation,
in line with the Arab Peace Initiative and resolutions
of international legality, so as to create a Palestinian
State in keeping with the borders of 4 June 1967, with
Jerusalem as its capital.
Four years after the beginning of the crisis in the
Syrian Arab Republic, Syria continues to be one of the
most serious humanitarian disasters of this century.
The Syrian authorities continue to intimidate, starve,
kill and destroy the Syrian people. That complete lack
of humanity and the proliferation of terrorism has led
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to condemn the presence
of armed foreign terrorist fighters in Syria, including
Hizbullah and other sectarian parties coming from
abroad. We must combat terrorism by finding solutions
to its root causes.
The Syrian authorities have engaged in genocide
and marginalization and have deprived the people
of their most basic humanitarian rights. We can see
what the Syrian authorities are doing with the full
support of Hizbullah in the town of Zabadani, where
the Syrian authorities have used more than 600 barrel
bombs in the past three weeks. We urge the Security
Council to condemn this aggression and to call on the
Syrian authorities to stop targeting civilians. We call
on the Council to condemn the crimes perpetrated in
Qalamoun by Hizbullah and other sectarian parties
coming from abroad. We call on the Council to put an
end to the bloodshed in the Syrian Arab Republic. The
Council can no longer fail to uphold its responsibility to
resolve the Syrian crisis if it is to retain its credibility.
The Council’s silence regarding what is happening
in Syria helps the Syrian authorities in their actions,
which target civilians with violence and weapons.
We join the call to hold accountable all those who
have used weapons of mass destruction against the
Syrian people, including barrel bombs, missiles and
toxic gases. The perpetrators of such crimes, whatever
their political affiliation or motivation, must stand trial.
My country is committed to helping the Syrian people
to achieve their aspirations in a way that preserves the
unity and territorial integrity of Syria and the rights of
its children, whatever their faith or ethnicity.
We call on the Security Council to commit to the
implementation of its relevant resolutions and to put an
end to the suffering of the Syrian people, and to fully
implement the Geneva communiqué, which calls for the
creation of a transitional authority.

S/PV.7490

The President: I call on the representative of
Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by thanking
the Foreign Minister of New Zealand for earlier
presiding over this meeting. We also thank the Special
Coordinator of the Secretary-General for the Middle
East Peace Process for his comprehensive though
sobering briefing.
Peace in the Middle East appears more distant than
ever. The inflexible and indefensible posture taken
by the hard-line Israeli Government has frozen any
prospect for the resumption of the peace process and
a political resolution based on a two-State solution.
Israeli extremism is evoking a matching turn towards
further radicalization in Gaza and the West Bank.
Earlier this month we marked the first anniversary
of the 51-day Israeli military assault on Gaza. The
devastation that it caused has left Gaza in ruins.
The report of the Independent Commission of
Inquiry established by the Human Rights Council
on the Gaza conflict is an eye-opener. It establishes
that security concerns cannot relieve Israel of its
obligations under international law. It also expresses
concern at the impunity that prevails across the board
for violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law by Israeli forces. These forces refused to
change course despite knowledge of the massive death
and destruction being caused by their actions in Gaza.
This, the Commission concludes, may even amount to
war crimes.
The persistent lack of implementation of
recommendations regarding violations made by
similar previous Commissions all but guarantee their
systematic recurrence. This impunity must end. The
full implementation of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation-sponsored and Pakistan-steered Human
Rights Council resolution of 1 July 2015 would, we
hope, be a step towards ending this cycle of impunity.
The devastation of Gaza, mind you, is but one
aspect of the daily hardships that the Palestinians
face as a result of Israeli oppression. The eight-year
blockade of Gaza, the detention regime, excessive
use of force against Palestinian civilians and illegal
settlements all continue unabated and unchecked. It is
heartbreaking that of the more than 12,500 houses that
were completely destroyed in Gaza not a single one has
so far been rebuilt.

15-2288235/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The international community must act to alleviate
the suffering of the people of Gaza, especially because
it shares part of the blame. We collectively have not
lived up to our promises. Only 28 per cent of the amount
pledged at the Cairo Conference in October 2014 has so
far been disbursed.
We believe that the path to sustainable peace in the
Middle East can only lie in a two-State solution and an
end to Israeli occupation of all Arab lands. This body, as
the prime custodian of international peace and security,
must take its responsibility seriously. We call on the
Security Council to adopt a resolution setting timelines
and parameters for establishing an independent, viable
and contiguous State of Palestine, based on the pre-1967
borders, with Jerusalem as its capital. An international
mechanism to steer the process is also imperative.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
poses a spreading threat to security across the Middle
East, North Africa and even beyond. A purely military
approach is neither sufficient nor permanent in its
impact. A comprehensive military, political, economic
and social strategy is needed to defeat a movement
that is motivated by an ideology of hate and gruesome
violence.
In Iraq, ISIS must be confronted and rolled back.
That should be achieved by the State, not by sectarian
militias. Success will come about only if the minority
population is fully assured of its safety and its human
rights. Durable peace can be achieved through political
solutions, not just military engagements.
Syria continues to bleed profusely. Apart from
defeating ISIS, a serious search for a political solution
in Syria is needed. We welcome the consultations on
Syria undertaken by Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
in Geneva. We look forward to the comprehensive
peace plan that he will present and hope that it will
garner the support of parties to the conflict as well as
of the international community. Dialogue, we believe,
is the only way out of that quagmire.
In Yemen, Pakistan is concerned that the
humanitarian pause has not held. We urge parties to the
conflict to return to the negotiating table. The legitimate
Government of Yemen must be restored. That effort
should be led by diplomacy and engagement.
Finally, my country welcomes the landmark
agreement recently reached with Iran, which, if fully
and sincerely implemented, can contribute not only to
nuclear non-proliferation but also to regional stability,
36/65

23/07/2015

cooperation and economic growth. That would also open
the way for closer consultations and even agreement on
how to address pressing regional challenges, which, at
the end of the day, require regional responses.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank
New Zealand for convening this important open debate,
as well as Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for
his briefing. Brazil also wishes to acknowledge the
statements made by the Permanent Representative
of Israel and the Permanent Observer of the State of
Palestine.
Today’s exercise is happening against the backdrop
of increasing tensions and threats to international peace
and security in different parts of the region. Violent
extremism conducive to international terrorism is on
the rise, spreading fear, violating human rights and
international humanitarian law, and adding greater
complexity to the task of bringing peace and stability
to the region.
We remain deeply troubled by the fact that the peace
process between Israel and Palestine is paralysed. The
international community must not be idle, as each day
we watch the violence increase and the viability of the
two-State solution dwindle as a result of the continuous
expansion of Israeli settlements.
One year after the latest conflict, the situation in
Gaza remains deeply distressing. It is appalling to learn
that in the past 15 years the number of people in Gaza
requiring humanitarian assistance has undergone a tenfold increase, from 80,000 in 2000 to 890,000 in 2015.
Under such circumstances, accepting the status
quo is simply not an option. We reiterate our call for the
Security Council to fully carry out its responsibilities
under the Charter of the United Nations and actively
support and steer the peace process. It is our collective
responsibility to bring about a renewed negotiating
process that will promptly lead to a two-State solution.
We welcome multilateral initiatives, such as the one led
by France in the Security Council on the relaunching of
peace talks.
Turning to Syria, after more than three years since
the adoption of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex), we are deeply disturbed that the prospects for
success in resolving the conflict remain elusive. The
indiscriminate attacks against the civilian population,

15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

including the use of chemical substances and barrel
bombs as weapons, are simply unacceptable. All parties
to the conflict must comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, including by providing safe, full and
unimpeded access to humanitarian agencies, taking
into account the relevant Security Council resolutions.
There is no military solution to the Syrian crisis.
It is high time for the parties to engage genuinely in
political negotiations aimed at ending the conflict.
We reaffirm our support for the efforts of Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura and look forward to hearing
his recommendations on the implementation of the
Geneva communiqué based on the consultations he
held with several parties during the past weeks. We
also appreciate the efforts by the Russian Federation to
promote dialogue between the parties.
Once again, we commend the outstanding
generosity of many countries in the region, including
Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan and Egypt, which have been
receiving the bulk of the Syrian refugees. Brazil has
also contributed to the humanitarian efforts by issuing
more than 7,000 entry visas for Syrian residents affected
by the crisis and by providing food and medicine to
help alleviate the dire situation faced by refugees and
displaced people in the region.
We support the efforts by the Lebanese Government
to overcome the difficulties caused by the spillover of
the war in Syria. In that regard, Brazil urges all the
relevant political actors to make every effort to end
the presidential vacuum in Lebanon. We are convinced
that such a development would further strengthen
the country in the face of the current political and
security challenges. We also firmly support the policy
of dissociation from regional crises agreed to in the
Baabda Declaration of June 2012.
Despite those serious challenges in the Middle
East, there is reason for hope. We would like to
conclude this statement by once again expressing
Brazil’s great satisfaction with the recent conclusion of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian
nuclear programme and its unanimous endorsement
by the Security Council, which we certainly welcome.
We congratulate all parties to the agreement for the
political will, persistence and determination shown
throughout the complex and highly sensitive negotiating
process. Those qualities will also be crucial for the
implementation of the agreement.

S/PV.7490

Brazil has always supported diplomatic efforts
aimed at ensuring the peaceful nature of the Iranian
nuclear programme and the normalization of Iran’s
relations with the international community, including
through the 2010 Tehran Declaration. The Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action demonstrates the
effectiveness of diplomacy in bridging differences and
creating truly sustainable peace.
We are confident that the success achieved in
Vienna will significantly contribute to the launching of
a new and productive phase in the relations between
Iran and the other parties to the agreement. The
agreement has the potential to help reduce international
and regional tensions for the benefit of the entire
international community. Brazil expresses its readiness
to continue to collaborate through diplomatic means for
the furtherance of stability, peace and prosperity of the
Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Ms. Stener (Norway): Norway also welcomes the
recent historic agreement between the P5+1 and Iran on
the Iranian nuclear programme. We stand ready to assist
and support the International Atomic Energy Agency in
the important and demanding task of monitoring the
implementation of the agreement. There is hope that
the agreement will open a window for settling other
pressing issues in the region.
For more than a year, the efforts towards realizing a
two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict have
been suspended. Now is the time for the international
community to find concerted ways to aid the parties in
reinvigorating the peace process. Norway welcomes the
European Union initiative to discuss how to broaden
support for the process. The Security Council should
also explore how it may be of assistance.
Norway believes that an important way of preparing
the ground for a renewed process is to strengthen the
Palestinian economy and further improve the Palestinian
institutions of governance. The sustainability of
those institutions has been severely threatened by the
restricted economic space. Improved market access is
key for the Palestinian economy to thrive.
Norway therefore appeals to Israel to increase
its efforts — working together with the Palestinian
Authority and within the arrangements established by
the Oslo Accords and the Paris Protocol — to settle

15-2288237/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

outstanding problems, increase space for Palestinian
economic activity and improve the financial
sustainability of the Palestinian Authority, which needs
more support from its donors. To follow up on the
technical meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
(AHLC) in Brussels on 27 May, Norway will convene
a meeting of the AHLC at the ministerial level here in
New York in September. The objective is to address the
challenges and provide the necessary political guidance
for further donor efforts. We appeal to the parties to
avoid provocative measures. A freeze on the Israeli
plans to demolish the Palestinian village of Susiya
would be taken as a measure of goodwill.
There are positive developments in the
reconstruction work in Gaza, but progress is still far
too slow in terms of access, funding and the unification
of the administration. Norway notes with satisfaction
that Israel has allowed increased volumes of imported
goods to enter, and that Egypt has extended the opening
of the Rafah crossing. We call on Israel to further lift
the restrictions on access to Gaza. We also call on
donors to honour the pledges they made at the Cairo
International Conference on Gaza Reconstruction, and
we call on the Palestinians to renew their efforts to
reunite the administrations of Gaza and the West Bank
under the Palestinian Authority.
We were horrified by the bomb attack in
Diyala province in Iraq, and again in Turkey, where
young people on an idealistic mission of peace and
reconstruction were brutally targeted. Recently,
victims of terrorism have included tourists on a beach
in Tunisia and worshippers in a mosque in Kuwait.
In Iraq, we have seen progress in the fight against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), but clear
challenges remain. Non-sectarian messages should seek
to counter the forces fuelling sectarian fears and actions.
Iraqi Prime Minister Al Abadi should be commended
for his efforts in that regard. We encourage the Iraqi
Government to further step up its reconciliation efforts
and to give all of Iraq’s constituent communities a real
stake in the future of the State. The struggle against
ISIL will take time. As villages and towns in Iraq and
Syria are liberated, it is important that the rule of law
and respect for human rights replace the rule of terror.
The situation in Syria is becoming ever more
desperate and fragmented. The regional and international
parties involved must intensify their efforts to find
a political solution to the armed conflict. Norway
supports all efforts to that end, particularly the efforts
38/65

23/07/2015

of United Nations Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura.
But the United Nations Envoy can only make progress
on the issues that the Council agrees on. Therefore,
each Member State bears a great responsibility to seek
unifying action, to work with the parties and to pave
the way towards a political solution. Norway also calls
for full and safe access for humanitarian actors to all
Syrian people in need.
Finally, spearheaded by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya, Mr. Bernadino
León, the Skhirat agreement is a critical first step
towards ending the armed conflict in Libya. Norway
strongly urges the party that was absent in Skhirat to
address outstanding concerns through the remaining
annex negotiations. The final agreement must be
founded on broad Libyan consensus in order to stand a
real chance of successful implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Hallergard: I thank New Zealand, and in
particular the Minister for Foreign Affairs of New
Zealand, for convening and presiding over this meeting.
I also thank Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing and
hard and good work on this difficult theme.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; and the European Free Trade Association
country and member of the European Economic Area
Liechtenstein, as well as Ukraine, align themselves
with this statement.
The European Union remains committed to a just
and comprehensive resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. There is no alternative to a negotiated twoState solution, whose viability is, however, constantly
being eroded by new facts on the ground. We urge
both parties to demonstrate their stated commitment
to a two-State solution through concrete actions. The
European Union will actively support them to create an
environment of trust necessary to engage in meaningful
negotiations as soon as possible.
An immediate priority must be to address the grave
situation in Gaza. All international community pledges
should be honoured. We are also concerned over the
severe lack of funds being faced by the United Nations
15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East’s, and call on all concerned donors to step up
their funding.
The European Union believes that compliance
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law by States and non-State actors,
including accountability, is a cornerstone for peace and
security in the region.
We welcome recent steps taken by Israel to ease
restrictions in Gaza. Further positive measures are
now needed for the full delivery of humanitarian
aid, reconstruction and economic recovery on a
permanent basis. We call for a fundamental change in
the political, security and economic situation in Gaza,
including the end of the closure and a full opening
of the crossing points, while still addressing Israel’s
legitimate security concerns. Recent rocket fire by
militant groups is unacceptable and underlines again
the danger of escalation. All stakeholders must commit
to non-violence and peace. We call on all parties to
agree on a durable ceasefire that prevents a return
to conflict, strengthens Gaza as an integral part of a
future Palestinian State and reinforces the link between
Gaza and the West Bank.
The European Union urges all Palestinian factions
to find common ground, based on non-violence and
reconciliation, and to work together to address the
needs of the Palestinian population. We call on the
Palestinian factions to make reconciliation and the
return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza a top
priority. The Authority must take greater responsibility
in that regard and assume all Government functions
in Gaza. The European Union is ready to provide full
support to those efforts.
We are committed to working with all sides so
as to allow the socioeconomic development of the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and empower
Palestinian institutions in preparation for statehood.
We stress that actions such as the easing of restrictions
must be part of a fundamental change of policy with
regard to the occupied Palestinian territory. We call on
Israel to enable accelerated Palestinian construction, as
well as social and economic development in Area C.
We furthermore call on the Israeli authorities to halt
plans for the forced transfer of the population and the
demolition of Palestinian housing and infrastructure in
the Susiya and Abu Nwar communities.

S/PV.7490

The preservation of the viability of a two-State
solution is at the core of EU policy. In that regard,
while recalling that the settlements are illegal under
international law, the European Union reiterates its
strong opposition to Israel’s settlement policy and
the actions taken in that context, such as building the
separation barrier beyond the 1967 line, demolitions
and confiscation — including of EU-funded
projects — evictions, forced transfers — including
of Bedouins — illegal outposts, settler violence and
restrictions on movement and access. Those actions
seriously threaten the two-State solution. Settlement
activity in East Jerusalem seriously jeopardizes the
possibility of Jerusalem serving as the future capital
of both States. We will continue to closely monitor
developments on the ground and their broader
implications, and we remain ready to take further
action in order to protect the viability of the twoState solution. The EU and its member States reaffirm
their commitment to ensuring the continued, full and
effective implementation of existing EU legislation
and bilateral arrangements applicable to settlement
products. We express our commitment to ensure that,
in line with international law, all agreements between
the State of Israel and the EU must unequivocally and
explicitly indicate their inapplicability to the territories
occupied by Israel in 1967.
Securing a just and lasting peace will require an
increased common international effort. The European
Union will work actively on a renewed multilateral
approach to the peace process in consultation with
all relevant stakeholders. The establishment of an
international support group is a possible way to
contribute to that goal. The EU’s position on parameters,
as set out in its Foreign Affairs Council conclusions of
July 2014, provides a basis for achieving consensus
on the way forward. The European Union is ready to
engage in joint work with regional partners on the basis
of the Arab Peace Initiative, and welcomes the ongoing
efforts of the Quartet in that regard.
A lasting solution to the conflict in Syria is urgently
required. We fully support the efforts of United Nations
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura to revive a political
process. We hope the Geneva consultations will help
launch a Syrian-led inclusive political process leading
to a transition, based on the Geneva communiqué of
30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex) and in line with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Our ultimate
objective is to help build a democratic and pluralistic

15-2288239/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Syria. That political approach is at the heart of the EU
regional strategy for Syria, Iraq and the threat of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), or Daesh.
In Iraq, the EU will continue to work closely with the
Government, supporting it as much as we can in its
efforts to restore inclusive governance and stability.
In Syria, an inclusive political transition is crucial to
sustainable peace and stability. All Member States,
in accordance with resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178
(2014), should take decisive action to stop the flow of
foreign fighters and to counter ISIL/Daesh financing
and combat its incitement. The Al-Assad regime’s
brutal war against its own people, massive human
rights violations, and systematic obstruction against
democratic reforms have contributed to the flourishing
of ISIL/Daesh in Syria. As a consequence of its policies
and actions, the Al-Assad regime cannot be a partner in
the fight against Daesh.
More than 220,000 Syrians have been killed and
more than half of the population is displaced. Peace
will remain elusive in Syria as long as impunity reigns.
The perpetrators of violations and abuses must be held
to account. In a letter dated 18 June, 71 countries,
including all EU member States, expressed their
outrage at the never-ending state of unchecked brutality
in Syria, in particular through the systematic use of
barrel bombs. The Arria Formula meeting convened
by France and Spain on 26 June clearly showed the
Council the terrible toll exacted on civilians by the
Al-Assad regime’s widespread use of barrel bombs.
We strongly condemn those indiscriminate attacks, as
well as the continued besieging of civilian areas, the
use of the starvation of civilians as a combat method
and the arbitrary detention and torture of thousands of
Syrians. We believe it is high time for the Council to
follow up on its own resolutions, including resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014), and to take
decisive action to put an end to these ongoing violations
of international law and the Council’s resolutions.
We are equally concerned about the frequent
reports that toxic chemicals such as chlorine have
been used as weapons in Syria. The use of chlorine gas
as a weapon is a violation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention as well as of resolutions 2118 (2013) and
2209 (2015). Both resolutions foresaw further measures
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
in case of non-compliance. We strongly support the
initiative being discussed in the Council to establish
an attribution mechanism through a joint investigative

40/65

23/07/2015

mechanism of the United Nations and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
I would like to conclude by stressing the EU’s
determination to continue supporting the Syrians and
the refugee-hosting countries in the region affected by
the crisis, particularly Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey.
Overall, the European Union has mobilized more than
€3.7 billion since the outbreak of the Syrian crisis. At
the third Kuwait pledging conference, on 31 March, the
European Union and its member States pledged close to
€1.1 billion.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM) and to convey the Movement’s
appreciation to New Zealand and its Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Murray McCully, for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine, at this critical
juncture for Palestine, the Palestinian people and the
Middle East. I would also like to thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, the United Nations Special Coordinator and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his informative briefing.
The Non-Aligned Movement would like to take this
opportunity to reaffirm its longstanding solidarity with
the Palestinian people and to reiterate its support for
their realization of their legitimate national aspirations
and inalienable rights, including self-determination
and freedom in an independent State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, along with a just solution
to the plight of Palestinian refugees, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
We should keep in mind that the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly contain the
fundamental principles for a just, lasting and peaceful
solution. The question of Palestine has been on the
United Nations agenda for more than 67 years, almost
as long as the Organization has existed, so it is not
for lack of attention that the conflict and its injustices
continue. That is due rather to a lack of political will
and the Security Council’s repeated failure to uphold
its responsibilities, leaving the Palestinian people with
little hope of realizing their right to self-determination
and freedom and the justice and peace they have been
denied for so long.

15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Despite decades of the Palestinian people’s
good-faith participation in peace efforts and a
clear commitment by them and their leadership to
international law, reaffirmed by Palestine’s recent
accession to several international conventions and
treaties, Palestine’s plight and predicament have
worsened on all fronts. That is directly owing to Israel’s
illegal policies and practices, which have entrenched
the occupation, caused widespread suffering and
flagrantly undermined all peace efforts, to a point
where the viability of a two-State solution has been cast
into grave doubt.
As we witness escalating breaches by Israel, the
occupying Power, of international law, including
humanitarian and human rights law, we stress that it
is high time for the international community to take a
decisive and historic step towards ending the occupation
of Palestinian lands and paving the way for a just and
peaceful settlement of the conflict. In doing so, the
Council would be fulfilling its duty under the Charter of
the United Nations to maintain international peace and
security and make a genuine contribution to a solution
of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, which is at the core of
the Arab-Israeli conflict and remains a source of grave
concern for the region and the international community
and for the prospects for global peace and stability.
This time last year, Israel was carrying out an
act of military aggression against the besieged Gaza
Strip that lasted for 51 days, during which it inflicted
widespread death, injury and trauma on Palestine’s
civilian population and massive destruction of their
homes and infrastructure. According to the report of
the Human Rights Council’s Independent Commission
of Inquiry, the scale of the devastation in Gaza was
unprecedented, and serious violations of international
humanitarian law, in some cases amounting to war
crimes, were committed by the Israeli occupying
forces. According to the Secretary-General’s summary
of the Board of Inquiry report (S/2015/286) into certain
incidents affecting schools run by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA), as a result of Israeli actions
during the 2014 conflict, at least 44 Palestinians were
killed and 227 injured at seven UNRWA schools that
were used as emergency shelters.
The Secretary-General’s annual report on children
and armed conflict (S/2015/409) states that at least 540
Palestinian children were killed during the conflict,
and 2,955 were injured. At least 262 schools, 274

S/PV.7490

kindergartens and 17 hospitals in Gaza were damaged,
while only three schools were damaged in Israel.
That report concludes that the unprecedented and
unacceptable scale of the impact on children in 2014
raises grave concerns about Israel’s compliance with
international humanitarian law, notably the principles
of distinction, proportionality and precaution in
attack, and respect for international human rights law,
particularly in relation to the excessive use of force.
Israel has not been held accountable for those crimes,
despite the fact that the occupying forces launched tens
of thousands of missiles, bombs, artillery shells and
live ammunition against the defenceless Palestinian
civilian population in a brutal onslaught that killed
more than 2,200 Palestinians, the majority of them
civilians, including hundreds of children and women;
injured more than 11,000 people; displaced hundreds of
thousands; and terrorized the entire population.
It is unacceptable that this humanitarian disaster,
deliberately inflicted on the Palestinian people by the
occupying Power, remains without redress and that,
one year later, not a single home of the more than
12,000 homes completely destroyed has been rebuilt,
as the illegal Israeli blockade continues to obstruct
reconstruction; more than 100,000 people remain
homeless; and socioeconomic conditions continue
to deteriorate, as Gaza continues to be suffocated by
the blockade and isolated from the rest of Palestine
and the entire world. It is unacceptable that Israeli
impunity persists without consequence. There can be
no justification for such inhumanity and criminality.
We appeal to the Security Council once again to uphold
its Charter and moral duties and act to redress this
injustice.
The Security Council must also act to address
Israel’s ongoing illegal colonization of the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in line
with international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention and the Council’s own resolutions. How
can the Council remain silent as Israel continues,
deliberately and systematically, its settlement and
wall construction and the confiscation and de facto
annexation of Palestinian land, destroying the possibility
of realizing the two-State solution for peace? Those and
other systematic violations — including the demolition
of homes, the forced displacement of Palestinian
civilians, the arrest and detention of Palestinians,
including children, and incessant violence, terror and
provocations by Israeli settlers and extremists, including

15-2288241/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

at sensitive religious sites, particularly the Al-Aqsa
Mosque in occupied East Jerusalem — have persisted
unabated, worsening the already fragile situation on the
ground, and must be addressed immediately to avert
further destabilization and to salvage the two-State
solution based on the pre-1967 borders.
The Security Council cannot remain on the
sidelines in the quest to find a just and peaceful
solution to the question of Palestine. NAM once again
urges the Security Council to act forthwith to end the
plight of the Palestinian people with resolute action
towards ending the Israeli occupation, supporting the
realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people and establishing peace and security so as to put
an end to this prolonged conflict that has so severely
destabilized the region and undermined international
law and our international system as a whole.
NAM believes that the message is clear worldwide.
It is high time to end this abhorrent Israeli occupation
and the impunity that has brought so much suffering,
has caused so many crises, sown so much instability
and anger throughout the Middle East, and continues
to undermine regional and global peace and security.
The position of NAM vis-à-vis the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict and the question of Palestine as a whole is clear
and strong, as reflected in its summits and ministerial
declarations over the decades. NAM will therefore
not relent in calling on the Security Council to act in
accordance with its Charter duties, its resolutions and the
applicable provisions of international law that provide
the solution to the conflict. We stress the important
role to be played by the NAM caucus members of the
Council in this regard and call for active engagement
to uphold our collective responsibilities for finding a
solution.
Lebanon continues to suffer from consecutive
Israeli violation of its borders and incursion into its
territory, followed by subsequent years of occupation
and aggression. Unfortunately, Israel still continues to
violate Lebanese airspace, intensifying its incursions
over Lebanon. Such activities are a blatant violation
of Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006). The
provisions of that resolution should be implemented
in a manner that guarantees the consolidation of the
foundations of stability and security in Lebanon and
prevents Israel from undertaking its daily violations of
Lebanese sovereignty.

42/65

23/07/2015

With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement condemns all the measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan,
which intensified after the outbreak of the Syrian crisis.
The Non-Aligned Movement demands once again that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June
1967, in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
the presidency of New Zealand for convening this open
debate. My delegation also welcomes the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of New Zealand, His Excellency
Mr. Murray McCully, and thanks him for presiding
over the debate earlier today. Our gratitude also goes
to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his useful briefing.
Before I make a few remarks in my national
capacity, I wish to align myself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and the
statement to be delivered later by the representative
of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.
We are meeting at a bleak time in the situation
in the Middle East, which needs a fresh and closer
look as well as renewed commitment, especially from
the Security Council, to address the problem in an
integrated manner, not only on the political front, but
also from the humanitarian aspects of the crisis. Allow
me to focus on the issue of Palestine.
Indonesia’s advocacy of the rights of the Palestinian
people is a long and unflinching one. We support their
right to live in peace as one people in a State of their
own. To that end, we strongly stand by the vision of
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security. In that regard, we are pleased by the
growing recognition of the State of Palestine by various
countries and entities, the accession of Palestine to
various international treaties and its admission to
international organizations. We consistently support
Palestine’s efforts towards its eventual full membership

15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in the United Nations, which will make Palestine an
equal member of the community of sovereign States.
Indonesia is deeply concerned about the continued
stalemate on the road towards peace. We stress the
urgent need to revive the peace process, and possibly the
convening of an international conference to deliberate
on the issue. In that connection, the need to review
the role and mandate of the Quartet has also become
glaring. Indonesia supports ideas and initiatives that set
a framework for the resumption of the peace process
and include clear parameters and a time frame. We
believe that such ideas and initiatives have the potential
to give us a new opportunity and approach to break the
impasse in the peace process.
There are clearly deteriorating humanitarian
conditions in the occupied Palestinian territory. It
is now one year since Israel’s last assault on Gaza in
2014. When it was over, well over 2,200 Palestinians
were dead. They included more than 550 children and
299 women. The injured, many of them critically,
numbered more than 11,000. When the 51 days of
bombardment ended, much of Gaza lay in ruins, with
critical infrastructure — such as schools, roads and
hospitals — levelled to the ground. An unprecedented
humanitarian nightmare arose with 100,000 people
rendered homeless. Up until today, Gaza has little
electricity or water. According to the World Bank, its
unemployment is the highest in the world at 43 per cent.
Nearly 80 per cent of the population is dependent on
aid. The youth of Gaza face a bleak future.
On many occasions, we have called for the reversal
of this situation and for the international community
to redouble its efforts to prevent the recurrence of
Israeli aggression. That includes taking steps to hold
accountable those responsible for the aggression that
resulted in a great number of casualties among the
Palestinian civilian population.
Regrettably, since the ceasefire of 2014, Israeli forces
have continued to execute a reign of terror throughout
the occupied Palestinian territory. Israel is continuing
with its construction of the separation wall, confiscating
Palestinian land, demolishing homes and properties,
forcibly displacing and evacuating Palestinian
families, and shooting and arresting Palestinians, with
absolutely no concern for human rights. In addition,
Israel is continuing its illegal settlements throughout
occupied Palestine, especially in and around occupied
East Jerusalem, trampling on international law and the

S/PV.7490

advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the Legal consequences of the construction of a wall
in the occupied Palestinian territory (A/ES-10/273).
Indonesia reiterates its call upon the Security
Council to assume its responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations and bring the conflict to an end
without further delay. The Council should renew efforts
towards the resumption of the peace process, beginning
with ensuring the compliance of Israel with the relevant
international laws and United Nations resolutions,
particularly those of the Council. We believe that the
extensive work of various organs and bodies within the
United Nations with regard to finding a comprehensive
solution to the Palestinian conflict would add value in
that regard.
Lastly, my delegation wishes to welcome the
agreement reached by the P5+1 with the Islamic
Republic of Iran on its nuclear programme. That is
indeed a historic achievement, which we hope will
create momentum for the international community to
make progress in finding a comprehensive solution to
the situation in the Middle East. We call on the Council
to capitalize on that momentum in order to boost its
endeavours to achieve a comprehensive settlement
of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Peace has eluded
the Middle East for too long, and it is our collective
responsibility to ensure that we discharge this historic
burden.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation would like to welcome the
presence among us earlier today at this important
debate of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of New
Zealand, Mr. Murray McCully. We would also like
to congratulate the delegation of New Zealand on
its very able leadership of the Council and all the
work that it has been doing throughout the month of
July while exercising its presidency of the Security
Council. We also are grateful for the briefing made by
the United Nations Special Coordinator and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, on recent events in the Middle East. We have
taken due note of the content of his briefing.
A year ago, we witnessed the beginning of what
turned out to be the latest round of conflict between
Palestinian armed groups and the Israel security forces.
We also saw the launching of Operation Protective

15-2288243/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Edge in Gaza by Israel. Those actions led to some of the
worst fighting seen in Gaza since 1967. Still today, we
continue to see the aftermath of those acts, particularly
the suffering and pain that they have caused to the
civilian population.
The various reports published by the United Nations
clearly spell out to the reader the levels of violence that
were reached during the conflict. For example, in the
report published by the Independent Commission of
Inquiry established by the Human Rights Council, we
saw underscored the unprecedented devastation as well
as the serious violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law caused by Israel and
Palestinian armed groups, actions which in some cases
could be equated to war crimes.
In addition, in the Secretary-General’s summary of
the report of the United Nations Headquarters Board
of Inquiry on various incidents that had occurred
in Gaza which affected schools administered by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, we see clear evidence of the
attacks and abuses committed against United Nations
schools that were being used as emergency shelters.
Moreover, in one of the most alarming reports, the
report (S/2015/409) of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict, we are confronted with the statistic
of the number of Palestinian children murdered in 2014,
a number higher than the number of children who died
in the Syrian Arab Republic and in Darfur. There can
be no doubt that the situation is unsustainable.
In addition to all that I have just detailed, we need
to add the precarious economic situation that persists
in Gaza, an area in which the unemployment rate is the
highest in the world, standing at 44 per cent. Although
it could be said that some progress has been made in
the reconstruction of Gaza following the lifting of some
restrictions, the blockade imposed by Israel continues
to heavily impact upon the viability of this people.
The situation in the West Bank has been further
complicated by the increasing number of clashes
between Palestinian protesters and the Israeli security
forces, alongside the expansion in settlements and the
forced displacement of Palestinians from Area C in
East Jerusalem. In a similar vein, following a period
of relative calm, the number of sporadic rocket attacks
launched from Gaza targeting Israel has also increased.
For all those reasons, it is essential that we establish
a political time line that responds to the legitimate
44/65

23/07/2015

needs of both peoples that would allow us to arrive at a
lasting and just agreement. It is for that reason, and to
avoid a repetition of the conflict that we saw a year ago,
that the international community has to play a key role
in supporting and driving forward the peace process in
the region.
We recognize the value of the principle of shared
responsibility, and therefore believe that the active
participation of both the diplomatic Quartet on the
Middle East and the Security Council in the peace
process can, and should, serve to revitalize the process
so that the parties are able to take responsible steps
towards a broad, just and lasting peace. We urge the
Council to debate the Arab Peace Initiative, which sets
out a vision for a global solution to the Israeli-Arab
conflict, as well as the key role that can be played by
countries in the region and the Security Council.
Parties should avoid adopting measures that
will hinder still further perspectives for a renewal of
meaningful talks. We see the parties as being those
who are principally interested in making a genuine and
renewed effort, which would include, inter alia, the
total lifting of the blockade, a halt in the construction
of illegal settlements, a halt in the carrying out of
provocative acts and the cessation of the launching of
rockets, all of which should be done in order to guarantee
the legitimate security concerns of Israel. It is essential
that parties continue to build trust between themselves
and that they commit to the option of peace talks and
the two-State solution, Israel and Palestine coexisting
side by side in conditions of peace and security, and
both adopting measures aimed at rebuilding mutual
trust.
Very briefly, I should like to refer to the very
serious humanitarian situation and the risks posed to
economic and social development caused by the various
conflicts in the Middle East region.
Over the last few years, we have borne witness
to the havoc caused by war and the rise in violence in
Syria, Iraq and Yemen, as well as the poverty into which
the civilian population has been thrown. We would like
to point to the invaluable support extended by peoples
and Governments of countries neighbouring Syria, in
particular Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon and Egypt, which
have sought to alleviate somewhat the circumstances
of these persons. But the burden they have shouldered
is too great and it is crucial that the international
community support them in their development goals so
that they can maintain their domestic stability, given
15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that this is a cornerstone for guaranteeing peace in the
region.
We are aware of the huge challenges that the
quest for a political solution, both at the national and
international level, might pose to the parties. But this is
the only path open to us. It is our political and historical
responsibility as member States of the international
community to support those measures that might allow
us to achieve such a solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the Deputy
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See.
Monsignor Kassas (Holy See): My delegation
congratulates the President on New Zealand’s
presidency of the Security Council this month and
commends him for convening this timely open debate.
The Holy See continues to monitor closely the
situation in the Middle East, which is deeply afflicted
by various conflicts that continue to intensify.
Unfortunately, the international community, which
seems to have become accustomed to these conflicts,
has not yet succeeded in working out a sufficient
response.
A particular worry is the situation in Syria, where
the dramatic humanitarian situation affecting more than
half of the population calls for renewed commitment
by all in order to arrive at a political solution to the
conflict. We should not continue to look helplessly from
the sidelines while a great country is being destroyed.
The situation in Syria requires putting aside many
particular interests in order to prioritize those of Syria
and of the Syrians themselves.

S/PV.7490

While being aware of the sufferings of entire
populations, I wish to point out the sufferings that
Christians and other minority ethnic and religious
groups are suffering, forcing many of them to leave their
homes. The diminution of the Christian presence is a
grave loss for the entire region, where Christians have
been present since the very beginnings of Christianity
and where they wish to continue cooperating with their
fellow citizens in building harmonious societies and
working for the common good as promoters of peace,
reconciliation and development.
My delegation wishes to express appreciation for
the agreement that has been reached between Iran and
the 5+1 group.
On 26 June, the Holy See and the State of Palestine
signed the comprehensive agreement that follows
the basic agreement between the Holy See and the
Palestine Liberation Organization of 15 February 2000.
That agreement is indicative of the progress made by
the Palestinian Authority in recent years, above all in
the level of international support it has obtained, as
exemplified by General Assembly resolution 67/19,
which, among other things, recognizes Palestine as
a non-member Observer State. The Holy See hopes
that this agreement may in some way promote the
achievement of the two-State solution, bringing a
definitive end to the long-standing Israeli-Palestinian
conflict that continues to cause suffering to both
parties, and that the agreement may offer, within the
complex reality of the Middle East, a good example of
dialogue and cooperation.
As Pope Francis said during his pilgrimage to the
Holy Land last year:

In Syria as well as in Iraq, we continue to be gravely
concerned about the terrorist acts perpetrated by the
so-called Islamic State. This is a challenge not only for
the region but for the entire international community,
which is called upon to cooperate with unity of purpose
in order to thwart this terrorist plague, which is
expanding its activities into different countries.

“The time has come for everyone to find the
courage to be generous and creative in the service
of the common good, the courage to forge a peace
which rests on the acknowledgment by all of the
right of two States to exist and to live in peace
and security within internationally recognized
borders.”

By having to take care of millions of refugees,
Lebanon and Jordan also bear the brunt of the conflict in
neighbouring Syria. They urgently need the solidarity
of the whole international community. The Holy
See hopes that the land of the cedars will be able to
resolve, as soon as possible, this period of institutional
instability arising largely from the vacancy for more
than a year now of the presidency of the country.

In that context, my delegation wishes to reiterate
that the peace process can move forward only if it is
directly negotiated between the two parties with the
support of the international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.

15-2288245/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): First, I
should like to congratulate New Zealand on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We also commend the presidency for convening this
meeting on a subject that is of great importance to the
Islamic and Arab world.
On a note of hope, I should like to congratulate the
Libyans on the negotiations, in which we assisted, in
reaching the the Skhirat agreement, which has been
ratified and which augurs the possibility of exiting
from the Libyan crisis. It is a major accomplishment in
Libya’s efforts to put an end to the conflict and to help
establish a Libyan State that is modern. The people of
Libya wish this. My country, inspired by the guidelines
from our King, Mohammed VI, supports Libya in
trying to reach its aspirations based on the principles of
justice and dignity. The people of Libya are entitled to
this. The Kingdom will continue in its determination to
support Libya in future so that it will be able to recover
and regain its status among the nations.
Since the last open debate on the Middle East
(see S/PV.7430), no breakthrough has been noted and
the economic and social situation for the Palestinians
keeps getting worse. The political situation continues
to encounter obstacles months after the beginning of
negotiations. We deplore the situation in Palestine, in
particular in Jerusalem. The legal status of Jerusalem
must be protected and must not be threatened, and
measures must not be taken to change that status. All of
the measures to change it must be considered null and
void. It is a place for Christians and Muslims. Our King
has said in international meetings that the settlements
and Judaization must be condemned as well as attacks
on the faithful. In Marrakesh in 2014, the Committee
chaired by our King reiterated the principles of a sacred
city for Muslims. This is at the heart of a political
solution. Attacks against the Al-Aqsa Mosque will lead
only to further violence and will serve only to achieve
the interests of extremists and those who try to sow the
seeds of hatred. The perpetrators of such actions are
co-terrorists, to which desperate young people will be
drawn if the situation continues as it is.
As part of the efforts by the Arab Ministerial
Committee at the summit held at Sharm El-Sheikh
in March, Morocco welcomes the efforts of Egypt, a
fraternal country, as well as of Jordan, a member of
the Council, Palestine and the Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States, all of whom are trying to
mobilize international peace efforts for the Palestinian

46/65

23/07/2015

cause and put an end to the occupation according to a
determined timetable, so as to establish an independent
Palestinian State along the borders of 4 June 1967.
A final settlement must also be found on the basis
of the Arab Peace Initiative, the resolutions of the
United Nations and the relevant documents. Morocco
will continue to support the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital and along the lines of the 1967 borders, as
part of a solution based on two States living side by side
in peace and coexistence in line with the Arab Peace
Initiative.
In earlier statements to the Council, we warned
of the possibility of a conflict in Yemen given the
instability and selfishness of the position of certain
parties. Some parties are trying to proclaim a fait
accompli, in violation of resolutions 2201 (2015) and
2216 (2015). Those parties are attempting to get out of
their obligations and ignore the outcome of the National
Dialogue, which is leading to an undermining of the
political transition process, a flexible process in Yemen.
That is leading to a cycle of violence and aggravation
of the humanitarian situation in the country. Once
again, we call on all the parties in Yemen, including
the Houthis, to implement those resolutions, withdraw
their forces from all invaded areas and put an end to
the violence. We welcome the efforts of Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed.
We call on the Yemeni parties to use wisdom and make
sure that the overall interests prevail in order to protect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country.
The people of Syria continue to suffer from the
repercussions of the crisis in that country. Five years
after it began, we still see no ray of hope. The crisis
continues to claim lives and produce refugees and
internally displaced persons by the millions. Morocco
has contributed to the work of the third international
donors conference in order to support and help the
humanitarian situation. On 31 March in Kuwait, we
offered assistance to our Syrian brothers, especially the
refugees, to alleviate their suffering. This took the form
of a multi-purpose hospital in the Zaatari refugee camp,
which King Mohammed VI had been calling for since
2012. The hospital provides therapeutic and medical
services on a regular basis to thousands of Syrians.
Morocco will spare no effort to find a political
settlement to the crisis in Syria. We believe that the
solution in Syria requires dialogue, not war, as well as

15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

finding ways and means to implement the first Geneva
communiqué (S/2013/522, annex). My delegation
supports the efforts of Mr. Staffan de Mistura to find a
way out of the crisis. We need to protect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria.
We also support the independence, unity, and
territorial integrity of Lebanon. We welcome the
responsible national spirit demonstrated by the
Lebanese people at the highest levels to protect the
security, stability and sovereignty of that country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to congratulate you, Madam President, your
delegation and the New Zealand Minister for Foreign
Affairs on your country’s assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of July. We
trust that, under your presidency, the Council’s work
will be crowned with success during this important
phase in the history of the Middle East, which has seen
dangerous, fast-moving and, unfortunately, negative
developments.
Allow me to focus on the role of the United Nations
in general and of the Security Council in particular in
addressing the Palestinian question and finding a just
solution to the cause of its people. This situation is
particularly close to the hearts and minds of all Arabs
and all peace-loving countries. It is a cause for which
the Council has adopted several resolutions that have
so far gone unheeded, for reasons known to everyone.
The occupation continues; the larger part of Palestinian
territory is under the longest-known military occupation
in modern history. No solution has been found for the
issues involved in a definitive solution, especially that
of the refugees. Millions of Palestinians live in refugee
camps or as guests in countries that are not their own,
which is a stain on the international community.
We must protect the credibility of the Council,
which must work to implement its resolutions, taking a
firm approach to support principled diplomacy. This is
essential if we are to reach the solution that we hope for.
We must pursue negotiations to find a definitive and
lasting solution. We need to move away from the path
of the last two decades by finding a new creative and
innovative solution and ensure that the occupying Power
finds the political will to support the negotiations, rather
than hindering them. They seem to be hindering them
so that they can complete their plan to grab the land of

S/PV.7490

the Palestinian people through their settlement policy,
which has been repeatedly denounced as undermining
any attempt to find a fair and lasting solution to the
problem and to establish a contiguous Palestinian State.
We need to revitalize negotiations, and there
must be genuine political will to find a solution. If we
continue to adopt measures that we sought to adopt in
the past, we will see no concrete and tangible result. As
I have said, that will undermind the credibility of the
parties, especially those who sponsor negotiations. It is
essential to be innovative, to avoid increasing the levels
of frustration felt by the Palestinians, which opens the
door to the extremism that is one of the root causes of
the terrorism that threatens the stability and well-being
of many countries in the region and the broader world.
The continuing crisis in the fraternal Syrian Arab
Republic is a major challenge for regional security.
To date, we see no glimmer of hope for reaching a
lasting solution to the crisis. To that end, I would like
to reiterate our call for the continuation of Egyptian
efforts, together with all parties to the Syrian conflict,
in which we will try to enable them to find a legitimate
and lasting solution. We call for an end to the Israeli
occupation in the Golan, in accordance with the
international resolutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): At the outset, let me
thank New Zealand for convening today’s open debate,
which is a good opportunity for delegations to once
again exchange views on the current situation the
Middle East, particularly concerning possible ways for
settling conflicts or tensions in the region.
While Ukraine has aligned itself with the statement
of the European Union, I would like to say a few words
in our national capacity.
Ukraine reiterates its commitment to a balanced
and impartial approach to the Middle East issue and is
willing to develop stable and constructive relations with
both Israel and Arab States. We support the idea that
the only realistic way to solve the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is through an agreement between the parties
that ends all claims and fulfils the aspirations of both
sides. A lasting solution to the conflict must be achieved,
one which would see Israel and Palestine living side by
side in peace and security and mutual recognition.

15-2288247/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Accordingly, we urge the parties to renew their
commitment to the two-State solution, to build trust
and resume meaningful negotiations with the aim of
achieving a comprehensive peace agreement. We also
reiterate the call on all sides not to undertake steps that
would lead further away from a negotiated solution. We
consistently support the Middle East peace process and
believe that peace in the region can be achieved only if
viable mutual concessions are made at the negotiating
table.
Ukraine also reiterates its position that an IsraeliPalestinian peace agreement lies within the framework
of the unconditional fulfilment by the parties in the
conflict of the relevant Security Council resolutions
and other documents — such as the 2002 Arab Peace
Initiative, which remains of strategic importance for
any future comprehensive peace agreement.
Regarding the situation in Syria, Ukraine reaffirms
its commitment to the universal principles and basic
norms of international law, in particular the strict
observance of human rights, territorial integrity,
inviolability of borders and State sovereignty. We
strongly condemn the ongoing violence and systematic
violations of human rights in Syria perpetrated by
both the regime and terrorist groups. Fighting between
Government forces, non-State armed groups and
listed terrorist groups continues to result in the death,
injury and displacement of civilians, as well as the
destruction of property and infrastructure. Parties to
the conflict continue to disregard their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including for the
protection of civilians.
May 2015 was reportedly the deadliest month of
the Syrian crisis so far. We express our deep concerns
regarding the continued bloodshed and violence against
civilians in Syria, particularly that caused by military
operations of the Syrian regime in heavily populated
areas of the country. That includes the use of barrel
bombs, which is prohibited under international law.
The indiscriminate and excessive use of force by the
army against the civilian population, as well as the
intolerable violence of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS) and other terrorist groups operating
on the ground, contribute to the considerable human
sufferings in Syria.
In a letter of 18 June, Ukraine, along with 70 other
countries, expressed its outrage at the never-ending
state of unchecked brutality in Syria, especially the
systematic use of barrel bombs. At the same time,
48/65

23/07/2015

Ukraine proceeds from the fact that, according
to the Charter of the United Nations, the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security falls on the Security Council.
Ukraine remains deeply concerned about the
activities of ISIS and other associated terrorist entities
in the Middle East. The negative impact of their presence
in the region, their violent, extremist ideology and their
destabilizing actions must not be tolerated and should
be duly addressed by the international community. We
strongly condemn the crimes and acts of mass violence
that ISIS commits against civilians — including the
most vulnerable minorities, which may amount to
crimes against humanity. We hail all possible steps,
including appropriate military operations against ISIS
forces, conducted by the international coalition, aimed
at the complete removal of terrorist threats from the
region. We underscore that the fight against ISIS and
other terrorist groups that commit barbaric acts against
the people of Syria and Iraq should contribute to the
political transformation of the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I wish
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing.

to

thank

I would like to begin my statement by welcoming
the conclusion of the final agreement of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear
issue last week, as well as its endorsement through the
adoption of resolution 2231 (2015) this past Monday.
In a region with increasingly complex and disastrous
crises, we value this agreement as a timely testament
to the possibilities of dialogue and diplomacy. Japan
appreciates the efforts made by the parties and looks
forward to its thorough implementation. As Iran
further reintegrates into the global economy, we look
to the country to play an increasing role in the stability
of the region, one commensurate with its influence.
We therefore hope that the agreement will serve to
strengthen not only the international non-proliferation
regime, but also the region’s stability.
The unabated violence and the absence of political
solutions are exacerbating the plight of millions on the
ground. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, three of the four countries
with the most severe and large-scale humanitarian
crises — namely, Syria, Iraq and Yemen — are located
in the Middle East. The international community

15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

must not let the dire humanitarian situation become a
breeding ground for extremist ideology. We therefore
condemn the heinous acts of terror committed in Iraq
and Turkey in the past two weeks. At the same time,
we must also not lose sight of the fact that political
solutions are the only durable solutions to the ongoing
conflicts in the region.
Because of the time limitation, I will concentrate
my remarks on the Middle East peace process and leave
my comments on Syria and Yemen to my written text,
which I believe has been distributed.
The instability of the region should not divert our
attention from the Middle East peace process. One year
ago, we were reminded of the damage that the absence
of a political solution can impose on the ground. The
stagnant reconstruction process and the worsening
economic situation in Gaza are of great concern. Gaza
is an integral part of Palestine; hence the worsening
humanitarian situation there not only undermines its
precarious social cohesion but also the viability of
two States living side by side in peace and security.
We therefore call on the international community to
steadily disburse the pledges made at Cairo Conference
on Reconstructing Gaza, held in October 2014, and
strengthen its support for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
which faces serious funding shortages. Furthermore,
we call for the easing and eventual lifting of the Gaza
blockade, while duly taking security concerns into
account.
The worsening humanitarian situation on the
ground highlights the need for the resumption of
peace negotiations. An environment conducive to the
resumption of talks must be recreated. In that regard,
we welcome the easing of restrictions taken by the
Israeli Government during Ramadan and urge that
such measures be extended on a permanent basis. It
is imperative that both parties refrain from unilateral
measures that could undermine efforts to resume peace
negotiations. To that effect, we reiterate our call to
Israel to freeze settlement activities, which are illegal
under international law. Correspondingly, we call on
Palestine to exert efforts to advance and consolidate its
national reconciliation process.
In the light of the current impasse, Japan believes
that the international community, including the
Security Council, could contribute to the resumption
of negotiations as appropriate and when necessary. We
therefore welcome the initiatives pursued by France

S/PV.7490

to advance the process. Japan enjoys strong ties with
both sides and is a principal contributor to Palestine’s
development, including through initiatives such as the
Corridor for Peace and Prosperity and the Conference
on Cooperation among East Asian Countries for
Palestinian Development, which mobilize regional
actors. Firm in our belief that we can contribute to a
two-State solution, we stand ready to play a further
constructive role in such international efforts.
We are confronting deep and complex crises in
the region. While the urgent humanitarian needs must
surely be addressed, we must also not lose sight of the
underlying factors that are fuelling instability in the
region. Prime Minister Abe, in his policy speech on
the Middle East in January, highlighted the philosophy
that the best way is to go in the middle, representing
the ancestral wisdom of the region. It emphasizes the
importance of embracing dialogue and moderation as
well as of nurturing societies to become resistant to the
allures of extremism. Although political solutions are
long and arduous, those are what are most needed at
the moment.
With that understanding, Japan has pledged and is
delivering $2.5 billion in non-military assistance to the
region. Please rest assured that Japan, in cooperation
the United Nations and the international community,
stands ready not only to address the humanitarian crises
but also to support political solutions to the conflicts in
the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. AlJarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I have
the honour to address the Security Council today on
behalf of the member States of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC). At the outset, allow me
to congratulate New Zealand on assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We also thank
Malaysia for guiding the Council’s work during the past
month. I would also like to thank the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing this morning.
With regard to the agreement reached by the
P5+1 with the Islamic Republic of Iran on its nuclear
programme, and the related resolution 2231 (2015), the
OIC hopes that the agreement will serve as a pathway
to security and stability in the Middle East. We hope
that the international community will endeavour to

15-2288249/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

make the Middle East region one free of weapons of
mass destruction. We also hope it will compel Israel to
adhere the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and subject its nuclear arsenal to United
Nations inspections.
With the rising tide of extremism, terrorism
and violence in the Middle East, the question of
Palestine remains the OIC’s central concern. Despite
the negotiation efforts exerted over the past 25 years,
including the recent mediation efforts sponsored by
the United States to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, all have failed to achieve an agreement.
That is because Israel, the occupying Power, has
failed to honour its commitments. International peace
efforts have not succeeded in getting Israel to release
Palestinianprisoners, halt settlement activities and to
put an end to the blockade of the Gaza Strip and the
siege on East Jerusalem. As a result, the international
community must redouble its efforts to stop Israel’s
illegal policies and practices and their impact on the
two-State division.
We face today a difficult situation characterized
by growing frustration given the ongoing illegal
conduct of Israel, the occupying Power, its denial of
the rights of the Palestinian people and its violations
of international law and legally binding resolutions.
We must emphasize that Israel’s occupation policy to
create a de facto reality is not legitimate. While it may
serve to establish temporary security, it will never lead
to sustainable peace and security.
The OIC underscores the ongoing responsibility of
the United Nations towards the question of Palestine
until a just and comprehensive resolution to the
conflict is found for all its aspects. In the meantime, we
support the Palestinian decision to internationalize the
Palestinian issue and to bring it before the international
legal system. We support all efforts to adopt a new
Security Council resolution to reiterate the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people, including that of selfdetermination, as well as establishing a time frame for
ending the Israeli occupation from all Palestinian Arab
territories, including East Jerusalem, and providing
an international mechanism to guarantee the full
implementation of the resolution.
The OIC would also like to emphasize the importance
of the involvement of all international parties in all
efforts to achieve peace. We call for the expansion of
the Quartet and its mandate to implement the relevant
United Nations resolutions and to achieve the two50/65

23/07/2015

State solution, based on the pre-1967 borders, with an
independent the State of Palestine with East Jerusalem
as its capital. Given the importance of realizing the
political and legal identity of the State of Palestine and
its rightful place in the international community, we
must further promote and mobilize more international
recognition for a State of Palestine by supporting its
accession to international institutions, organizations
and covenants, including the International Criminal
Court, in order to protect the rights of the Palestinian
people.
Almost one year has passed since Israel’s military
aggression against the Gaza Strip. However, the
humanitarian crisis continues to worsen at an alarming
rate due to Israel’s prolonged illegal blockade of the
Gaza Strip. There has been no progress in compelling
Israel to implement resolution 1860 (2009), which calls
for ensuring the sustained and regular flow of goods
and people through the Gaza crossings. Therefore,
the Organization of the Islamic Conference calls upon
the Security Council to take the necessary measures
towards the immediate lifting of the blockade imposed
upon the entire Palestinian civilian population in
the Gaza Strip, in order to end their suffering and
ensure their protection. We also urge the international
community to fulfil the financial pledges made at the
Cairo Conference in order to advance reconstruction
efforts and deter further deterioration.
We also express our concern over the critical
financial situation of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) at an extremely important time in terms
of assisting the Palestinian people. The international
community must shoulder its responsibility to support
UNRWA.
The Organization of the Islamic Conference
renews its demand that Israel implement resolution 497
(1981), which calls for its withdrawal from the occupied
Syrian Golan to the 4 June 1967 borders. It also renews
its commitment to stand by the Lebanese Republic in
support of all actions and measures taken to promote
its security, sovereignty and territorial integrity. We
demand that Israel halt its violations of Lebanese
sovereignty, withdraw completely from the occupied
Lebanese territories and implement resolution 1701
(2006).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.

15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank New
Zealand for convening today’s open debate, which
draws the attention of the international community to
the alarming situation in the Middle East, including
in Palestine and its occupied territories. We thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. There are several
concerns on which my delegation would like to focus.
First of all, my delegation is concerned about
the Palestinian situation, and calls for urgent action
to mitigate the suffering of the local population. The
settlement process in the occupied territories aggravates
the conflict. Kazakhstan recognizes the legitimate
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
to the creation of an independent State of Palestine
peacefully co-existing with Israel within the 1967
borders, and to full-fledged membership in the United
Nations. We see the two-State solution as the only
viable option for a durable peace, and therefore call on
Israeli and Palestinian leaders to demonstrate political
responsibility and goodwill to reach a historic peace
agreement that would meet the legitimate aspirations
of their peoples.
We need to respond urgently and boldly to combat
ongoing attempts to create quasi-State entities opposing
and fighting legitimate Governments, in order to avert
atrocities in local populations. Kazakhstan co-sponsored
resolution 2178 (2014), on foreign terrorist fighters, as
we are committed to combatting terrorism through a
comprehensive approach that involves all Member
States and regional organizations in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
All perpetrators should be brought to justice and
all impunity ended, and every effort must be made
to isolate, impede and incapacitate terrorists and
their funding sources. Most of all, social media — a
powerful weapon in the hands of terrorist groups to
spread religious extremism and separatism and recruit
volunteers — instead of being indiscriminately
exploited, should be utilized to encourage the youth to
become agents of peace and harmony.
Last month, Astana hosted the Central and South
Asia Regional Conference on Countering Violent
Extremism to develop new strategies, specific
programmes and initiatives to be considered at a similar
summit to be held on the margins of the general debate
of the forthcoming session of the General Assembly.
The Regional Conference was a follow-up to the summit
on the issue held in Washington, D.C., in February.

S/PV.7490

We need to find inclusive political solutions
through the Security Council, the good offices of the
Secretary-General and dialogue that includes systemwide coherence in the United Nations, with civil
society as the watchdogs. Likewise, attention should
be given towards combating transnational crime and
the illegal trafficking of weapons, arms and narcotics,
trafficking of human beings and violence against
civilian populations.
My country also expresses concern for the
humanitarian crises in Syria and Yemen, with the
increasing flow of refugees and displaced persons. We
call for the mobilization of emergency relief efforts,
and we see peaceful means as the only way to resolve
the conflict in the Middle East.
We believe that regional and international players
must create conditions for solving the Syrian crisis,
but a peaceful solution to the conflict can be found
only by the Syrians themselves. They need to come to
a peaceful solution. The aim of global players should
be to create conditions for solving the Syrian crisis,
without any external pressure or interference. That is
the basis of our approach. We have no hidden agenda
and our position is clearly neutral, with the sole interest
of creating durable, long-term peace in Syria.
We are confident that all political peaceful
means, including various regional dialogue platforms,
should be used to achieve long-awaited peace and
non-violence. The Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-Building Measures in Asia, established
at the initiative of Kazakhstan’s President more than
two decades ago and uniting 26 States from Asia
and the Middle East, represents that kind of dialogue
opportunity to bridge political gaps among nations
of the region. Kazakhstan supports the efforts of
the Secretary-General, the President of the General
Assembly and the High Representative for the Alliance
of Civilizations in promoting the ideals and values of
tolerance, mutual understanding and respect for longlasting security and stability.
Last month, Kazakhstan convened the fifth
Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions
to promote peace based on spiritual values, with the
Secretary-General in attendance. The final declaration
of the Congress calls on world leaders to end the abyss
of distrust and restore peace and harmony.
My country is willing to share its experience in
maintaining harmony among more than 100 different

15-2288251/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

ethnic groups and almost 20 religious confessions in
its territory, including the work of the Assembly of the
People of Kazakhstan, which was created 20 years ago
to promote peace and stability in the country through
maintaining inter-ethnic and interreligious accord.
As seen in our efforts with the Alliance and the
Congress, Kazakhstan is known to be a bridge-builder,
bringing about durable rapprochement among various
groups and helping to further peace processes. A key
example I can cite is that Kazakhstan hosted, in Almaty,
two rounds of talks between Iran and the international
mediators during the interim phase, in 2013, which
helped to carry forward the draft Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action regarding Iran’s nuclear programme. We
therefore welcome the recently concluded agreement
and Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
Kazakhstan has made a further contribution for
peace and stability through non-proliferation. I am
pleased to say that my country has reached an agreement
with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
on hosting the IAEA Low Enriched Uranium Bank on
its territory, as a guarantee mechanism to meet the fuel
supply needs of States members of the Agency.
Kazakhstan will stand in solidarity with the
international community to ensure peace in the Middle
East based on freedom and justice for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Mr. Gunnarsson (Iceland): I thank the New
Zealand presidency for convening this important
debate, and the Special Coordinator for his insightful
briefing.
Iceland reiterates its strong conviction that the only
path to peace between Israel and Palestine is the twoState solution.
But both sides need to commit fully to the twoState solution, and they must refrain from actions
that undermine the viability of the only solution that
will bring peace. Israeli leaders have yet to dispel, by
actions on the ground, the very serious doubt cast on
their commitment to the two-State solution during the
pre-election period. Indeed, acts on the ground continue
to be very damaging to the chances of peace; there is
little letup in the expansion of Israeli settlements and
the expropriation of land in Palestine, a clear breach of
international law. We join others in calling on Israel to
immediately stop all settlement activities.

52/65

23/07/2015

Of continuing deep concern is the humanitarian
situation of the Palestinians, particularly in Gaza,
where we continue to call for the lifting of the blockade.
The cycle of violence has to be broken, which calls for
different approaches by all concerned. In this regard,
we welcome the report by the Independent Commission
of Inquiry on the 2014 Gaza conflict.
The situation in the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, is also of deep
concern. The continued fragmentation of Palestine
through settlement activities and movement and access
restrictions undermine Palestinian livelihoods and
deprive the Palestinians of their basic human rights.
Israel needs to abide by international humanitarian and
human rights law, including ceasing the demolition of
Palestinian homes and the displacement of Palestinians
from their land.
Predictably, the highly abnormal living conditions
in the occupied Palestinian territories have a
disproportionate impact on women and children. We
commend the work of the United Nations agencies
against gender-based violence. The Mehwar Centre for
Protection and Empowerment of Women and Families,
supported by UN-Women and to which Iceland has
contributed, does excellent and much-needed work in
the West Bank. Ensuring equal participation of women
at all decision-making levels on both sides of the
conflict and within the international community is also
key to durable peace and reconciliation. Unfortunately,
the absence of women in the peace process has been
noticeable. This has to change.
Terrorist activity from Palestinian elements is also
totally unacceptable and can only undermine peace.
We condemn all acts of violence against civilians.
The safety and well-being of civilians must always be
ensured.
The recent report by the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations underlines the primacy of
politics in maintaining and achieving peace. Managing
a crisis is not enough; the aim must be to solve it. There
is consensus on the urgency thereof. There are signs in
both communities of a loss of faith in the possibility
of a peaceful solution. It is therefore essential that
the Security Council create a clear frame for ending
the occupation and establishing a durable peace, with
two States living side by side in peace and security.
The dangers of inaction are far greater for all parties
involved than the risks of action.

15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Emvula (Namibia): I wish to congratulate
you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of July. I also
wish to thank you for having organized this debate at
this crucial moment, which affords the wider United
Nations membership an opportunity to address the
challenges facing the Middle East, particularly the
people of Palestine. This debate is taking place one
year after Israel’s devastating attacks on the Palestinian
people in the Gaza Strip, which resulted in the worst
escalation of hostilities and loss of life in Gaza since
1967, requiring urgent international action.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
As we commemorate the barbaric massacre of
more than 2,000 Palestinians, including 1,462 civilians,
the injury to more than 11,000 and the destruction of
homes in the Gaza Strip during the summer of 2014, my
delegation joins others in condemning the violations,
the continuous provocations and the escalation of the
aggressive measures that continue to be carried out
by the Israeli occupying forces, aimed at collective
punishment of the Palestinian people.
My delegation wishes to reiterate its concern at the
continuing turmoil in and deterioration of the situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, due to the illegal provocation policies being
carried out by the Israeli regime against the Palestinian
people. The Israeli occupying forces continue to carry
out airstrikes in the Gaza Strip, injuring more and
more Palestinians and causing great fear and distress
among the population, which continues to suffer from
deplorable living conditions as a result of the unlawful
blockade.
Israel is continuing to perpetrate grave violations
of international law, including humanitarian and human
rights law, threatening to further destabilize the already
fragile situation and seriously undermine the future of
the peace process, which it suspended by its unilateral
decision to halt negotiations. Therefore, the international
community, including the Security Council, cannot
continue to fail to hold Israel accountable for its flagrant
breaches of the international law. Such continued
failure by the international community has only further

S/PV.7490

emboldened the occupying Power and bolstered its
impunity, which has resulted in the continuation of
the aforementioned Israeli violations and the failure to
secure a just and lasting peace.
As recognized unanimously by the international
community, this unjust situation and the consequent loss
of hope is unsustainable and highly volatile, requiring
urgent remedy to prevent further deterioration and the
explosion of another cycle of violence.
While condemning the indiscriminate rocket fire
emanating from Gaza targeted at Israeli cities and
civilian infrastructure, we contend that such attacks
do not justify the disproportionate use of force and the
collective punishment of the 1.7 million Palestinians
living in Gaza, including the killing of children and
attacks on civilian facilities, including schools.
Israel’s actions are in clear violation of its
obligations, as an occupying Power under the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, to protect the civilian
population under its occupation. Israel, the occupying
Power, cannot be allowed to remain immune from the
provisions of international humanitarian and human
rights law governing such situations. If Israel continues
to reject the demands for respect for international law,
then measures aimed at ensuring an end to the violations
and that the rule of law prevails must be undertaken in
response.
While supporting the steadfastness and resolve of
the Palestinian leadership in the face of this unprovoked
aggression against their land and people, we reiterate
our condemnation of all of the illegal actions and
crimes being perpetrated by Israel, the occupying
Power, in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, which are dramatically raising tensions
and destabilizing the situation on the ground.
We call once again on the international community,
specifically the Security Council, to assume its
responsibility as accorded by the United Nations
Charter, to act collectively to address this crisis so as to
prevent its exacerbation and to put an end to all human
rights violations against the Palestinians.
We reiterate our call for the unconditional removal
of the blockade on the Gaza Strip, which has caused
and continues to cause so much suffering for the
Palestinian people. The blockade is inhumane and
violates international law.

15-2288253/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We reiterate our strong support for the resumption
of the peace process, and appeal to Israelis and the
Palestinians to commit themselves to it. Both parties
should abide by their previous agreements and
obligations in order to achieve a lasting peace and live
side by side within secure borders. At the same time, I
wish to reaffirm Namibia’s support for the establishment
of an independent Palestinian State on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, its
unconditional admission as a full Member of the United
Nations and its agencies, and its taking of its rightful
place among the community of nations.
I would conclude by reiterating Namibia’s
unwavering support for, and solidarity with the people
of Palestine in their just cause for obtaining freedom,
independence and social justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): My delegation wishes
to thank New Zealand, in its capacity as President
of the Security Council, for convening this quarterly
open debate in connection with the agenda item on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. I would also like to extend our appreciation
to the Special Coordinator for his briefing and his
dedicated efforts aimed at finding a solution to the
conflicts in the Middle East.
Peace will never be achieved through violence and
bloodshed. This July marks one year since the most
recent round of escalated conflict between Palestine and
Israel and the launch of the Israeli military operation in
Gaza, which was the worst escalation of hostilities since
1967. Gaza remains a city in ruins. With the conflict is
unresolved, along the breakdown of talks since 2014,
lasting peace remains a distant dream.
While hope is dim, we reiterate our call for a twoState solution, which remains the one and only viable
solution to enduring peace in the region. The Maldives
therefore reiterates its call for the full realization of the
right to self-determination of the Palestinian people,
the right of Palestinian people to establish their own
State, alongside Israel, on the basis of a two-State
solution, within pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. We also call on the Security Council to
reinvigorate its efforts to find new ways of moving
forward.
The human cost of the conflict in Syria weighs
heavily upon all of us and compels us to explore all our
54/65

23/07/2015

options in finding solutions. A political solution must
be found to end the bloodshed in line with the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. We would like to
underscore the importance of achieving an inclusive
political solution in Syria based on the Geneva talks.
Accordingly, we call on the United Nations membership
to actively contribute ideas to the body in the hope of
finding the way to peace.
The Maldives remains deeply concerned over
the impact of the situation in Yemen on the stability
of the entire region. Similarly, we must ensure that
humanitarian assistance reaches the more than 80 per
cent of the population of Yemen that is now in need of
aid. Peace must win in Yemen.
The Maldives condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations and believes that terrorism should
not be associated with any religion, race, culture or
society. Islam promotes peace and the protection and
preservation of life and unity. Islam also condemns
violence, and the Maldives does not condone the use
of the veil of religion as a pretext for inflicting terror.
Religion is not a means to a political end.
While there are numerous violent hot spots in the
region, we are heartened to see progress as well. In that
regard, the Maldives welcomes the historic framework
agreement reached in Lausanne on 2 April between
Iran and the P5+1, which represents an opportunity
to resolve more than the nuclear issue alone. That is
a clear example of how political will and unrelenting
effort can help bring solutions.
We need leadership. We need political will. But
above all, we need courage — courage from the leaders
of the region, courage from the leaders of members
of the Security Council and from the members of the
international community. We need the courage to do
the right thing, to take the right step forward, towards
lasting peace in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): The situation across the
Middle East continues to be a grave concern for all of
us. Terrorism, violence and humanitarian crises have
escalated and engulfed millions of innocent people
in the region. The peace, security and stability of the
entire region and beyond are at stake.
In the face of this grim reality, we must maintain
our focus on the urgent need to resolve the Israeli-

15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian conflict, which still undermines the
prospects for lasting regional and global peace. Failing
to do so will further destabilize the region and lead to
more extremism.
One year after the unprecedented suffering caused
by the Israel Defense Forces offensive, little to no
recovery or reconstruction has taken place in Gaza. The
military operation, coupled with the illegal blockade
imposed on Gaza, has led to chronic, widespread and
systematic violations of human rights, above all the
right to life and security, as underlined by the report
of the Commission of Inquiry on Gaza. People who
live in tremendous despair and insecurity are losing
their belief that a solution and peaceful coexistence are
possible. The current situation is unsustainable and will
only further disenfranchise the Palestinian people. The
international community can no longer afford to stand
idly by as this tragedy unfolds.
While the immediate priority must be to address
the grave situation and growing frustration in Gaza,
only long-term solutions can turn the tide in Gaza’s
reconstruction. The ongoing illegal blockade and other
restrictions must be lifted in accordance with resolution
1860 (2009). Further steps should be taken to alleviate
the dire situation, sustain the current ceasefire and
support the efforts of the national unity Government
to operate in Gaza. On this occasion, we also would
like to highlight the alarming financial challenge
that United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East is facing today and
the importance of providing sustained support to the
Agency as a contributor to stability in the region.
The need to find a negotiated political settlement for
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, achieving a two-State
solution and ending the longest occupation in modern
history in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, remain urgent
priorities. There is a broad international consensus on
the unsustainability and unacceptability of the status
quo. The trend in Europe towards the recognition of
the State of Palestine is a reflection of this frustration.
It is our sincere hope that reason will prevail and that
Israel will engage with the peace process in a sincere
and results-oriented manner. Israel should demonstrate
its commitment to a two-State solution, as it is the only
viable option for sustainable peace and security.
Palestinian unity is also imperative if a lasting
solution is to be reached. It is high time for the
international community to renew its engagement to

S/PV.7490

finding a solution of the problem. We need to intensify
our efforts towards the adoption of a Security Council
resolution setting a time frame and parameters for
peace negotiations based on the vision of a two-State
solution for peace. The Council should assume its
primary responsibility vis-à-vis international peace and
security. Turkey will continue its support for finding a
just, comprehensive and lasting solution to the conflict
and the establishment of a sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within the pre-1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
The Syrian crisis has become a constant factor
of instability and immense human suffering for the
entire region and beyond. A collective response that
addresses the magnitude of the threat remains lacking.
One should keep in mind that no country is immune to
this acute crisis as its impacts range from terrorism to
displacement and devastation. The regime is responsible
for this chaos.
Turkey, the largest refugee-hosting country in
the world, is gravely concerned by the humanitarian
and security impacts of the crisis, which have caused
unprecedented devastation. Given the enormity of that
challenge, I need to reiterate that a meaningful and
genuine burden-sharing is the collective responsibility
of the international community. It is neither possible
nor just to expect Turkey to face, alone, the migratory
pressures or the risks and threats emanating from
Syria, as we recently witnessed during the clashes in
Ayn al-Arab/Kobani and Tel Abyad.
The international community has still not envisaged
a comprehensive strategy, with political, security and
humanitarian pillars, to re-establish stability in Syria.
We must focus on addressing the underlying causes
of the problem through resolute action. The regime’s
indiscriminate attacks should not be overshadowed
by the appalling actions of Daesh. It is also important
to express outrage at the use of barrel bombs and the
increase in chlorine attacks by the regime forces, as
was emphasized in the recent letter of 18 June, signed
by 71 countries, which was addressed to the Security
Council, the Secretary-General and the President of the
General Assembly.
We believe that there is no military solution to the
conflict. The territorial integrity of Syria is of utmost
importance. Peace and stability can only be reinstated
in Syria through a genuine and comprehensive political
transition, based on the Geneva Communiqué of June
2012 (S/2012/523, annex) through the establishment

15-2288255/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of a “transitional governing body” with authority to
exercise full executive powers. In that framework,
we support the mission of the United Nations Special
Envoy for Syria, Mr. De Mistura, and his bilateral
consultations initiative.
We would also like to highlight our support to the
Iraqi Government in its fight against Daesh, and express
our concern at the rise of sectarian-motivated attacks
against civilians. In that regard, the implementation
of inclusive policies to end the alienation of some
segments of society and the enhancement of efforts to
achieve national reconciliation would be key for Iraq’s
stability.
Last but not least, let me express our support for the
efforts to find a political solution to the crisis in Yemen,
which can only occur only through peaceful dialogue
and reconciliation. The parameters for achieving that
goal are clear: the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative,
the final Outcomes Document of the National Dialogue
Conference, and Security Council resolution 2216
(2015). Yemen should not become another showcase
of the damage inflicted by sectarian policies in the
region. With that understanding, upon our proposal an
Organization of Islamic Cooperation Contact Group
on Yemen was established. Its goal is to contribute
to finding a political solution. We are also concerned
about the humanitarian situation in Yemen. To that end,
we will do our utmost to continue our assistance to the
population in need.
The supremacy of diplomacy was demonstrated
again by some recent developments, and gave us hope
that a solution to the protracted crises can be found.
In that regard, we welcome the agreement reached
recently between the P5+1 and Iran on the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, as well as the adoption
of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015) on the topic.
The initialling of the Libyan Political Agreement is
also a promising first step towards a comprehensive
solution, with the participation of all parties to the
political dialogue and establishment of a Government
of National Accord.
Let me conclude by reiterating our strong
commitment to the peace and security of the overall
region and our full and continued solidarity with the
Palestinian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.

56/65

23/07/2015

Mr. AlShamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): On behalf of the Arab Group, I commend New
Zealand for its assumption of the presidency of the
Council in the month of July. We thank His Excellency
Mr. Murray McCully for chairing this open debate, and
we wish New Zealand great success in presiding over
the work of the Council this month. I also thank and
commend New Zealand’s predecessor, the delegation of
Malaysia for its successful management of the Council’s
work last month. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his efforts, as well as Mr. Mladenov for his briefing
and for his tireless efforts to attain peace in the Middle
East region.
My statement will be brief. A full copy will be
available on our Mission’s website. The United Arab
Emirates also supports the statement delivered by the
representative of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.
The briefing this morning has reflected the
worsening humanitarian situation of the Palestinian
people resulting from the measures adopted by Israel,
which violate international laws and norms and
constitute the direct cause for the continued stalemate
in the long anticipated peace talks.
Despite all the international and regional efforts
and initiatives made during the past two decades,
including the efforts of the Quartet and the United
States of America, we continue to witness many
lost opportunities for attaining peace. That not only
prolongs the suffering of the Palestinian people and
increases their economic losses, but also deepens their
frustration, despair and instability. It has also led to
the emergence of dangerous extremism, which is now
threatening our region and the entire world.
The Arab peoples are bearing the onerous burden
of confronting those serious challenges. The Arab
Group strongly condemns the continued illegal
policies and systematic violations committed by
Israel, which include the expansion of its illegitimate
settlements deep inside the Palestinian territories and
within Al-Quds and the adoption of measures against
Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the Holy City. That includes
the confiscation of properties, the demolition of homes
and buildings, the displacement of people, including
the arbitrary transfer of 7,000 Palestinian Bedouins and
shepherds from 64 residential areas in the West Bank,
and the illegal planning and division of the Palestinian
territories. Those measures have made it practically

15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

impossible for the Palestinians to exploit their lands or
build in Area C in the West Bank. All those measures
violate international law and ignore the wishes of the
majority of the international community.
We welcome the recent report of the United Nations
Independent Commission of Inquiry into possible
human rights violations and war crimes in Gaza
(A/HCR/29/52), which reflected the unprecedented
levels of suffering and hardship experienced by the
unarmed Palestinian people, and we call for the
implementation of an accountability system that would
bring those responsible for war crimes to justice.
We also urge the donor countries to fulfil their
commitments announced last year at the Cairo
Conference on Palestine: Reconstructing Gaza in order
to ensure the necessary financing for reconstruction
in Gaza. We stress the shared responsibility of the
international community towards lifting the Israeli
siege imposed on Gaza and providing the necessary
support for United Nations programmes, especially the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, which we strongly support.
We also reaffirm before the Council our full
and continuing support to the Palestinian Unity
Government. We urge the international community to
increase its support for this Government in order to
enable it to fulfil its responsibilities and take a leading
role in restoring its control over Gaza, including its
border crossings, and also to support its efforts towards
achieving national reconciliation.
The Arab Group believes that the continuation of
the historic injustice done to the Palestinian people
by Israel is one of the main causes for the current
deterioration in peace and stability in the region and
for inflaming tensions, with terrible consequences
throughout the region and the entire world. Therefore,
the failed negotiation process should not become
a vicious circle, reaching a dead end without the
adoption of effective international efforts to eliminate
the causes of that failure, for which Israel is fully
responsible. Therefore, we ask, now more than ever,
that the Council’s efforts not be limited to holding these
routine periodic briefings, despite their importance,
but that the Council also play a leading role by taking
the necessary steps towards the immediate cessation
of all violations committed by Israel, according to the
principles and terms of the peace process, in order to
create an appropriate environment for resuming peace
negotiations.

S/PV.7490

We hope that the international Powers will support
the efforts of the Arab Ministerial Committee tasked
with ending the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territories so as to ensure the launch of serious
negotiations. That would make a difference. We also
hope that the Council will respond to the repeated calls
and initiatives made by the Arab Group since last year
for the adoption of an effective resolution that would
salvage the peace process and determine the basic
terms of reference and principles of negotiations based
on the two-State solution. Such a resolution should be
fully implemented in accordance with relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference and
the Arab Peace Initiative. It should be a resolution that
can ensure the possibility of reaching a comprehensive,
just and lasting settlement within a specific time frame
and of ending every aspect of Israel’s occupation,
including its full military withdrawal from all the
territories that have been occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem. We also hope that such a resolution will
enable the establishment of an independent, sovereign,
viable and internationally recognized Palestinian
State with Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side
with Israel in permanent peace and security. In that
context, we would like to express our support for the
efforts of some of the members of the Security Council,
particularly France.
We regret that the Syrian crisis is now in its fifth
year, and we reiterate our support for all efforts to
reach a political solution to it, particularly those of
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, aimed at achieving positive results
that can help to realize the Syrian people’s aspirations
for a democratic political transition and the restoration
of stability and security in the country. Until that goal
is achieved, we urge the international community to
increase its assistance to those Syrians who have been
affected and displaced or who have fled the conflict,
and to share the burden of sheltering Syrian refugees
with the country’s neighbours, especially Jordan,
Lebanon and Iraq.
In conclusion, we hope our debate today will
contribute to advancing international efforts aimed
at resolving the Palestinian question and ending the
Syrian crisis so as to bring peace and stability to the
region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.

15-2288257/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): I join other speakers in
commending His Excellency Mr. Murray McCully,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of New Zealand, for
convening this important debate. I also wish to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing to the
Council this morning.
We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
For more than 50 years, the international community
has struggled to find a just and durable solution to the
situation in the Middle East. We are encouraged by
the international community’s continuing diplomatic
engagement with the issue, including the recent United
Nations international meeting held in Moscow in July
in support of peace between Israel and Palestine.
The people of Palestine have suffered as a result of a
range of factors, in particular by being dispossessed of
much of their land. The international community has
repeatedly called for a freeze of settlement activity.
The ongoing settlement activities, which are illegal
under international law, must end as soon as possible
if sustainable peace is to be achieved in the region. In
recent years, the continued blockade of Gaza has added
to the pain and frustrations of Palestinians living there.
We encourage the parties to exercise restraint for the
sake of the larger goal of peace.
Another key challenge the Palestinian people are
now facing is reconstruction, following the destruction
wrought in Gaza last year. It is our fervent hope that,
with the help of the global community, the people of
Palestine will rise to the challenge of rebuilding their
lives and livelihoods. It is urgent that their living
conditions improve. In that regard, we also strongly
support the work of the various United Nations agencies
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
We join with the international community in
appealing to all parties to refrain from indiscriminate
and disproportionate attacks on civilians, which are
detrimental to the peace and security of both Israel
and Palestine and the stability of the entire region.
Indiscriminate attacks on civilians, in violation of
international humanitarian law, can only intensify
feelings of desperation and insecurity and widen the
gap between the parties. At the same time, the security
58/65

23/07/2015

needs of the Israeli people must also be respected. A
climate conducive to peace will be encouraged by a
common humanitarian approach in which both sides
are sensitive to the other’s concerns.
The Middle East conflict attracts a considerable
amount of international attention and resources. The
lingering question of Palestine is one of the main issues
driving the recruitment of terrorists in the region and
worldwide. Terrorism, including the recent phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters with origins in the region,
has the potential for posing a serious threat to the
security and stability of every nation, tearing apart the
established fabric of nation States and the international
legal order. In today’s interconnected world, it is very
easy for agents of extremism to spread their ideologies
across national borders.
Sri Lanka supports Palestine’s application for
admission to full membership of the United Nations.
We recognize that the viability of a two-State solution
will depend on the political unity and economic
advancement of the Palestinian people. We reiterate our
support for the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 242 (1967), of
22 November 1967, regarding the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people to statehood and the attainment
of a two-State solution, established on the basis of the
1967 borders. We must not give up on our hopes for a
lasting peace accord that can lead to the establishment
of a fully sovereign and secure State of Palestine. We
hope that the parties concerned will not fritter away
the opportunity that the current international climate
presents for achieving a sustainable peace when there is
so much international good will supporting the process.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Fodé
Seck, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mr. Seck (spoke in French): On behalf of all the
members of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, a body that
my country, Senegal, has had the privilege of chairing
since its inception, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on New Zealand’s outstanding
conduct of its presidency of the Security Council this
month — sincere and well-deserved congratulations,
since your presidency has been packed with significant
events and results, including, I am pleased to say,
the Council’s adoption on Monday of resolution 2231
(2015), endorsing the P5+1’s agreement on the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action on Iran’s nuclear
15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

capacity, as well as the important open debate, wisely
planned for 30 July and marking the end of your
presidency, on the major security challenges faced by
small island developing States. I hope those positive
developments will be reflected in the situation in the
Middle East in general and in particular the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, which is inarguably that situation’s
Gordian knot.
We cannot repeat it too often: the unresolved IsraeliPalestinian conflict has been, and still remains, the chief
source of the instability and insecurity afflicting the
Middle East and far beyond. Many of the extremist and
violent groups currently proliferating in the region use
the fact of the injustice done to the Palestinian people
as a pretext in their attempts to legitimize their harmful
activities. It has been 47 years since the occupation of
the Palestinian territories began, 40 since the General
Assembly established the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and
20 since the Oslo process stalled. It is high time that the
Security Council, the supreme organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, found
a way to impose a final settlement of the Israeli-Arab
conflict through a solution based on two States, the
State of Israel and the State of Palestine, living side by
side along the 1967 borders.
It is up to the Security Council to end this
anachronism, which, in addition to being an injustice
and an impediment to the respect or international
law, is contrary to the ideals and aims of the United
Nations, whose seventieth anniversary the international
community is preparing to celebrate in a few weeks,
when it will adopt a sustainable and inclusive
development programme that leaves no nation or
individual behind.
The long cycle of direct negotiations between
Palestinians and Israelis is now at an impasse,
punctuated by violence, the rampant grabbing of
Palestinian land, the continued imposition of settlements
and the blockade imposed on Gaza — all of which
culminated last summer in the deadliest war that Gaza
has ever known..The diplomatic efforts to establish a
vital timeline for ending the occupation of Palestinian
and other Arab territories did not come to fruition
last December in the Council. Should the Council not,
therefore, take inspiration from the multilateral process
leading to the adoption, last Monday, of resolution 2231
(2015) on the Iranian nuclear issue? Should it not take
inspiration from that process and launch a vigorous

S/PV.7490

diplomatic initiative for the definitive settlement of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on the twostate solution — with the State of Israel and the State
of Palestine, living side by side in peace and security
within the pre-1967 borders?
Such a collective process could involve the action of
an expanded Quartet, with the participation of regional
Powers, supported by the Arab Peace Initiative, and an
international conference, which was proposed in the
past by the Russian Federation. It could also involve the
approach that France proposed in the Security Council,
an approach that seeks a comprehensive settlement of
the conflict within a reasonable time frame.
For its part, the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People continues
to discharge its mandate conscientiously, pleading,
when necessary, for the Palestinian people’s right to
self-determination, as well as for the appropriateness
of a Palestinian State, in the spirit, if not the letter,
of the founding resolution 181 (1967). In so doing,
the Committee works together with all individuals
or entities — whether Palestinian or Israeli — and
all others that might be able to make some type of
contribution to the advent of a just, peaceful and lasting
solution to the conflict.
This year, for example, the Committee organized
an international meeting on the humanitarian situation
in Gaza from 31 March to 1 April in Vienna, an
international consultation on legal aspects of the
question of Palestine in The Hague from 20 to 22 May,
and an international meeting more recently in Moscow
from 1 to 2 July to support the Israeli-Palestinian
peace process entitled, “The two-State solution: a key
prerequisite for achieving peace and stability in Middle
East”. Among its future activities, the Committee
will, in cooperation with the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, conduct a similar activity in Brussels at
the beginning of September 2015 on the topic entitled
“Israeli settlements in the occupied territories, obstacles
to peace. What solutions for tomorrow?”
For all practical purposes, I would remind you that
all of the Committee’s activities and its reports and
recommendations are available and can be consulted on
the Committee’s website.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Zimbabwe.
Mr. Ntonga (Zimbabwe): May I begin by conveying
my delegation’s appreciation to New Zealand for having

15-2288259/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

convened this important open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for
his insightful contributions.
Zimbabwe aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-aligned Movement.
For the overwhelming majority of the international
community, a two State-solution based on the pre-June
1967 borders is the only sustainable way of ending the
longest occupation in modern history. The parameters
for the resolution of the Palestinian question are
known; they are enshrined in numerous United Nations
resolutions, including Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), the Oslo Accords, the Madrid
terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet’s Road Map for Peace. Despite those known
parameters, violence against the Palestinian people
continues in the occupied territories. According to
the June 2015 report of the Independent Commission
of Inquiry established by the Human Rights Council
(A/HRC/49/52), the scale of devastation in Gaza in 2014
was unprecedented, with sufficient evidence pointing
to serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law, which, in some cases, amount to
war crimes.
The Secretary- General’s annual report on children
and armed conflict (S/2015/409), released on 5 June
2015, indicates that 540 Palestinian children were killed
and 2,955 were injured. The report concludes that:
“The unprecedented and unacceptable scale of
the impact on children raises grave concern about
Israel’s compliance with international humanitarian
law, notably the principles of distinction,
proportionality and in relation to the excessive use
of force”.
Despite those findings, Israel has not been held
accountable.
Israel continues to approve the construction of
illegal settlements despite unanimous condemnation of
settlement activities by the international community.
That is all in an effort to change the demographic
character of the occupied territory. Settlement activity
is illegal under international law and prejudicial to a
just peace. The illegal blockade continues, and the wall
of shame remains in place — as do the various forms of
persecution perpetrated against the Palestinian people,
including the demolition of homes, illegal arrests under
60/65

23/07/2015

what is known as administrative detentions, and the
forced displacement of Palestinians. Despite all those
violations, the Security Council has not held Israel
to account. The latest demonstration of the Security
Council’s paralysis was the failure to adopt a resolution
on 30 December 2014 that would have set a timetable
for Israel’s withdrawal from Palestinian territory. The
resolution, which provided a reasonable time frame for
withdrawal, would have given the Palestinian people a
ray of hope.
We welcome current efforts in the Security Council
by some members to negotiate a resolution that would
pave the way for the withdrawal of Israel from Palestinian
settlements within a given time frame. Endless openended negotiations without clear objectives have not
served the interests of the Palestinian people. As a
measure of goodwill, we call on the Security Council
to prevail on Israel to halt settlement activities, remit
revenues, whenever they are due, to the Palestinian
Authority and to lift the blockade on Gaza.
We listened attentively to the statements delivered
by Council members this morning. All seem to be of
the same mind — that the only sustainable way to end
the conflict is a two-State solution, with Palestine and
Israel coexisting in peace. Let us walk the talk. We hope
that recent breakthroughs in multilateral diplomacy will
inspire and provide lessons that will contribute to the
resolution of this long-standing conflict in the Middle
East, and to other conflicts in that region as well. We
also call on the international community to honour
all pledges made towards the reconstruction of Gaza.
Indeed, some Council members this morning gave us
an indication of the magnitude of the gap between the
pledges and their delivery. It is huge.
May I conclude by reaffirming Zimbabwe’s
continued support for and solidarity with the Palestinian
people. We look forward to Palestine’s admission to its
deserved status as a full Member of the United Nations,
sovereign and equal with all other States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba supports the statement made by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The situation in the Middle East region continues to
be of serious concern to the international community.
As we commemorate the one-year anniversary of
the most recent Israeli attack on the Gaza Strip — in
15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

which more than 2,000 Palestinians lost their lives,
including at least 299 women and 556 children, and
which plunged the territory into terror, death and mass
destruction — the Palestinian people continue to be
victims of acts of vandalism perpetrated by Israel,
which is occupying their lands, killing their children,
destroying their heritage and curtailing their inalienable
rights, including the right to self-determination.
Despite periodic open debates in the Security Council
on this issue, which have shown overwhelming support
for the Palestinian cause, the Council, unfortunately,
has not adopted any resolution demanding that Israel
immediately end its military occupation of Palestinian
and other Arab territories and end the blockade of the
Gaza Strip and the construction and expansion of illegal
Israeli settlements and the separation wall on occupied
Palestinian territory, and demanding accountability for
war crimes and collective punishment committed by
Israel against the Palestinian people.
The undemocratic veto right in the Security
Council, which has allowed impunity in the conduct
of Israel, must come to an end. This body must
fulfil its obligation to promote a negotiated solution
that guarantees the end of the Israeli occupation of
Palestinian territory, the peaceful coexistence of two
independent States, starting with the establishment of
an independent, sovereign and viable State of Palestine,
and a just solution to the problem of Palestinian
refugees, pursuant to resolution 194(III) of the General
Assembly. We are convinced that a solution to that longstanding conflict would help to reduce the tensions in
the Middle East region today.
My delegation again reiterates in this forum
its strong condemnation of the Israeli colonization
campaign in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, and all measures, policies and practices
associated with that campaign, which also include
construction and expansion of the illegal settlements
and the wall, the destruction and confiscation of
Palestinian land and property, the forced displacement
of hundreds of thousands of Palestinian families and
the transfer of settlers into the occupied Palestinian
territory, among other violations of international law,
international humanitarian law and United Nations
resolutions.
Cuba also condemns, and calls for a definitive end
to, violence, provocations and incitements to hatred
and terror by Israeli settlers, arbitrary arrests, mass
imprisonment and genocide against the Palestinian

S/PV.7490

people. Cuba reaffirms its unequivocal solidarity with
that people and the firm and decisive support for all
actions to promote recognition of the State of Palestine
based on the pre-1967 borders, with its capital in East
Jerusalem, and the right of the State of Palestine to
become a full Member of the United Nations. Many of
the promises made for the reconstruction of the Gaza
Strip following the atrocious bombing and massive
destruction inflicted by Israel in July and August 2014
have not materialized. We call on all members of the
international community to honour their commitments
and to work for the reconstruction of that devastated
area.
Peace in Syria is possible only through respect for
the right of its people to decide their own destiny. A
political solution through dialogue and negotiations is
the only alternative to the conflict in Syria. Those who
feed the conflict from the outside with the declared
objective of regime change are responsible for thousands
of civilian casualties accumulated during four years of
fighting. We reiterate concern about the causes for the
loss of innocent lives as a result of the Syrian conflict
and again condemn all acts of violence that take place
in that country against the civilian population, but the
supposed protection of human life and the fight against
extremist elements cannot serve as a pretext for foreign
intervention.
The United Nations, especially this Council,
should promote an immediate ceasefire to open the way
for dialogue and negotiations and should not promote
initiatives that encourage further tensions in the
country. It should support all efforts in that direction,
such as those that have driven the Russian Federation
and other international actors to oppose those who seek
to fan the conflict by dispatching arms and mercenaries.
The huge human, financial and material resources
currently consumed by wars in the region would be
better utilized to ensure health-care services and quality
education, to encourage construction of infrastructure
that generates progress, to protect and promote all
human rights, including the right to development, to
eradicate poverty and promote social justice. Those
should be our priorities as Members of an Organization
that was founded nearly 70 years ago to maintain
international peace and security and to defend human
dignity.
The role of the Security Council is crucial to
achieving the aspirations of welfare, peace and
development that all peoples in the Middle East deserve.

15-2288261/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Its member States should be advocates of peaceful
solutions, without foreign interference, that preserve
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
contribute decisively to safeguarding the lives of the
peoples affected by the conflicts in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate New Zealand on its presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I would like
to express appreciation to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of New Zealand, Mr. Murray McCully, for
organizing this debate on the situation in Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. I also wish to thank
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing and
to congratulate him on his assumption of that important
responsibility.
Bangladesh welcomes the agreement reached
by the G5+1 with the Islamic Republic of Iran on its
nuclear programme. We hope that the agreement will be
a pathway to security, peace and stability in the Middle
East by way of the international community giving the
same attention to freeing the region of weapons of mass
destruction.
The Palestinian issue is now the number-one
longstanding issue in the field of international peace
and security and deserves top priority for resolution.
We should ask questions: can the people of Palestine
live with this uncertainty of life and livelihood forever?
We regret that the appalling human rights and
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the repeated appeals of the international
community to improve the deteriorating conditions
of the Palestinian people remain unheeded. The
people in the occupied territories continue to suffer
due to Israel’s blockades, closures, confiscation of
land and demolition of houses. The illegal separation
wall continues to divide and isolate communities,
destroying livelihoods and preventing access to jobs,
families, markets, schools and hospitals. Let us demand
that those walls be torn down, including the walls in the
mindset of the neighbours.
Gaza’s borders have been subject to a regime of
closure that is without precedent anywhere. Such closure
is tantamount to strangulation of an entire population
in the form of collective punishment. The quality of
62/65

23/07/2015

life of the Palestinians had already diminished to a
subsistence level. The periodic escalation of violence
only leads to further despair and destitution. Israel
is doing that purposefully, to generate fear, fury and
distress among the Palestinians. We deplore the Israeli
policy of collective punishment, of forcing Palestinian
people off of their land, of detaining people for a
long time without charge, of restricting freedom of
movement and property ownership by the Palestinian
people, of deporting Palestinian inhabitants and
depriving people of their legitimate claims over natural
resources, including scarce water resources.
The Government of Israel has continued its
settlement campaign in the occupied Palestinian
territory, with a particularly aggressive settlement
expansion in East Jerusalem. Those measures have
been soundly rejected by the international community
and their illegality unanimously confirmed, but
they continue unabated. All settlement construction,
including the so-called natural growth, is illegal under
international law and must be halted immediately.
Settlement activities constitute grave breaches of the
Fourth Geneva Convention and are war crimes under
article 8 of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. We appreciate the decision made by
the Palestine Authority to become a member of the
International Criminal Court, in order to seek justice
for the people of Palestine.
Having monitored the situation closely, we would
like to register our concern about the grave financial
crisis besetting the Government of the State of Palestine,
which undermines the accomplishments of its national
institution-building programme. The crisis has been
exacerbated by the decision of the Government of Israel
to withhold the tax receipts it collects from Palestinians
on behalf of the Palestinian Authority, as mutually
agreed through the Oslo Accords.
We urge Israel to fulfil its legal obligation, as
the occupying Power, to ensure that all inhabitants
are safeguarded against all acts of violence and
threats; to cease the illegal detention of Palestinian
people, including children; to stop the destruction of
homes and land confiscation; to allow the Palestinian
people access to their lands, employment and natural
resources; to desist from transferring its population to
the territories it has occupied; and to lift its embargo
against the Palestinians and immediately open all
border crossings to allow free movement of goods,
persons and humanitarian aid.

15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

It is needless to mention that the people of Israel,
who have suffered for years, know better. They
know that neither force nor extermination, nor illegal
occupation or subjugation or deprivation, can win and
bring peace and stability in the long run. For sustainable
peace and stability there is a two-State solution — the
State of Palestine and the State of Israel living side by
side in peace and harmony.
We express our total solidarity with the Palestinian
people and reiterate our full and unwavering support for
the legitimate and inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to a sovereign and independent State, and we
support its full membership in the United Nations and
demand an end to the Israeli occupation that began in
1967. We look forward to a two-State solution on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders and the just resolution of
all final status issues without delay.
The President: The representative of Iran has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I asked for
the floor in exercise of the right of reply, but allow
me first to express my Permanent Mission’s gratitude
to His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
New Zealand and the New Zealand presidency of the
Council and those ambassadors of Member States who
have spoken in this meeting of the Council in favour of
the deal concluded between Iran and the E3/EU+3, and
for their positive and encouraging approach adopted
with regard to this important event.
Once more, the representative of the Israeli regime
raised some baseless allegations against my country,
which I categorically and systematically reject.
The Israeli regime would have liked very much
to see the controversy over Iran’s nuclear energy
programme continue forever. That regime looked at
the controversy and the effective threat, which it touted
as a golden opportunity and smokescreen to hide its
criminal policy against the Palestinian people. It also
loved to keep the international community busy with
the issue in such a way that major countries have failed
to address the prolonged occupation of the Palestinian
territory, the criminal blockade of Gaza and the type
of atrocities that it committed in Gaza last summer and
which it continues to commit.
Therefore we will not be surprised to see, from now
on, the Israeli regime increase its baseless accusations
against us and against those who concluded the nuclear

S/PV.7490

deal. With this deal at hand, it will be much more
difficult for them to cheat and deceive people and
Governments as to what the international community
expects to be done in the Middle East. That regime
will find it much more difficult to turn a deaf ear on
the demands of the international community to end the
occupation. It will also be much more difficult for them
to stand as the only obstacle against the establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. We
and many others in the region and beyond believe that
the nuclear warheads stockpiled by the Israeli regime
constitute a grave threat to peace and security in our
volatile region and that the Security Council should
live up to its primary responsibility under the United
Nations Charter and take the actions necessary to
neutralize that threat.
The President: The representative of Israel has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Nitzan (Israel): Looking at the empty seats
here in the Security Council Chamber, I cannot refrain
from asking: where are all of those representatives who
made such strong and emotional appeals today and
called on the Security Council to act? Why is it that the
representatives of Kuwait, Indonesia, Namibia, Senegal
and Iceland could not sit here and follow this debate
until it ends? With such heartbreaking statements, I
think that they should have stayed with us during our
important discussion.
In her remarks earlier, the Lebanese representative
quoted from different United Nations reports. I think
that I would have expected the Lebanese representative
to first read the recent reports of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolutions 1559 (2004) and
1701 (2006). Perhaps Lebanon should consider toning
down its rhetoric and turning up the heat on Hizbullah’s
terrorist activities. Hizbullah has built an arsenal
of 120,000 rockets with the kind help of Iran, whose
representative just made another statement here. Those
rockets are located inside populated areas in southern
Lebanon as well as throughout Lebanese territory. In
operating within the population and directing attacks
against the civilian population of my country, Hizbullah
is committing a double war crime.
But I must say that I was once again touched to hear
the representative of Lebanon show such an interest
in Palestinian rights, though I would suggest that
instead of speaking empty words here, her Government
should take a look at the Palestinian refugee camps

15-2288263/65

S/PV.7490

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

throughout Lebanon, where Palestinians are kept in
some of the worst conditions in the region. They are
subjected to violence, discrimination, oppression and
marginalization from every sector of society.
I also found it interesting, again, as a response to
the Iranian statement, that the Iranian representative
was speaking about the Israeli occupation earlier,
although Iran is the main occupier in the Middle
East today, including in Syria and Lebanon. The
Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps is a terrorist
entity responsible for the murder of tens of thousands
of civilians in the Middle East and for terror attacks
around the world. In Lebanon, Iran is the chief sponsor
and supplier of illicit advanced weapons to Hizbullah,
in blatant violation of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701
(2006). Iran is in violation of those resolutions. Iran
and its proxies, be it the Al-Assad regime, Hizbullah,
Hamas or the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, are a threat to
international peace and security.
Only in the parallel universe of a Middle East open
debate can a role model such as Saudi Arabia attack
Israel while acting with full impunity and killing tens
of thousands of civilians in Yemen while creating a
humanitarian catastrophe in that country. It is very
easy for Saudi Arabia to focus on the situation in my
country and echo empty concerns for human rights
while hiding the fact that, for example, today Saudi
Arabia carried out its first barbaric execution after a
pause for Ramadan by beheading one of its citizens.
This latest beheading brings us to 103 executions in
Saudi Arabia this year alone, a sharp increase over the
87 recorded executions during the whole of 2014.
With regard to the lengthy conspiracy theories that
we heard earlier from the representative of Venezuela,
I understand that the same culture of conspiracy is
also used for the daily and systematic persecution of
political activists and opposition members in Venezuela.
Malaysia does not hesitate to support the Hamas
terrorist organization here in the Council Chamber. It
should also be emphasized that Malaysia’s support for
Hamas is also carried out on the ground. Hamas trains
terrorists on Malaysian soil with the full knowledge
of the Malaysian authorities. Hamas terrorists are
recruited and sent to Malaysia for weeklong parachute
training, in preparation for cross-border kidnapping
attacks in Israel. The support provided by a Security
Council member to a terrorist organization is an
obstacle to the resumption of our peace negotiations

64/65

23/07/2015

and to the improvement of the lives of those whom
Malaysia claims to care about.
The President: The representative of Saudi Arabia
has asked for the floor to make a further statement. I
now give him the floor.
Mr.
Al-Mouallimi
(Saudi
Arabia):
The
representative of Israel has chosen to give us a most
melodramatic finale in which he opened fire on just
about everybody. It is ironic that the representative
of Israel can stand here and give all of us a lecture on
the protection of civilians in time of war. Israel has
written the book on killing civilians in warfare. Israel
is the ultimate authority in that area, having murdered
thousands of Palestinians just one year ago in Gaza.
Now the latest version of Israel’s protection of
human rights is to defend the rights of criminals. I say to
the representative of Israel that if my country executes
criminals, his country is deliberately killing innocent
civilians — children, women and men, day and night,
and has been doing that for a very long time. I think that
it is high time for the Council to put an end to Israeli
arrogance and double standards and to ensure that Israel
complies with the rules of the civilized community of
nations and ceases its occupation of Arab territories in
Palestine, Syria and Lebanon.
The President: The representative of Malaysia has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give her the floor.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): Malaysia is taking the
floor to exercise its right of reply to the comments and
allegations made by the representative of Israel.
I would first categorically reject the allegation
against my country made by the representative of Israel.
This is a malicious allegation aimed at tarnishing my
country’s image. Such allegations have been made
before, and my Government has categorically rejected
any such ridiculous notion.
Our commitment to countering terrorism is not the
issue here. It is, rather, Israel’s practice of terrorizing
helpless and defenceless Palestinian civilians that is the
issue now. I should also reiterate that Malaysia is not
an occupying Power, unlike Israel, which is roundly
condemned for its illegal practices related to its ongoing
occupation of the Palestinian and other Arab territories.
My delegation’s position on the matter under
consideration has been made clear in our statement

15-22882

23/07/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

delivered today. We would urge the Israeli delegation
to focus its energy on addressing the various concerns
raised by Malaysia and other Member States today,
instead of attempting to divert attention with false
allegations.
The President: The representative of Israel has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. Please
note that I will be limiting further statements to one
more per delegation. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Nitzan (Israel): I will be very brief. In reply to
the statement of representative of Saudi Arabia made

S/PV.7490

just now, there is a phrase in Arabic that says, “words
are cheap” or “you can say whatever you want” — with
full impunity, let us say. I think that the representative
of Saudi Arabia proved right now, in talking about the
protection of civilians and double standards, and earlier,
about commissions of inquiry, that this Arabic phrase
is very valid with respect to his cynical argumentation.
The President: There are no more speakers
inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

15-2288265/65
