A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/163
30 January 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 149
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/51/629)]
51/163.

Report of the Committee on Relations with
the Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country,1
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations, the
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations,2 and the
Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America
regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations,3 and the responsibilities of
the host country,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to be taken by the
competent authorities of the host country, in particular to prevent any acts
violating the security of missions and the safety of their personnel,
Noting the spirit of cooperation and mutual understanding that has
guided the deliberations of the Committee on issues affecting the United
Nations community and the host country,
Welcoming the increased interest shown by Member States in participating
in the work of the Committee,
1.
Endorses the recommendations and conclusions of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 65 of its report;1

1

A/51/26; see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first
Session, Supplement No. 26.
2

Resolution 22 A (I).

3

See resolution 169 (II).

97-76369

/...

A/RES/51/163
Page 2

2.
Considers that the maintenance of appropriate conditions for the
normal work of the delegations and the missions accredited to the United
Nations is in the interests of the United Nations and all Member States, and
requests the host country to continue to take all measures necessary to
prevent any interference with the functioning of missions;
3.
Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the host
country, and hopes that the concerns raised at the meetings of the Committee
will continue to be resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance with
international law;
4.
Notes with appreciation the efforts of the Committee which have
contributed to a decrease in the amount of diplomatic indebtedness, stresses
that existing indebtedness continues to be a matter of significant concern to
the United Nations and that non-payment of just debts tarnishes the image of
the Organization itself, and reaffirms that non-compliance with contractual
obligations cannot be condoned or justified;
5.
Welcomes the efforts of the Committee aimed at identifying
affordable health care programmes for the diplomatic community;
6.
Once again urges the host country to consider lifting travel
controls with regard to certain missions and to staff members of the
Secretariat of certain nationalities, and in this regard notes the positions
of the affected States, the Secretary-General and the host country;
7.
Notes with satisfaction the steps taken by the host country at
John F. Kennedy International Airport with regard to special passages for
members of the United Nations community, and urges the host country to
continue to take appropriate action in this regard to ensure application of
those procedures;
8.
Calls upon the host country to review measures and procedures
relating to the parking of diplomatic vehicles, with a view to responding to
the growing needs of the diplomatic community, and to consult with the
Committee on these issues;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all
aspects of the relations of the United Nations with the host country;
10.
Requests the Committee to continue its work, in conformity with
General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971;
11.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-second
session the item entitled "Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country".
85th plenary meeting
16 December 1996
