52

General AHembly-Twenty-tbird Seuion

4. Confirms the views of the International Conference
on Human Rights, held at Teheran, which recognized
and vigoro~sly supported the legitimacy of the struggle
of the peoples and patriotic liberation movements in
southern Africa and in colonial Territories, in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions;
5. Further confirms the decision taken by the International Conference on Human Rights to recognize the
right of freedom fighters in southern Africa and in
colonial Territories to be treated, when captured, as
prisoners of war under the Geneva Conventions of
1949 ;40
6. Appeals to all Stcrt:es and organizations dedicated
to the ideals of freedom, independence and peace to
continue to give political, moral and material assistance
to peoples struggling against all forms of racial discrimination and colonialism;
7. Calls 1ipon all States to sever all relations with
South Africa, Portugal and the illegal minority regime
in Southern Rhodesia and to refrain scrupulously from
giving any military or economic assistance to these
regimes;
8. Requests the United Nations organs and the
specialized agencies concerned to continue to give all
appropriate assistance to the patriotic freedom movements in colonial Territories and in southern Africa
am! to keep this matter under constant review;
9. Further requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with Member States, to prepare a programme
for the celebration in 1971 of the International Year for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.

2447 (XXIII). Education of youth in the respect
for human rights and fundamental
freedoms
The General Assembly,
Noting resolution XX on education of youth in the
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
adopted on 12 May 1968 by the International Conference on Human Rights, 41 as well as paragraph 17
of the Proclamation of Teheran, 42
Noting also Economic and Social Council resolutions
1353 (XLV) and 1354 (XLV) of 2 August 1968 on
youth participation in international co-operation and
on programmes of international action relating to
youth,
Recalling the Declaration on the Promotion among
Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and
Understanding between Peoples proclaimed by the
General Assembly on 7 December 1965,
Aware of the aspirations expressed by large sectors
of the young generation for a more effective protection of human dignity in this age of great scientific,
technological and cultural achievements and of the desire
of youth to have its full share in the accomplishment of
the major humanitarian demands of this century,
C onscio11s of the importance of extending to young
people an education in the spirit of the most noble
humanitarian ideals of mankind and therefore convinced
40 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), Nos. 970-973.
41 See Final Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),

p. 15.
42 Ibid., p. 3.

that States, the United Nations and other international
organizations, youth organizations and society in general
should undertake continuous and permanent efforts to
that effect,
Convinced that the enthusiasm, energy and creative
ability of the young could be a major factor in the
spiritual and material advancement of all peoples,
the universal promotion of human rights and worldwide economic and social development,
Considering that the United Nations and the specialized agencies, in particular the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, within their
spheres of competence, could provide useful channels
through which the deeply felt concerns of youth could
be better understood and studied and constructive
confrontations between spokesmen of the various generations could be harmoniously conducted,
Taking note of the appeal made by the International
Conference on Human Rights to States to take all
appropriate measures to prepare youth for, and stimulate
its interest in, the creation of a better society,
1. Endorses the appeal made by the International
Conference on Human Rights to States to ensure that
all means of e.ducation should be employed so that youth
may grow up and develop in a spirit of respect for
human dignity and equal rights of man without discrimination as to race, colour, language, sex or faith;
2. Further endorses the recommendations made by
the International Conference on Human Rights, in its
resolution XX, to States, international organizations
and youth organizations ;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
invite the Commission on Human Rights, in co-operation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, to study the question of
the education of youth all over the world with a view
to the development of its personality and the strengthening of its respect for the rights of man and fundamental
freedoms;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange from
time to time for an exchange of information on action
taken by States in their efforts to ensure that young
people are educated and brought up in a spirit of
respect for human rights everywhere and given the
opportunity of playing their part in the implementation
and protection of human rights ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to organize,
within the framework of the programme of advisory
services in the field of human rights and in co-operation
with interested Governments, seminars with the participation of persons specially qualified in subjects of
particular concern to youth, including youth leaders;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to .the
General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session on action
taken in implementation of the present resolution.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.

2448 (XXIII). Freedom of information
The General Assembly.

H a'l!iny rcqard to article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights which ensures to everyone
the right to freedom of opinion and expression, including freedom to hold opinions without interference and
to seek, receive and impart information and ideas
through any media and regardless of frontiers,
