United Nations

A/RES/63/1

General Assembly

Distr.: General
8 October 2008

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 57 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 September 2008
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/63/L.1)]

63/1.

Political declaration on Africa’s development needs

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 62/242 of 4 March 2007, in particular paragraph 5,
Adopts the following political declaration:
Political declaration on Africa’s development needs
1.
We, heads of State and Government, ministers and representatives of
Member States gathered at a high-level meeting at United Nations Headquarters in
New York on 22 September 2008 to address “Africa’s development needs: state of
implementation of various commitments, challenges and the way forward”, stress
that the high-level meeting represents a unique opportunity to strengthen the global
partnership for development in Africa, which is pivotal to bringing Africa into the
mainstream of the global economy.
2.
We reaffirm the special needs of Africa as contained in the United Nations
Millennium Declaration, 1 the United Nations Declaration on the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development, 2 the Monterrey Consensus of the International
Conference on Financing for Development, 3 the Plan of Implementation of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation”) 4 and the 2005 World Summit Outcome. 5
0F

1F

2F

3F

4F

3.
We recommit ourselves to reinvigorate and strengthen a global
partnership of equals based on our common values, mutual accountability, shared
responsibility and the determination to collectively act for our common future and
to mobilize the resources, including human, financial and technological, required to

_______________
1

See resolution 55/2.
See resolution 57/2.
3
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.
5
See resolution 60/1.
2

08-47085

A/RES/63/1

end poverty, hunger and underdevelopment in Africa, with the explicit objective of
turning existing commitments into concrete actions.
4.
We commit to strengthening support for the implementation of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, 6 which is an overarching framework for
socio-economic sustainable development in Africa, as well as for the
implementation of national and subregional development plans and strategies.
5F

5.
We stress that eradicating poverty, particularly in Africa, is the greatest
global challenge facing the world today. We underline the importance of
accelerating sustainable broad-based economic growth, including employment
generation and decent work, towards a vibrant Africa.
6.
We reaffirm our commitment to address the special needs of Africa, a
continent where, despite recent considerable improvements, the full and timely
achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals, remains elusive.
7.
We commit to supporting the consolidation of democracy in Africa and
assisting African countries in their struggle for lasting peace, economic growth,
poverty eradication and sustainable development.
8.
We underline that good governance at all levels is essential for sustained
economic growth, poverty eradication and sustainable development. We welcome
the progress many African countries have made with respect to implementing
pro-poor economic policies, deepening democracy and protecting human rights. We
stress the importance of African-led initiatives to strengthen political, economic and
corporate governance, such as the African Peer Review Mechanism. We recommit
ourselves to actively protecting and promoting all human rights, the rule of law and
democracy.
9.
We welcome the efforts of African Governments to mobilize domestic
resources and attract private capital to finance the investments and expenditures
needed to achieve their development goals. We underscore the importance of an
enabling environment at all levels, which is vital for mobilizing domestic resources,
increasing productivity, generating employment, especially for youth, reducing
capital flight, fighting corruption, encouraging the private sector and attracting
foreign direct investment, and in this regard we underline the importance of human,
professional and institutional capacity-building for development.
10. We stress the importance of strengthening domestic financial sectors as a
source of capital by making them inclusive, thus expanding access to financial
services.
11. We underline the importance of increasing foreign direct investment in
the extractive industries value chain as well as diversification in other sectors, in
order to achieve higher levels of employment and facilitate the transfer of
technology and knowledge.
12. We are concerned that, at the current rate, the commitment of doubling
aid to Africa by 2010 as articulated at the Summit of the Group of Eight, held at
Gleneagles from 6 to 8 July 2005, will not be reached. We call for the fulfilment of
all official development assistance-related commitments, including the
commitments made by many developed countries to achieve the target of
_______________
6

2

A/57/304, annex.

A/RES/63/1

0.7 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance by 2015, as
well as the target of 0.15 per cent to 0.20 per cent of gross national income for least
developed countries, and urge those developed countries that have not yet done so to
make concrete efforts in this regard in accordance with their commitments.
13. We welcome the increased aid flows from new development actors,
including some developing countries, global funds, the private sector and civil
society organizations, as well as from innovative sources of finance.
14. We emphasize that debt sustainability is essential for underpinning
growth, and underline the importance of debt sustainability and effective debt
management to the efforts to achieve national development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals. Debtors and creditors must share the responsibility
for preventing and resolving unsustainable debt situations. We note with
appreciation the progress under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative and
the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative, but remain concerned that a number of
African countries are still facing difficulties in finding a durable solution to their
debt problems, which could adversely affect their sustainable development. We
therefore call for continued efforts to achieve long-term debt sustainability.
15. We recommit to improving the effectiveness of development assistance,
including the fundamental principles of ownership, alignment, harmonization,
managing for results and mutual accountability. We call for a continuing dialogue to
improve the effectiveness of aid, including the full implementation of the Accra
Agenda for Action by countries and organizations that commit to it.
16. We commit to promoting South-South cooperation and triangular
cooperation, which have great potential to facilitate the exchange of successful
strategies, practices and experiences. The impact of South-South cooperation may
be further harnessed through synergies with other bilateral or multilateral
development partners. We recognize South-South cooperation initiatives that are
rooted in the principle of national ownership and are aimed at strengthening
productive capacity as well as accelerating economic growth and sustainable
development.
17. We welcome the commitments made by Africa and its development
partners in the context of various important initiatives and partnerships in recent
years, inter alia, the Africa Partnership Forum, the New Asian-African Strategic
Partnership, the China-Africa Partnership, the European Union-Africa Strategic
Partnership, the Group of Eight-Africa Partnership, the Millennium Challenge
Account, the Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief of the President of the United States
of America, the Africa-Turkey Cooperation Summit, the Africa-South America
Summit, the Tokyo International Conference on African Development, the
comprehensive health-care initiative sponsored by the Government of Cuba, the
Initiative for Africa’s Development of the Republic of Korea, the special technical
assistance programme for Africa of Pakistan, the Viet Nam-Africa cooperation
partnership and the India-Africa Forum.
18. We urge the United Nations system, international and regional financial
institutions and other multilateral development partners to continue and strengthen
support for African Governments in their efforts to implement national development
strategies and programmes. We stress the need to strengthen the capacities and
capabilities of the United Nations system in supporting Africa’s development.
19. We stress the need for well-functioning national and international
financial systems, which should have the capacity to help reduce uncertainty and
3

A/RES/63/1

support economic growth. We recognize the need to enhance the voice and
participation of developing countries in policymaking in the areas of trade, money
and finance.
20. We are concerned that Africa’s share of international trade is only
2 per cent, and underline the important role that trade plays in promoting economic
growth. We stress the need to promote Africa’s international trade, including
through regional integration and greater integration into the global economy and
fulfilment of our commitment to a well-functioning, universal, rules-based, open,
non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system which promotes
sustainable development. We commit to redoubling our efforts towards the
reinvigoration of the multilateral trade negotiations and to achieve a successful
development-oriented outcome of the Doha Round of the World Trade Organization.
We call for stronger national action and international support to build domestic
productive competitive export supply capacities, as well as trade support,
infrastructure and institutions for African countries.
21. We underline that development, peace and security and human rights are
interlinked and mutually reinforcing. We stress that conflict prevention, resolution
and management and post-conflict consolidation are essential for the achievement of
the objectives of the special needs of Africa. We welcome the progress that the
African Union and the subregional organizations have made in this regard, inter alia,
through the strengthening of Africa’s peace and security architecture.
22. We call for intensified efforts and a coordinated approach between
national Governments, the African Union, subregional organizations, the United
Nations system and partners with a view to achieving further progress towards the
goal of a conflict-free Africa. We stress the importance of and pledge to support
peace consolidation mechanisms and processes, including the Panel of the Wise, the
African Union Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development Framework, the early
warning system and the operationalization of the African Standby Force. We also
stress the importance of and pledge to support relevant United Nations bodies, inter
alia, the Peacebuilding Commission. We welcome the intensification of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union on peace and security and
underline the importance of the implementation of the ten-year capacity-building
programme for the African Union. We call upon the international community to
assist post-conflict countries in achieving a smooth transition from relief to
development.
23. We recognize that Africa faces a number of serious challenges, including
poverty, hunger, climate change, land degradation and desertification, rapid
urbanization, lack of adequate water supplies and energy supply and HIV/AIDS,
malaria, tuberculosis and other endemic diseases. We commend African countries
for their leadership in addressing those challenges and charting the way forward for
the region in the context of the African Union as well as through national and
subregional development plans and strategies.
24. We stress that climate change has serious implications for sustainable
development. We express concern that Africa faces high risks from the negative
effects of climate change, although it emits the least amount of greenhouse gases.
We acknowledge that the global nature of climate change calls for the widest
possible cooperation by all countries and their participation in an effective and
appropriate international response, in accordance with their common but
differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities and their social and
economic conditions. We reaffirm our support for the United Nations Framework
4

A/RES/63/1

Convention on Climate Change, 7 and welcome the decisions adopted by the
Conference of the Parties to the Convention at its thirteenth session, held in Bali
from 3 to 15 December 2007, 8 including the Bali Action Plan. 9 We remain deeply
concerned that all countries, in particular developing countries, including least
developed countries, small island developing States and African countries, face
increased risks from the negative effects of climate change, and stress the need to
urgently address adaptation needs relating to such effects. In this context, we
underline in particular the need for new and additional financial resources.
6F

7F

8F

25. We are concerned about the consequences of the global food crisis on the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, and in this regard we
acknowledge the African Union’s declaration on responding to the challenges of
high fuel prices and agricultural development. We call for an integrated response by
African countries and the international community, working in partnership to
support integrated and sustainable agriculture and rural development approaches,
and stress the importance of food security and strengthening the agricultural sector,
as set out in, inter alia, the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development
Programme of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development. We call upon all
donors and the United Nations system to increase their assistance to Africa, in
particular to least developed countries and those that are most negatively affected by
high food prices.
26. We welcome Africa’s commitment to the Africa Water Vision 2025, the
Sirte declaration on agriculture and water in Africa 10 and the Sharm el-Sheikh
Commitments for Accelerating the Achievement of Water and Sanitation Goals in
Africa. 11
9F

10F

27. We recognize the challenges of inadequate infrastructure and
industrialization in Africa and the need to substantively increase investment in all
forms of infrastructure in accordance with the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development. We recognize the contribution that private capital can make towards
the development of infrastructure.
28. We recognize the urgent need for large-scale investments in energy
infrastructure, as outlined in the New Partnership for Africa’s Development, and are
committed to promoting renewable sources of energy, clean energy, energy
efficiency and conservation.
29. We reaffirm the universal commitment to promoting gender equality and
the empowerment of women, recognizing that they are key actors in development.
30. We resolve to increase our efforts to reduce maternal and child mortality,
and reaffirm the commitment to achieve universal access to reproductive health by
2015.

_______________
7

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
FCCC/CP/2007/6/Add.1.
9
Ibid., decision 1/CP.13.
10
Sirte Declaration on the Challenges of Implementing Integrated and Sustainable Development on
Agriculture and Water in Africa (African Union, document Ex/Assembly/AU/Decl.1 (II). Available from
www.africa-union.org).
11
African Union, document Assembly/AU/Dec. (XI). Available from www.africa-union.org.
8

5

A/RES/63/1

31. We note with concern that violence against women and children
everywhere continues and often increases, and resolve to ensure the strict universal
adherence to international norms regarding violence against women and girls.
32. We express our grave concern at the negative effects on development,
peace, security and human rights posed by transnational crime, including the
smuggling of and trafficking in human beings.
33. We commit ourselves to safeguarding the principle of refugee protection
and to upholding our responsibility in resolving the plight of refugees, including
through support of efforts aimed at addressing the causes of refugee movement,
bringing about the safe and sustainable return of those populations.
34. We recognize the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement 12 as an
important international framework for the protection of internally displaced persons,
and welcome the fact that an increasing number of States, United Nations agencies
and regional and non-governmental organizations are applying them as a standard,
and encourage all relevant actors to make use of the Guiding Principles when
dealing with situations of internal displacement.
1F

35. We recognize that HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and other infectious
diseases pose severe risks for the entire world and serious challenges to the
achievement of development goals. In this regard, we welcome the commitment by
African Governments and regional institutions to scale up their own responses in
order to curb the devastating effects of those pandemics. We reaffirm our
commitment to pursuing all necessary efforts to scale up support for nationally
driven, sustainable and comprehensive responses in Africa to achieve broad
multisectoral coverage for prevention, treatment, care and support, with the full and
active participation of people living with HIV, vulnerable groups, most affected
communities, civil society and the private sector, towards the goal of universal
access to comprehensive prevention programmes, treatment, care and support by
2010, in line with the 2006 Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS. 13
12F

36. We renew our resolve to fulfil our commitments towards providing
quality basic education and promoting literacy, using the full range of bilateral and
multilateral instruments, including continued efforts to mobilize resources to meet
the education needs of African countries. We emphasize the importance of expanded
primary, secondary and higher education as well as vocational education and
technical training, especially for girls and women.
37. We recognize that the way forward for meeting Africa’s development
needs requires taking coordinated, balanced and integrated actions at all levels for
the full and timely achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and
comprehensively addressing all challenges to Africa’s development. In this regard,
we welcome the Secretary-General’s initiative to hold a high-level event on the
Millennium Development Goals on 25 September 2008.
38. This political declaration is adopted on 22 September 2008 on the
occasion of the high-level meeting on “Africa’s development needs: state of
implementation of various commitments, challenges and the way forward”. It seeks
to reaffirm the commitment of all States to addressing the development needs on the
African continent. In adopting this political declaration, Member States reaffirm
_______________
12
13

6

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.
Resolution 60/262, annex.

A/RES/63/1

their belief in a prosperous future for Africa in which core human values of dignity
and peace are fully enshrined. In this context, Member States further confirm their
adherence to the spirit of cooperation that defines the United Nations system and
that is based on a partnership among equals.
39. The high-level meeting has reviewed the implementation of all
commitments made to and by Africa in order to comprehensively address the special
development needs of the continent. All commitments to and by Africa should be
effectively implemented and given appropriate follow-up by the international
community and by Africa itself. We underscore the urgency of finding solutions to
Africa’s major challenges. In this regard, we request the Secretary-General to
submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session a comprehensive report,
with recommendations, on “Africa’s development needs: state of implementation of
various commitments, challenges and the way forward” with a view to the
formulation, by the sixty-fifth session of the Assembly, of a mechanism to review
the full and timely implementation of all commitments related to Africa’s
development, building on existing mechanisms, to ensure that Member States
remain seized of the issue of addressing Africa’s special development needs.
4th plenary meeting
22 September 2008

7
