64,

General A11embly-Twenty-fl.fth Se.1lon

motion of specific industrial projects dealing with the
natural resources of developing countries;
4. Calls upon Governments to continue their efforts
aimed at the complete implementation of the principles
and recommendations contained in the aforementioned
resolutions of the General Assembly;
5. Invites the Economic and Social Council to instruct the Committee on Natural Resources to include
in its work programme a periodic report on the advantages derived from the exercise by developing countries
of permanent sovereignty over their natural resources,
with particular reference to the impact of such exercise
on the increased mobilization of resources, especially
of domestic resources, for their economic and social
development, on the outflow of capital therefrom as
well as on the transfer of technology;
6. Further invites Member States to inform the
Committee on Natural Resources, through the
Secretary-General, on the progress achieved to safeguard the exercise of permanent sovereignty over their
natural resources, including the measures taken to
control the outflow of capital in a manner compatible
with the exercise of their sovereignty and international
co-operation;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue with
the study requested in section III of General Assembly
resolution 1803 (XVII) and the submission of the
report called for in resolutions 2158 (XXI) and 2386
(XXIII), taking into account also the provisions of
the present resolution;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the report mentioned in paragraph 7 above, through the
Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly
at its twenty-seventh session.
I926th plenary meeting,
I 1 December 1970.
2724 (XXV). Identification of the least developed
among the developing countries
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its support for resolution 24 (II)
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development on 26 March 1968, ~6 in which the
Conference invited international bodies responsible for
particular measures to benefit developing countries
generally to design the form of, and elaborate on, the
special measures which might be taken in favour of
the least developed countries, and to identify such
countries,
Reaffirming further its support for the request which
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development made to the Secretary-General of the Conference,
in resolution 24 (II), to continue studies relative to the
identification of the least developed countries and to
examine the various approaches to this problem,
Recalling its resolution 2564 (XXIV) of 13 December 1969, in which it affirmed the need to alleviate the
problems of the least developed among the developing
countries with a view to enabling them to draw full
benefits from the Second United Nations Development
Decade,
66 Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, Second Session, vol. I and Corr.1 and 3 and
Add.1 and 2, Report and Annexes (United Nations publication,
Sales No.: E.68.11.D.14), p. 54.

Noting with appreciation that the Committee for
Development Planning is engaged in examining questions relating to the least developed among the developing countries, including criteria for identifying such
countries, on the basis of a report prepared by one of
its working groups, 56
Recalling further the proclamation by the General
Assembly, at the closing meeting of its commemorative
session on 24 October 1970, of the Second United
Nations Development Decade, to begin on 1 January
1971,
Taking into account Trade and Develo~ment Board
resolution 68 (X) of 16 September 1970, 1
Noting further decision 75 (S-IV) adopted by the
Trade and Development Board at its fourth special
session 58 on the generalized system of preferences, particularly section V of the agreed conclusions of the
Special Committee on Preferences annexed to the decision, which concerns the special measures in favour of
the least developed among the developing countries,
1. Affirms the urgency of identifying the least developed among the developing countries in order to enable
the countries so identified to benefit as early as possible
from the special measures in their favour adopted in
the various forums, particularly those incorporated in
the International Development Strate~ for the Second
United Nations Development Decade; 9
2. Invites the Economic and Social Council, the
Trade and Development Board and international bodies
responsible for measures designed to benefit developing countries to accord a high priority to the question of the identification of the least developed among
the developing countries and, taking into account relevant studies, including that of the Committee for Development Planning, requests them to consider this
matter intensively and extensively during 1971;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session on the
progress made towards the identification of the least
developed among the developing countries.
1931st plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.
2725 (XXV). Third session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2402 (XXIII) of 13 December 1968, in which it drew the attention of the States
members of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development to the tasks which remained unfinished and to the large number of important issues remitted by the Conference at its second session to the
continuing machinery for further consideration and
action,
Recalling further its suggestion to the Trade and
Development Board in General Assembly resolution
2570 (XXIV) of 13 December 1969 that the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development should
consider, at its third session, ways and means of imple56 E/ AC.54/L.36 and Corr.I and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1
and 2.
67 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyfifth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/8015/Rev.l and Rev.1/
Corr.I), part two, annex I.
58 Jbid., part three, annex I.
59 Resolution 2626 (XXV),
