S/PRST/2016/19

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 December 2016
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7848th meeting of the Security Council, held on 21 December 2016, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Peace
consolidation in West Africa”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls the Press Statement of the Council
members on 10 December 2016, and takes note of the communiqué of the
Chairman of the African Union (AU) on 10 Dece mber 2016 as well as the joint
communiqué of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Commission, the African Union Commission and the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) on 10 December 2 016 regarding the
situation in the Islamic Republic of the Gambia (the Gambia).
“The Security Council welcomes and is encouraged by the decisio ns on
the political situation in the Gambia of the Fiftieth Ordinary Session of the
ECOWAS Authority held in Abuja on 17 December 2016 and the decisions of
the AU Peace and Security Council, at its 644th meeting held on 12 December
2016, and the African Union to recognize Mr. Adama Barrow as Presidentelect of the Gambia.
“The Security Council reiterates its request to outgoing President
Jammeh and the relevant Gambian Authorities to fully respect the results of
the presidential election of 1 December 2016, to respect the will of the
Gambian people and to carry out a peaceful and orderly transition process, and
to transfer power to President-elect Adama Barrow by 19 January 2017 in
accordance with the Gambian constitution. The Security Council further
welcomes the decision of ECOWAS Heads of State to attend the 19 January
inauguration of President-elect Barrow in Banjul.
“The Security Council commends the initiatives of ECOWAS, including
the visit of an ECOWAS/UN high-level delegation in Banjul on 13 December
2016, led by Her Excellency Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, President of the Republic
of Liberia and Chairperson of the ECOWAS Authority, aimed at ensuring a
peaceful and orderly transition process in the Gambia.
“The Security Council welcomes the appointment by ECOWAS of His
Excellency Muhammadu Buhari, President and Commander in Chief of the

16-22692 (E)

211216

*1622692*

S/PRST/2016/19

Federal Republic of Nigeria as the Mediator in the Gambia and His Excellency
John Dramani Mahama, President of the Republic of Ghana as the Co -Chair.
“The Security Council recalls its members’ request that the security of
President-elect Adama Barrow, and that of all Gambian citizens, be fully
ensured, and supports the decision of ECOWAS Fiftieth Session in this regard.
“The Security Council further requests that the Gambian defence and
security forces demonstrate maximum restraint to maintain an atmosphere of
calm in Banjul.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General, including through
his Special Representative, in collaboration with the relevant regional and
subregional organizations, to facilitate, as appropriate, political dialogue
between the Gambian stakeholders in order to ensure a peaceful transition of
power in the Gambia and in full respect of the outcome of the presidential
election as recognized by ECOWAS and the AU, and to provide technical
assistance to the ECOWAS mediation where required.
“In this regard, the Security Council emphasises the important role of
Mr. Mohammed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of UNOWAS in the current political situation in the Gambia.
“The Security Council further welcomes and reiterates its full support for
the continued efforts of the AU and ECOWAS to promote peace, stability and
good governance in the region.
“The Security Council expresses its intention to continue to follow the
situation in the Gambia closely.”

2/2

16-22692
