S/PV.7331

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7331st meeting

Tuesday, 9 December 2014, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mangaral .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chad)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Cai Weiming
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Tatham
Mr. Klein

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

14-68174 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1468174*

S/PV.7331

Briefings by Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the outgoing Chairs of the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council according to the year
of adoption of the related resolutions: His Excellency
Mr. Oh Joon, Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea, and Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004); His Excellency Mr. Gary
Quinlan, Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011); Her Excellency
Mrs. María Cristina Perceval, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan and Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions; Her Excellency Ms. Sylvie Lucas,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) and Chair of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict; and
His Excellency Mr. Eugène-Richard Gasana, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya and Chair of
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations.
I now give the floor to Mr. Oh Joon.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting, which provides a welcome opportunity
for the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council to take stock of their work and share some
personal reflections.
Over the past two years, the Republic of Korea has
had the honour to chair the Security Council Committee

2/16

09/12/2014

established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea.
With regard to the 1540 Committee, I already
briefed the Council in my capacity as Committee Chair
in November. I therefore do not have much to add today,
except to once again offer my heartfelt appreciation to
all members of the Committee, the Expert Group of the
1540 Committee, the Secretariat and the wider United
Nations membership for their support during the two
years of my country’s chairmanship.
Looking back, the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004) was an opportune moment
to renew our political commitment and explore future
strategies for the full and universal implementation
of the resolution. I hope that those efforts will give
renewed impetus to the work of the Committee in
the years ahead, including its preparations for the
comprehensive review to be conducted by 2016. I also
wish the incoming Chair every success in his new
chairmanship role.
Let me turn to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea. While chairing
this Committee, I have organized the work of the
Committee around three core principles.
First, I have focused on enhancing the credibility
of the sanctions regime, while considering how
sanctions can further promote peace and stability in
the region. The situation in Somalia is complex and
requires a holistic and comprehensive approach. While
we have seen considerable progress in recent years,
there is still a variety of obstacles to overcome, such
as the continuing military threats from Al-Shabaab,
arms embargo violations, the humanitarian crisis and
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights laws, to name a few.
In the light of the fragile situation, the effective
implementation of the sanctions regime, including
an arms embargo and charcoal ban, remains of vital
importance for the country’s path towards stability.
Accordingly, we have been vigilant with respect to
the potential flow of arms into the hands of armed
groups. In particular, following the partial lifting of the
arms embargo on the Federal Government of Somalia
as authorized by resolutions 2093 (2013), 2142 (2014)

14-68174

09/12/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

and 2182 (2014), the Committee paid special attention
to the implementation of the relevant resolutions,
including the Somali Government’s advanced
notification and reporting obligations. We also tried
to support the Somali Government in improving its
weapons-management capacity. Furthermore, cutting
off Al-Shabaab’s financing derived from the charcoal
trade is also a significant tool that will ensure a safer
and more secure environment in Somalia. This year, the
Committee adopted its first implementation assistance
notice, which outlines practical recommendations
and guidance on measures to assist Member States in
implementing the ban more effectively.
Secondly, I have always sought to strengthen
engagement with the countries concerned. I believe
that the effective and responsible implementation of
sanctions cannot be accomplished without the support
and cooperation of the countries concerned and other
regional actors. During my two years as Committee
Chair, I met with representatives from Somalia and
Eritrea as well as other countries in the Horn of Africa.
Their views on the Committee’s work helped provide
a balanced perspective on relevant issues. On multiple
occasions, we also invited the representatives of
Somalia and Eritrea to Committee meetings to share
their views, which gave us a better understanding of the
issues and challenges they have faced in implementing
the sanctions regime. As a part of such constructive
engagement efforts, I was privileged to contribute to
the improvement of relations between the Somalia
and Eritrea Monitoring Group and the Government of
Eritrea, which at the outset of my chairmanship had
reached a low point. I appreciate the strong support of
Council members for my initiative to engage Eritrea.
Since last December, I facilitated two face-toface meetings in Paris and Cairo, and one meeting via
videoconference between the Monitoring Group and the
Government of Eritrea. Those meetings were important
for promoting dialogue and building confidence.
Following that constructive dialogue, the Eritrean
Government’s opinion was reflected in the Group’s
final report. While it unfortunately was not possible
for the Monitoring Group to visit Eritrea during my
tenure, I strongly encourage my successor to continue
facilitating dialogue in the lead-up to the Monitoring
Group’s visit to Asmara.
Finally, I believe that the successful implementation
of the Committee’s mandate requires close working

S/PV.7331

relations between the Monitoring Group and the
Committee. In that regard, we took into serious
consideration the analyses and recommendations made
by the Group on the most effective ways to implement
the sanctions regime. I am pleased to note that we have
a competent Monitoring Group, which provides us with
an excellent basis for deliberation.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the members
of the Committee for their cooperation, active
participation, valuable contributions and enriching
discussions during my tenure as Chair. Despite the
many challenges, I believe that the Somalia and Eritrea
sanctions regimes have contributed to the Council’s
shared goal of promoting peace and stability in the Horn
of Africa, a region whose peoples have experienced far
too much suffering during the past two decades. I hope
our sustained efforts will bear fruit.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Oh for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Quinlan.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I have been assured that,
on this very special occasion of the outgoing Chairs
of the subsidiary bodies being able to reflect on their
chairmanships, I can speak for one or two minutes
longer than usual. With your agreement, Mr. President,
I intend to indulge myself in that way.
Of all the Council’s functions, sanctions are
one area in which elected members of the Security
Council have a truly distinctive opportunity to make a
difference. While the permanent members may be the
architects of the sanctions regimes, the elected 10 are in
essence the engineers — it is our job, through our role
as Chairs, to ensure they work.
As you indicated, Mr. President, Australia has
chaired three Committees — the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) on the Taliban and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) on Iran.
We have also very actively engaged in the Council’s
other sanctions committees and subsidiary bodies. We
have made an effort to demonstrate the positive impact
that sanctions can have, given their role in protecting
fragile States emerging from crisis or conflict, as
well as vulnerable populations in those States, and in
preventing the escalation or recurrence of violence.

14-681743/16

S/PV.7331

Briefings by Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

As part of the high-level review of United Nations
sanctions that we co-sponsored over the last six months
with Finland, Germany, Greece and Sweden, Australia
has consulted with States with the greatest stake in
the effectiveness of sanctions, that is, the States to
which the measures apply, and their neighbours. What
emerged, among many other things, was the critical role
that sanctions committees need to play in partnership
with the Member State and its neighbours and regional
organizations. I will focus on four themes that arose
from those consultations.
My first theme is greater transparency. In
previous years, today’s briefing — the briefing of
outgoing subsidiary body Chairs — was the only
public statement made in the Council about the work
of many of the bodies. There were exceptions — the
Iran Committee and the Al-Qaida Committee, jointly
with the Non-Proliferation Committee established by
resolution 1540 (2004), and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, and the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya have long
made their reports to the Council in public meetings.
But generally, the default has been that committees, to
the extent they report to the Council at all, have done so
in closed consultations.
That practice is now changing. This month, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014) concerning Yemen will again make their reports
in the open Chamber. In recent months, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte
d’Ivoire both reported to the Council in public for
the first time. The default should be that all sanctions
committees deliver their reports to the Council in public.
Sanctions are part of the collective security framework
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. How
they are administered is of interest to all Member
States, because these measures impose obligations on
all Member States.
My second theme, which was also just touched upon
by Ambassador Oh Joon, is that of closer engagement
with affected Member States. Sanctions — and therefore
the activities of the sanctions committees — are of
particular and special interest to those States to which
the sanctions apply. Our experience on the Council
has shown that the greater the engagement between

4/16

09/12/2014

the stakeholder States and the committees, the more
effectively the sanctions can deliver the outcomes
intended for them by the Council.
In some ways, the Taliban sanctions regime is a
model for such collaborative engagement, thanks to the
crucial role played by the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, and his team in
New York, as well as the active efforts of the focal
point in the Afghan Government, Isaaq Kamkai. The
confidence generated by that relationship means that
the Government of Afghanistan allows the Monitoring
Team access to all levels of the Afghan National Security
Forces, not just in Kabul but across all the provinces.
That significantly enhances the quality of the Team’s
analysis and the implementation of sanctions.
Over the past two years, that kind of engagement has
increasingly become the norm, due to the proactivity
of the Committee Chairs. Sanctions committees now
regularly meet with the focus country for the sanctions
regime and its regional partners. In recent weeks, the
Committees concerning the Central African Republic,
the Sudan and Yemen and Libya have held consultations
with the relevant Member States and regional countries,
and the Somalia and Eritrea Committee also recently
met with representatives of those Governments.
Such a practice applies also to the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee, as Al-Qaida affiliates and
splinter groups threaten the territorial integrity of
States. Last year we held consultations with countries
of the Sahel and Maghreb to consider how the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime could be made a more effective
instrument against the threat posed by Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb. This year we held consultations with
Yemen, jointly with the Yemen Sanctions Committee
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee, on how the three
Committees could work collaboratively with authorities
in Yemen against the twin scourges of organized political
violence and Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula. That
practice will build understanding and trust between the
stakeholder countries and the Council’s committees
and expert groups, which will in turn should make the
sanctions a more effective instrument to restore and
maintain international peace and security.
My third theme concerns the synergies across
Committees. The Al-Qaida and Taliban Committees
have long been incubators for innovations that enhance
the implementation and effectiveness of sanctions
measures. The trouble has been that much of that

14-68174

09/12/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

innovation, despite its applicability to other sanctions
regimes, was being applied only to the Al-Qaida and
Taliban sanctions regimes. It was a surprise to me to
find that there was no capacity, either in the Council
or in the Secretariat, to consider sanctions in a
cross-cutting way. The only way to ensure a unified
Council approach was through a bureaucratic and
time-consuming process of correspondence between
all the relevant sanctions committees.
Those representatives who attended the 25 November
briefing (see S/PV.7323) in the Council on sanctions
during Australia’s presidency know that Australia is
promoting the establishment of a capacity to allow
cross-cutting discussions of sanctions issues, as well
as to facilitate the provision of technical assistance
to Member States. We have been negotiating a draft
resolution to meet those widely endorsed objectives,
and we will continue to do so.
We made an effort from the beginning of our
chairing roles to consult with other committee Chairs
to see how we could exploit the obvious synergies in
the work of our committees. For so long as there is
no organized coordination mechanism on the work of
sanctions, at a time when the Council’s use of sanctions
is increasing and becoming more complex, the need for
future committee Chairs to continue that consultation
among themselves will be even greater.
My fourth and last theme is the indispensable
role of the expert groups that support the work of the
committees. I have had the privilege and the great
pleasure of working closely with two such groups, the
Al-Qaida and Taliban Monitoring Team and the Panel
of Experts on the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Over the last few months, the Al-Qaida Monitoring
Team has generated its regular threat assessment, as well
as reports on the specific threat posed by the Al-Nusra
Front and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and on the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon. The
reports have been of stand-out quality and instrumental
in the Council’s ability to respond to those threats. They
underpinned presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23,
adopted by the Council on 19 November. The Team’s
reporting early next year will be essential to the
development of further strategies by the Council to
combat the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters in
particular.
No less impressive is the investigative and analytical
work done by the Iran Panel of Experts into possible

S/PV.7331

incidents of non-compliance. I would also like to single
out the Panel’s outreach activities, which are so critical
in helping Member States understand the complexities
of the sanctions regime. Particularly at a time when the
focus seems to be on the P5+1 negotiations with Iran,
the Panel’s work in reminding Member States that the
Council’s measures remain fully in force is even more
important.
To conclude, I will brief the Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Iran Sanctions Committee
on 18 December, therefore I will reserve my 1737
Committee farewells for then. But I would like to
take this opportunity today to convey my unvarnished
thanks and appreciation to the members of the 1267
and 1988 Sanctions Committees; to the Monitoring
Team, whose praises I have already sung; to the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Ombudsperson, Kimberly Prost,
for her fierce independence and professional integrity;
and to our patient and hardworking colleagues in the
Secretariat, without whose support none of our work
would be possible.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Perceval.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Security Council for this
opportunity afforded us to share our points of view
and assessments of the work undertaken by the
two subsidiary bodies that I have had the honour of
presiding over during my country’s mandate as a
Council member. I will begin by addressing the work
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, which I have had the
honour to preside over during the past two years.
The Working Group was established in 1993. We
all know that it does not address substantive issues, but
it has the important task of considering proposals and
making recommendations to the Council in order, on
the one hand, to improve the efficiency of this organ
and, on the other, to make the work among the Security
Council members more democratic and to enable the
Council to respond to the need to be a more responsible
and transparent body, as well as more open to dialogue
and consultations with interested Member States and
other bodies.
During the two years of Argentina’s chairmanship,
the Working Group concluded the drafting of six

14-681745/16

S/PV.7331

Briefings by Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

notes by the President of the Council, with the aim
of complementing note S/2010/507. Note S/2013/515,
initiated by Australia, aimed at improving dialogue with
Members of the United Nations that are not members
of the Council and with other bodies. Note S/2013/630,
presented by the chairmanship, seeks to strengthen
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries to United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Allow me to underscore one aspect on which
there is a need for cooperation from the Secretariat.
The Secretariat should provide the troop- and
police-contributing countries with copies of the reports
of the Secretary-General with enough lead time,
as possible, to ensure that preparations and timely
meetings are held with said countries prior to the
consultations on the relevant draft resolutions.
Another important note (S/2014/268) during our
chairmanship had to do with penholders. I emphasize
this because it shows the manner in which some topics
that initially gave rise to resistance could become
acceptable for all Council members when it was made
clear that at issue was a potential matter for worthwhile
action, and furthermore when there was an attempt to
favour more democratic and egalitarian participation
among Council members without giving rise to a
revolution in the Council’s methods by doing so. The
co-penholdership came about in practice prior to the
adoption of the note, and the more harmonious manner
in which the practice was implemented facilitated its
incorporation into note S/2014/268.
With regard to dialogue among Council members,
the initiative of Pakistan is another aspect of a reiterated
call by the non-permanent members of the Council to
make the work more democratic — and it was taken up
in note S/2014/565.
The Group also agreed on presidential note
S/2014/739, concerning the list of speakers in the
Council — an initiative of the Russian Federation
seeking to clarify this issue based on Council practice.
The Group also considered the issue of the translation
of sanctions lists into all of the official languages of
the United Nations, at the behest of the President of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, on the initiative
of Argentina. The Council resolved the issue in its
resolutions 2160 (2014) and 2161 (2014). Further,
there was an agreement to request that the Secretariat

6/16

09/12/2014

implement a new practice for the issuance of edited and
concorded versions of the resolutions and presidential
statements adopted by the Council.
Finally, very recently we considered the issue of the
production of the verbatim records of Council meetings
so as to make clear to members — not just Council
members but the wider membership — how we can all
cooperate with the objective of ensuring the accuracy of
the verbatim records of the Council. We hope to be able
to adopt a presidential note in the next few days, before
we conclude our term as a non-permanent member of
the Security Council.
What matters remain pending for the next Chair and
for incoming members? There is a draft on the Arria
Formula, submitted by the Russian Federation, and one
on the report of the Security Council, submitted by
Lithuania. Regarding the issue of the Arria Formula,
which will be addressed by the Working Group next
year, I should like to recall that even though Council
members participate in this, it is not a Council activity.
We are talking about a concept that was born of the
need for flexibility, and because of that it can evolve
constantly, as needed.
Regarding the report of the Council to the General
Assembly, which will also be addressed in the year
ahead, I should like to touch on an issue that I stressed
in my capacity as Chair of the Group. The report to
the General Assembly is not a mere formality; rather, it
has a specific objective: accountability, as required by
Article 24(3) of the Charter. It is possible to improve
the way in which the report is prepared, including
the timetable for its drafting, but I am convinced
that shortening it or replacing it with the content of a
webpage does not seem to be the right path to take. The
report of the Security Council has value as a document
in the context of accountability to the plenary body of
the Organization, and also historical value. The cost of
document production is not a consideration that applies
in this case; the content of a web page represents not
documentation but dissemination and hence cannot
substitute for a Charter obligation.
Lastly, allow me to refer to the importance of
ensuring continuity in the work of the subsidiary bodies.
All of those bodies are presided over by non-permanent
members. It think that it is essential that the Security
Council continue to undertake efforts in two areas: first,
in naming the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies as soon
as possible, so that they can begin to get a handle on the

14-68174

09/12/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

work of the organ over which they will be presiding,
and so that they can work with the outgoing Chairs in
this process. That would facilitate the transition. Note
S/2014/393, submitted by the Argentine presidency, has
the goal of contributing to such continuity.
I should also like to highlight an aspect related
to the democratization of the work of the Council.
Note S/2012/937, adopted under the Portuguese
chairmanship of the Working Group, stresses the
importance of consultations with respect to the
appointment of the Chairs of subsidiary bodies. We
hope that the idea will continue to gain ground that
holding transparent consultations with incoming
members on the chairmanship of the subsidiary organs
does not mean undermining the role of the permanent
members; rather, it adds to the role of elected members,
given that, after all, the Security Council is an organ
made up of 15 members.
I conclude by expressing my conviction that to
achieve reform of the working methods of the Security
Council within and outside the informal Working
Group, the best way is that of dialogue. It is a matter
of preserving that which is legitimate and effective
and of creating what is missing. We must promote
harmonization and minimize opacity and arbitrary
aspects, recognizing that working methods are valid
when they are validated by results. We must base our
practices and procedures on normative legitimacy,
practical validity, ethical legitimacy and political need.
In assuming the chairmanship of the Group, Argentina
had no other ambition than that of contributing to a
joint task.
Lastly, I would say to the non-permanent members
that will be coming on board that they can bring about
transformation; they have can influence. I should like
here to assure the delegation of Angola, which will
succeed Argentina as Chair of the informal Working
Group, of our full cooperation and best wishes for
success in 2015.
Now, if I may, I will address the work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan and our
responsibility in having chaired this group over the past
two years. In the final report of December 2012, the
outgoing Colombian Chair of the Committee advised
a deepening of direct dialogue between the Committee
and the authorities of the Sudan, in order to improve
the understanding of the impact that the sanctions

S/PV.7331

regime could have on the peace process in Darfur and
to exchange views on remaining concerns regarding the
measures imposed by the Security Council.
That is a recommendation that as Chair I wish to
see implemented, because the deepening of dialogue
and the strengthening of trust, cooperation and
transparency are goals of Argentina’s foreign policy. It
is for that reason that we could not overlook them in
taking on the chairmanship of the Group.
Much of our efforts went towards bringing about two
concrete initiatives that we deemed important. First, we
undertook the Committee’s first visit to Khartoum and
Darfur, from 20 to 24 January 2014. We had an intensive
working agenda, meeting with interlocutors from the
Government of the Sudan as well as the Joint Special
Representative of the the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), diplomatic
representatives of States members of the Security
Council in Khartoum, the Resident Coordinator of the
United Nations and the United Nations country team in
the Sudan, and representatives of the African Union,
the European Union and the donors community.
On 24 November, we held the first meeting since the
establishment of the Committee with representatives
of the Sudan and countries of the region, in order to
identify shortfalls in the area of information and
address the need for capacity-building in the context of
the implementation of the sanctions.
The most recent 90-day report of the Chair of the
Committee was submitted for the first time publicly in
this Chamber. We call for this to continue with respect
to the submission of future reports of the Committee.
All of these initiatives, as I see it, contribute to
bringing about a greater culture of dialogue, allowing
for the building of trust, and for this reason contribute
to the effectiveness of the Committee. I would recall
that one of the challenges that we faced in assuming
the chairmanship was that of facilitating access to the
Sudan for the Group of Experts. The timely issuance of
visas and entry permits for Darfur had been a recurring
limitation, whereas now we can underscore that there
has been an improvement in the cooperation between
the Group of Experts and the Sudanese authorities.
I should like to avail myself of this opportunity to
underscore the professionalism of the experts that have
made up the Panel over the past two years. I should like
also to underscore the valuable cooperation provided

14-681747/16

S/PV.7331

Briefings by Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

by UNAMID under the leadership of Mr. Chambas to
the Group of Exprts and the Committee.
I should like to take this opportunity to express
here a few ideas that are not new but that I have been
formulating over the past two years.
The first observation concerns the high level of
confusion that seems to prevail between the sanctions
imposed by the Security Council, which consist of a
targeted arms embargo on Darfur, a travel ban and the
freezing of assets for individuals and entities specifically
designated in the Committee’s sanctions list, and, on
the other hand, the unilateral sanctions imposed by
member States. Along these lines, it is important to
us that the Committee undertake a pedagogical task to
raise awareness and clarify the content and scope of the
sanctions imposed by the Security Council, as well as
their objective, which is not that of punishing the Sudan
or its people. Rather, they are an instrument — not
the only instrument and perhaps not even the most
appropriate — for promoting a peaceful solution to the
conflict in Darfur.
A second observation is that certain difficulties
remain with respect to the implementation of the
sanctions imposed by the Security Council. I say that
in all lucidity. Darfur is plagued by weapons, and the
arms embargo imposed by the Security Council is not
being implemented.
A third observation is that the sanctions in place
against the Sudan are having a significant impact on the
well-being of the population. The sanctions imposed
by the Security Council, although targeted, may have
legitimized the unilateral sanctions that were already
in place. This has contributed to confusion between
the multilateral sanctions regime, on the one hand, and
those imposed by Member States individually, on the
other. Both regimes have an impact on the resolve of
countries and private donors to provide humanitarian
or other types of assistance and to make investments
in Sudan.
During my visit to Darfur, I had the opportunity
to visit one of the largest refugee camps, Zamzam, just
kilometres from El Fasher, the capital of the Northern
Darfur state. I met there with primary leaders of
the various ethnic groups. They described the great
suffering imposed by their situation, and laid out their
demands for the international community. I underscore
their yearning to work and to exercise their human
rights to a healthy life and to education. I believe

8/16

09/12/2014

that the matter of the refugee camps — which clearly
goes beyond the issue of the Sudan — requires deep
reflection on the part of our entire Organization in the
post-2015 period.
Ultimately, I believe that the Security Council
needs to undertake, and that the people of the Sudan
and its Government deserve, a full review of the
way the international community is managing the
situation in Darfur and addressing the peace process,
and in particular of whether the sanctions, at least
as currently conceived, are the ideal tool, or whether
they point to the need to find a solution to this historic
conflict in Darfur. It is important, we believe, for the
members of the Security Council, in particular its
permanent members, to reflect upon the situation in the
Sudan, setting aside their differences. Darfur, given
not only its geographical situation, but also its many
natural resources and its people with their remarkable
millennial history, deserves nothing less. Peace in
the region, particularly in light of the new conflicts
in South Sudan, the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, depends to a large
degree on peace in Darfur.
I should like to pay homage to the troops of the
United Nations who have fallen in the line of duty. I
should like to underscore that all attacks on the United
Nations and its personnel are unacceptable and should
be investigated. Those responsible should be brought
to justice.
The people of Darfur are part of the United Nations.
In 1973 Darfur had 1.3 million people; now it is believed
to have 7.5 million. It has grown enormously, but 52 per
cent of the population of Darfur is under 16 years old,
and they have never known anything but conflict. The
United Nations has forecast that the population growth
is expected to continue. Two million of them live in
refugee camps. Forty-eight per cent of women are
illiterate. The children represent half of the population
in the camps; 700,000 children are living in a culture of
conflict, if we can call it culture.
What can I say? The international community
needs to extirpate this logic of war entertained among
the primary political stakeholders. We need to follow
the worrisome humanitarian situation in Darfur very
closely. We should not compete among our organizations;
we should cooperate. We have to improve the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur programme because it is
not working. In the past, inter-ethnic clashes between

14-68174

09/12/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

nomads and farmers were resolved through traditional
justice, thanks to a consensus among the traditional
chiefs, but in 2003 we saw the rise of militarization and
a build-up of weapons. Dialogue was not used to resolve
problems among the tribal leaders; the survival of the
fittest became the norm, and whoever had the most
weapons was the strongest. This context of regional
insecurity requires us all to be fully responsible for
resolving the situation in Darfur once and for all.
I reiterate, all international stakeholders must work
hand in hand. Your country is attempting to do just that,
Mr. President. We have to craft measures that create
incentives for the people of the Sudan to seek peace.
We need to make it clear to the younger generation
that weapons are not the way; studies and work are the
way. We also have to consider lightening the Sudan’s
debt burden and lifting unilateral sanctions. The
Security Council should perhaps undertake other types
of activities, and speak and work with the General
Assembly. Above all, we must listen to the African
Union when former President Mbeki, who is leading
the African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur, calls
upon us time and time again to deepen our diplomatic
efforts, and not merely our punishments.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Perceval for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Lucas.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this briefing, which allows me to review the work
accomplished as Chair of two subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council in 2013 and 2014.
I would like to begin by sharing my ideas as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006) on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. It has been my honour and pleasure to chair
that Committee over the past two years. I will divide
my briefing into two parts: a summary of the work
accomplished over our two-year term, followed by
my assessment. The first part of my briefing will
reflect the two principal areas work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), namely,
the implementation of resolutions and the response to
non-compliance with the measures, on the one hand,
and outreach, assistance and cooperation, on the other.
The past two years were particularly intense and
active in terms of non-proliferation issues concerning

S/PV.7331

the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. A nuclear
test by that country took place on 12 February 2013 and
a number of ballistic missile launches were conducted
throughout 2014, in contravention of the international
obligations of the People’s Democratic Republic of
Korea. In early 2013, the Security Council adopted
resolutions 2087 (2013) and 2094 (2013), strengthening
and broadening the sanctions regime with respect to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. One of
the main tasks of the Sanctions Committee during
the period under review was to monitor the effective
implementation of the newly agreed measures and to
provide assistance and practical guidance to that end.
By the end of this month, the 1718 Committee will
have held a total of 15 informal advisory sessions
over the past two years, representing a considerable
increase with respect to prior years and demonstrating
the continued commitment of all members of the
Committee to advancing on the matters of its mandate.
Over the past two years, the Committee has been
called upon to address the most serious incident
that had been brought before it to date. In July 2013,
Panama alerted the Committee to the inspection and
seizure of a large shipment of conventional weapons
aboard the vessel Chong Chon Gang. The incident
highlighted the continuing shift in the techniques used
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to avoid
sanctions, as well as the important role of Member
States in moving to intercept suspect shipments in a
timely fashion.
The Chong Chon Gang incident required an appropriate
response from the Committee, commensurate with the
gravity of the violation. In implementation of paragraph
27 of resolution 2094 (2013), under which the Security
Council has tasked the Committee with implementing
the necessary consequences for violations of the relevant
resolutions by designating additional individuals and
entities that have contributed to the nuclear or ballistic
missile programmes of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, or to other activities prohibited by
those resolutions.
On 28 July, the Committee concluded its deliberations
on the designation of an additional entity, the Ocean
Maritime Management Company, Limited, which
played a key role in the organization of the transport
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of the
shipment of weapons and related materiel discovered
on board the Chong Chon Gang in July 2013. Through

14-681749/16

S/PV.7331

Briefings by Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

its actions, Ocean Maritime Management contributed
to activities prohibited by the resolutions by violating
the arms embargo imposed under resolution 1718 (2006)
and modified by resolution 1874 (2009), and assisted
in evading the measures imposed by those resolutions.
Similarly, on 28 July the Committee adopted a
detailed implementation assistance notice based on the
resolutions. Implementation assistance notice No. 5,
entitled “The Chong Chon Gang incident”, provides
information on that incident and clarifies certain
provisions of the resolutions.
In April, the Committee approved the updated
list of items whose import into or export from the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is prohibited,
as well as the list of designated individuals and entities,
in accordance with paragraph 21 of resolution 2094
(2013) and presidential statement S/PRST/2012/13 of
16 April 2012. The Committee thereby fulfilled its
responsibilities by strengthening the relevance of the
measures adopted, thanks to an improvement in the
quality of the list of prohibited items and the list of
designated individuals and entities.
I shall now address the awareness-raising and
cooperation activities. In 2013, a large share of
the Committee’s activities was devoted to the
implementation of the two new resolutions adopted by
the Council, as well as to enhancing Member States’
awareness of the obligations they entail. In that regard,
the Committee updated its existing implementation
notices to provide Member States with practical
guidance to ensure their compliance with resolutions
2087 (2013) and 2094 (2013). With a view to making the
sanctions regime more reader-friendly, the Committee
also developed a fact sheet that gives an overview of the
measures imposed by the four resolutions that concern
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and their
ensuing obligations for Member States.
In February, the 1718 Committee adopted an
additional implementation assistance notice that provides
practical information on the correct implementation of
the interdiction regarding the transport of any item to
or from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
if a Member State determines that said article could
contribute to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s nuclear or ballistic missile programmes. The
Committee is still in the process of considering a draft
notice regarding the neutralization of seized goods. The
Chong Chon Gang incident highlighted the need for the
Committee to provide practical guidance to Member

10/16

09/12/2014

States in that regard. I hope that the Committee will
soon conclude its deliberations on that matter.
The 1718 Committee, with the help of its Panel
of Experts, held two open briefings, in June 2013 and
July 2014, respectively. The aim of those meetings
was twofold. They sought, on the one hand, to share
information on the work of the Committee and the Panel
of Experts, and, on the other, to identify the assistance
the Committee is able to offer Member States with
respect to their implementation of resolutions and the
submission of their national reports. I believe that this
was an important demonstration of transparency that
gave Member States a deeper understanding of their
obligations pursuant to the relevant Security Council
resolutions.
I recall that all Member States are required to report
to the Security Council on the specific measures they
have adopted to effectively implement the provisions of
the resolutions. The number of Member States that have
filed their reports has now risen to 98. I have engaged
on a bilateral basis with the States that have not yet
submitted their reports to the Security Council in order
to encourage them to do so.
Concerning increased awareness, I note the open
briefing convened on 18 November 2013 by the Chairs
of the anti-terrorism committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001), along with
the Chairs of the committees engaged in the fight to
curb the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery, established pursuant to
resolutions 1540 (2004), 1718 (2006) and 1737 (2006).
The briefing was organized with the President of the
General Authority for Investment (GAFI) in order to
explain the respective roles of the Security Council
and GAFI in the implementation of financial sanctions.
During the period under review, the 1718 Committee
also responded to numerous requests from Member
States and international organizations for clarification
or interpretation of the sanctions measures.
I come now to the second part of my briefing,
which concerns my personal reflections, which my
team shares. In the light of the experience gathered
over the course of the past two years, it is my view
that the 1718 Committee faces two key challenges.
Member States and other concerned actors need to be
more aware, and our measures need to be effectively
implemented in all countries and throughout the world,
with assistance and advice provided where needed to
ensure success. The Panel of Experts, in its final report,
14-68174

09/12/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

S/PV.7331

observed that the existing measures provided for by the
Council support the prevention of proscribed activities
so long as they are correctly implemented. With respect
to such challenges, I can only reiterate the importance
the Committee ascribes to enhancing dialogue and
cooperation with Member States in order to strengthen
their capacity to implement the measures adopted by
the Council.

technical exercises had already been carried out by the
majority of the sanctions committees. Once they have
been approved by the Committee in 1718, which I hope
will be soon, the revised guidelines will be posted on the
Committee’s website. Clarifying and streamlining the
procedures for the conduct of business, these guidelines
should allow the 1718 Committee to discharge its duties
yet more efficiently.

To that end, the Committee should continue the
practice of holding open briefings for Member States
and should engage more directly with Member States
faced with particular difficulties in the implementation
of the measures. The effective implementation of
Security Council resolutions requires the commitment
and full cooperation of all Member States. It is equally
important for the Committee to continue to fully
shoulder its responsibilities in the implementation
of the sanctions regime by acting in a timely fashion
and, as needed, by taking the necessary measures to
respond with appropriate firmness in the case of proven
violations of Council resolutions.

I also believe that the Council and its sanctions
committees could benefit from increased interaction
with relevant international and regional organizations,
whether in the form of joint meetings or practical
cooperation. I would point to the example of the
cooperation between INTERPOL and several
sanctions committees concerning the publication of
special notices. These notices are used to disseminate
information about individuals on sanctions lists to
actors on the front-line of implementation. Luxembourg
supports this tool for disseminating information that
better informs Member States with regard to their
obligations under the sanctions regimes. With the aim
of promoting consistency in the work of the various
sanctions committees, I believe that it could be useful
for the 1718 Committee to consider, in turn, closer
cooperation with INTERPOL.

The Security Council’s recent open debate on
horizontal matters related to sanctions (see S/PV.7323)
made it clear that, despite the high number of similar
concerns shared by the various sanctions regimes,
the Committees and their secretariats barely interact
or communicate with one another. I therefore fully
agree with the objective of seeking better coordination
within the Secretariat so as to streamline its work
and make support to the Committees more effective,
thereby improving the implementation of the measures
imposed by the Council. The efforts made in this regard
by the Department of Political Affairs, especially the
Security Council Affairs Division, are commendable. It
is important to continue to identify good practices and
to facilitate their exchange among the various sanctions
committees.
I welcome in particular the work carried out by
the Secretariat to standardize the format of all United
Nations sanctions lists and establish a consolidated
list of the Security Council sanctions in all official
languages of the Organization. This will facilitate their
implementation by Member States and private-sector
actors. For the 1718 Committee, this task was completed
in October.
It was also in October that, at the request of the
Chair, the Secretariat updated the Committee’s
guidelines for the conduct of its work in order to
bring them into line with current best practices. Such

I would like to thank the Panel of Experts for its
valuable contribution to the work of the Committee and
for the thorough and professional manner in which it
fulfils its mandate. Despite the often difficult political
context in which it must operate, the Panel has always
been a reliable source of information for the Committee
in monitoring the application of sanctions. Throughout
the past two years, my team and I have been able to
count on excellent cooperation and interaction with the
Panel. In fulfiling its mandate, the Panel relies on the
cooperation of Member States. I take this opportunity
to encourage Member States to promptly provide
the Panel with all the information necessary to its
investigations — confidentially, when the need arises.
Likewise, I call on the Member States to cooperate
fully with the Panel and to facilitate expert visits.
Finally, as Chair of the 1718 Committee, my aim
has been to guide the work of the Committee in the most
effective manner, while seeking to facilitate consensus
on the actions to be taken and establishing open dialogue
with Member States and other partners. Here I wish
to thank the Committee members for their excellent
collaboration and the collegial and friendly relations
they established with my entire team. Together, we

14-6817411/16

S/PV.7331

Briefings by Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

have made significant progress in the implementation
of the measures decided upon by the Council. Even if
we do not always agree on everything, we are united
by the common desire to ensure compliance with the
objectives of Council resolutions. In this sense, our
discussions have always been rewarding. I believe I
speak for all members of the Committee when I say that
together we have managed to make the 1718 Committee
more effective in its functioning and more transparent
and accessible to all Member States.
I will turn, more briefly now, to the work achieved
chairing the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. For 15 years, the Security Council has been
paying increased attention to children affected by
armed conflict. Situations regularly appearing on the
agenda of the Security Council — those in Syria, the
Central African Republic or South Sudan, to name just
three examples — remind us of the urgent need to make
every effort to protect children from the consequences
of conflict.
While the issue of children and armed conflict was
essentially equated with that of child soldiers at the time
when resolution 1261 (1999) was adopted, it has since
undergone a considerable evolution, with the gradual
implementation of an apparatus that takes into account
the great many repercussions of conflict on children and
the whole range of serious violations committed against
them. The Security Council therefore established, with
resolution 1612 (2005), the monitoring and reporting
mechanism to provide reliable and comprehensive data
on violations committed against children in all countries
concerned, on the one hand, and the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict to develop conclusions
and recommendations to parties to conflict, on the
other hand.
The Working Group’s adoption on 26 November of
conclusions regarding the plight of children in armed
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic shows that, despite
the differences of opinion within the Security Council
on the Syrian conflict, the Working Group has been able
to fulfil its mandate responsibly and in solidarity. Here
I express my hope and wish that the spirit of consensus
and unity that characterized the Working Group can be
maintained in the future.
Luxembourg has worked to strengthen the protection
of children by strengthening existing mechanisms while
making more systematic use of other tools available to
the Working Group. Our work has focused on three

12/16

09/12/2014

priorities. First, we have attached great importance to
the consistent integration of the issue of child protection
into the work of the Security Council. Provisions for
the protection of children become of practical use when
transposed into the mandates of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations. Luxembourg has worked with
determination to ensure that the protection of children
in armed conflicts is duly taken into account when all
existing mandates come up for renewal, as well as in
the establishment of new mandates. Luxembourg has
also endeavoured to ensure that the issue of children
affected by conflict is reflected in all other relevant
resolutions and presidential statements adopted by the
Council.
During the deliberations of the Security Council
on the situation in the countries concerned, we have
consistently raised the issue of children and armed
conflict. Furthermore, when a specific situation has
required more information — as was the case for
Syria and the Central African Republic — and we
have deemed it beneficial for the Security Council
to hear from the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, we have ensured that Ms. Leila
Zerrougui was able to speak before the Council.
Finally, I would like to mention the importance of
consistently including violations and abuses against
children, including the recruitment and use of children,
in the listing criteria of sanctions regimes — as we did
in resolution 2134 (2014), adopted on 28 January 2014,
for the Central African Republic.
As a second priority, as Chair Luxembourg sought
to reinvigorate the activities of the Working Group
by organizing regular update briefings. The Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflicts has
thus briefed the Working Group regarding the latest
developments in the countries on its agenda —to name
just a few, the Central African Republic, Mali, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, Syria,
Iraq and Yemen. Such briefings usefully complement
the more substantial but less frequently updated
information contained in the periodic reports of the
Secretary-General.
We have also invited, in full accordance with the
mandate of the Working Group, qualified individuals
who could participate in its work. The African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Ambassador
Smail Chergui, briefed the Working Group on
cooperation between the United Nations and the African

14-68174

09/12/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Union in the protection of children in times of armed
conflict. The participation of Ambassador Chergui was
also in the spirit of greater involvement of regional
organizations in the protection of children in armed
conflict, which we sought to promote both in
presidential statement S/PRST/2013/8, of 17 June 2013,
and in resolution 2143 (2014) of 7 March 2014, to which
I will return in a moment. We also heard a briefing
by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, regarding the important
work carried out by the ICC in bringing to justice
those who have committed grave violations against
children in situations of armed conflict. Finally, on
2 June we were able to talk via video-teleconference
with the special country team of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism for South Sudan, after which a
press statement (SC/11429) was adopted.
In the same spirit, in order to allow better
interaction between the Working Group and the
actors responsible for child protection in the field, we
revived the practice of conducting field missions. The
Working Group visited Myanmar from 30 November to
4 December 2013 at the invitation of the Government
of Myanmar. Last week, I had the opportunity to lead
a mission of the Working Group to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. During both visits, members of
the Working Group, many of whom participated, were
able to meet the relevant ministers, United Nations
officials, representatives of civil society and affected
children, thereby demonstrating the importance that
the Council attaches to the issue of the protection of
children affected by armed conflict. I hope that, like
the sanctions committees, field visits of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict in the near
future will be covered by the United Nations budget.
We believe that the exchanges I have just mentioned
enrich the actions of the Working Group, helping it to
better fulfil its role. We hope that these practices will
be continued in the future.
On the third priority, Luxembourg has worked
to strengthen the normative framework on the matter
of child protection with the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2013/8 on 17 June 2013, and of
resolution 2143 (2014) on 7 March 2014, during the
Luxembourg presidency of the Security Council. The
resolution condemns in particular the use of schools
for military purposes and encourages all States to take
concrete measures to deter armed forces and non-State
armed groups from using schools. Resolution 2143

S/PV.7331

(2014) also recommends that Member States include
child protection in training programmes, military
orders and military directives, and that United Nations
entities and troop- and police-contributing countries
involved in United Nations peacekeeping be provided
with targeted and operational information so as to
better prepare their staff to contribute to the prevention
of violations against children.
Through the open debate in which resolution
2143 (2014) was adopted (see S/PV.7129), we called
for discussions on how to progressively implement
the full realization of the children and armed conflict
agenda. New challenges are on the horizon. At the
same time, recurring problems persist. The Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict must redouble
its efforts to solve them. These problems include the
issue of persistent perpetrators, to which we dedicated
a thematic meeting in May 2013 in order to explore how
best to address the fact that some parties to a conflict
have been identified in the annexes to the SecretaryGeneral’s annual reports for five consecutive years,
or even longer. Among these persistent perpetrators
are a large number of non-State actors. Now that
the Children, Not Soldiers campaign, launched by
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict and UNICEF in March, is beginning to bear
fruit, we must tackle head-on the problem of non-State
actors, who make up the vast majority of the parties
listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s annual
report.
In conclusion, let me thank very warmly the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
and her formidable team, as well as UNICEF, for the
praiseworthy work they do every day at Headquarters
and especially in the field. Luxembourg is proud to
have been able to make a contribution on behalf of
children affected by armed conflicts during the past
two years. I also wish to thank all members of the
Working Group and the Council, who have contributed
to re-establishing Security Council unity on the
imperative need to protect children. As our term draws
to a close, I assure the Council that we will continue to
commit to this noble cause, which concerns us all.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Lucas for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Gasana.

14-6817413/16

S/PV.7331

Briefings by Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting and for providing me
with the opportunity to share my reflections and
observations as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya for
the past two years and as Chair of the Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations for the past year.
I will begin with the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
Only in its fourth year, the regime has likely been the
most rapidly evolving Security Council sanctions regime
in recent years. While initially the core objectives of
the measures were to prevent further attacks against the
civilian population in Libya, the political context has
necessitated modifications of the measures that have
provided better support to the Libyan-led transition and
the rebuilding process, and benefitted regional security.
The sanctions regime has also provided a good
example of how the Security Council has been
proactive in terms of quickly moving to respond to
developments on the ground, as evidenced by the 10
resolutions adopted in the record time of four years,
with four resolutions during my tenure. As one
example, this year, as the security situation in Libya
was deteriorating, the Security Council acted quickly
in adopting resolution 2174 (2014), which reinforced
the arms embargo and introduced criteria to designate
spoilers to Libya’s political transition. Following an
incident in March 2014 involving the illegal seizure of
oil by a militia in Libya, the Council also responded
with resolution 2146 (2014), introducing measures in
relation to attempts to illicitly export crude oil. In all,
the flexibility of the Council in that case allowed the
sanctions regime to evolve to better serve its remedial
and preventative purpose.
As well stated by Ambassador Lucas regarding
the cooperation between the various sanctions
committees with INTERPOL, during Rwanda’s tenure
the Committee reached an agreement with INTERPOL
concerning the INTERPOL-Security Council Special
Notices. INTERPOL is an important partner in
promoting effective implementation of measures. It is
our belief that the Council and its sanctions committees
could strengthen even more interaction with relevant
international and regional organizations.
As for interaction with Member States, in February
we convened an informal open briefing for all Member
States with the participation of the Panel of Experts, and
in November a briefing with Libya and the interested
14/16

09/12/2014

Member States, in particular those of the region. In
both briefings there was interactive participation from
Member States. For instance, at our briefing with
neighbouring countries, the views and perspectives
expressed on the challenges faced in implementing
the measures imposed by the Security Council shed
light on how the Committee can better assist Member
States. We therefore endorse continuing this practice,
since we believe that these types of dialogue help to
increase transparency and initiate an important process
that can contribute greatly to the effectiveness of the
Committee’s work.
As for interaction between the Committee
and the States concerned, we have noted some
success, particularly the invitation to the Permanent
Representative of Libya to join the Committee at
two meetings. Additionally, in our efforts to be more
transparent, the Committee shared with Libya unofficial
and informal information on the exemption requests
and notifications relating to the assets freeze and arms
embargo imposed under resolution 1970 (2011) and
modified by subsequent resolutions. That was a first
step in the right direction and I am sure that in future
the Committee will try to improve information-sharing
with the Permanent Mission of Libya. I should also add
that in the light of the increased relevance of the work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to the Committee’s work in the wake of the adoption of
resolution 2174 (2014), we believe it will be useful to
invite him to Committee meetings in the near future.
We regret that we could not organize such a meeting
during my tenure.
Concerning the scope of the Committee’s work, we
note that while the total number of issues before it has
decreased, their complexity has increased significantly.
That has been due largely to the changes that have been
made to the measures, with a particular focus on the
arms embargo, which has received a lot of attention,
especially in recent months. The Committee has
exercised vigilance with regard to exemption requests
and exchanged letters with individual Member States
seeking clarification when necessary. However, despite
our vigilance, the situation on the ground today shows
gaps in the implementation of the arms embargo. The
Panel of Experts has reported transfers of non-exempt
material, both into and out of Libya. In that context, I
would like to emphasize that the Committee’s vigilance
is not a silver bullet, and that Member States should
fully implement the arms embargo. It is also important
to emphasize that the Committee will remain ready to
14-68174

09/12/2014

Briefings by Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

provide guidance on the scope and application of the
measures to any Member State requesting it, in order
to ensure a clear and consistent understanding on
everyone’s part.
Regarding the Panel of Experts, I would first like
to extend my sincere appreciation to the experts for
the tremendous work they do and for their consistent
provision of detailed and exhaustive reports. During
Rwanda’s tenure, the Committee has been proactive
and in regular communication with Member States,
seeking support for the Panel and following up on
its recommendations and input. Unfortunately, the
response rate remains low, and I would encourage
Member States to cooperate more closely with the
Committee.
I would also like to express my deep gratitude to
the secretariat of the Subsidiary Organs Branch for
its invaluable assistance, and to the members of the
Committee for their support and cooperation during
the past two years, which has enabled us to address the
complex issues submitted to the Committee in a timely
manner.
Turning now to the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, during its tenure Rwanda has addressed
important thematic debates relating to the complexity of
international peacekeeping operations today. Overall,
the programme of meetings, eight in total, including
the upcoming one scheduled for 17 December, has
reflected not only the current activities of the wider
Security Council and its members’ priorities, but also
the concerns and issues important to Member States
that have personnel and equipment on the ground.
Specific topics have included mission start-ups and
rehatting challenges, inter-mission cooperation,
women’s participation in peacekeeping, troop and
police preparedness, and the role of United Nations
police in peacekeeping. For our first subject, given the
earlier rehatting challenges in Mali, we believed it was
critical to improve future rehatting processes, and our
topic in April was on the Central African Republic,
ahead of the rehatting of the African-led International
Support Mission to the Central African Republic
into the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
The following month we considered the question
of inter-mission cooperation, focusing on the recent
example of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan. Several participants made proposals that could

S/PV.7331

make such cooperation more effective, including
the possibility of developing airlift capabilities for
the regional service centres. In June, we addressed
the challenges confronting United Nations efforts
to increase female participation in peacekeeping
operations, both in the field and at Headquarters.
Rwanda’s Assistant Commissioner of Police travelled
all the way from Kigali to share insights into how
Rwanda is able to deploy such a high percentage of
female peacekeepers to United Nations operations.
Many Member States raised important points,
including recognizing the value of national action
plans in promoting the use of women, providing more
opportunities for predeployment training, utilizing
the skill sets that female personnel have to offer and
recruiting women into leadership posts.
The last meeting I would like to highlight will be
our final one, scheduled for 17 December, next week.
It will address the complex issue of the protection of
civilians, with the aim of working towards a common
understanding of the definition of the protection of
civilians and mandate design and implementation. We
believe it paramount that we delve into the evolution
of protection-of-civilian mandates and address key
conceptual issues that affect the work on the ground.
It is our hope that the discussion among Member
States will illustrate varying visions for the protection
of civilians, as well as laying the groundwork for an
attempt to move this discussion forward.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that next year
the Secretary-General’s High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations will provide, for the first time in
20 years, a comprehensive assessment of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. We hope that
the recommendations of the Panel and of other review
and assessment efforts will inform the agenda of the
Working Group in 2015.
Finally, I would like to thank the Secretariat for
its support in ensuring that the work of the Working
Group has been conducted smoothly, and to thank all
Member States for their contributions, which without
a doubt have helped to enrich the discussion. I would
also like to wish the delegations of Chad and Malaysia
the best of luck in discharging their duties at the helm
of the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and
the 1970 Committee, respectively.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Gasana for his briefing.

14-6817415/16

S/PV.7331

Briefings by Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

On behalf of the Security Council, I take this
opportunity to commend the outgoing Chairs for the
way in which they have discharged the important duties
entrusted to them by the Council.

16/16

09/12/2014

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

14-68174
