S/PV.8249

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8249th meeting

Tuesday, 8 May 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Djédjé
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Alfassam
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Allen
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-13841 (E)
*1813841*

S/PV.8249

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of South Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; His Excellency Mr. Ismail Wais,
Intergovernmental Authority on Development Special
Envoy for South Sudan; and Ms. Jackline Nasiwa,
Centre for Inclusive Governance, Peace and Justice.
Mr. Wais and Ms. Nasiwa are joining today’s meeting
via video-teleconference from Addis Ababa and Juba,
respectively.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Lacroix, Mr. Wais and Ms. Nasiwa. I
will provide a briefing in my capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015), concerning South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity provided to colleagues of the African
Union, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) and myself to update the Security Council
on the situation in South Sudan.
Today’s meeting is timely as we look ahead to the
next round of peace talks at the High-level Revitalization
Forum in Addis Ababa. While I will principally speak
about key developments in the country since we last
briefed the Security Council in March (see S/PV.8197),
it is paramount that I underscore to the Security Council
that the peace process is at a critical juncture.
Heading into the next round of the High-level
Revitalization Forum, the parties remain far apart on the
critical issues of governance and security. The parties
2/12

08/05/2018

continue to argue over the ministerial quotas in any
revised transitional Government arrangement, while
agreement on the modalities of the permanent ceasefire
and transitional security arrangements, including
security arrangements for Juba and security sector
reform, remains elusive. While the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) has worked to try
and narrow the gap in advance of the talks — which I am
sure Special Envoy Ambassador Wais will tell us more
about — the continued divergence in the positions of the
parties was underscored by Government and opposition
officials to Assistant-Secretary-General Keita, who has
just returned from South Sudan and Ethiopia.
While President Kiir and his Government have
repeatedly pledged to participate constructively
in the High-level Revitalization Forum, rhetoric
around the unilateral extension of the mandate of the
Transitional Government of National Unity and the
preparation of subsequent elections, should the Highlevel Revitalization Forum fail to yield an “acceptable”
solution, is increasing. Those were the messages given
to Assistant-Secretary-General Keita while she was in
Juba three weeks ago.
Meanwhile, two weeks ago, the Transitional
National Legislative Assembly was presented
with a draft constitutional amendment bill, which
would incorporate the 2015 Peace Agreement into
the Transitional Constitution at a time when the
very agreement is under review at the High-level
revitalization Forum. Finally, last week, the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) held an
extraordinary meeting of its National Liberation
Council with the overall objective of advancing peace
through the reunification of the SPLM and the holding
of elections. Several foreign dignitaries were also in
attendance. While efforts aimed at the reunification
of the SPLN are noteworthy, a unified and coordinated
approach by all regional and international partners in
support of an inclusive political initiative is critical at
this juncture in the peace process.
Two weeks ago, I also met with Ambassador Francis
Deng, a member of the national dialogue steering
committee, who was making rounds to give briefings
on the progress of the national dialogue. Apparently,
grass-roots consultations have been completed and next
steps include the launching of a constitutional review
process, which would incorporate the outcomes of the
consultations and set the framework for elections. June
2018 was cited as the date for completion of that process.
18-13841

08/05/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Concurrently, however, I had an opportunity to raise
these developments with a visiting delegation of the
South Sudan Council of Churches. In their estimation,
the national dialogue has not been an inclusive process,
with many South Sudanese constituents residing
in largely Opposition-controlled territories being
excluded from the local level consultations. Moreover,
the delegation was frank about the serious violations
that both sides continued to commit against civilians
and expressed concern at the steady deterioration of the
humanitarian and economic situation in the country.
The aim of grass-roots consultation is laudable, but
must be considered alongside other political processes
and must be inclusive; at the moment this is not the
case, with the majority of opposition parties boycotting
what they consider to be a flawed process.
It is our firm belief that the holding of elections
in the current political, security and humanitarian
environment is unrealistic and would be counterproductive. As we are all aware, despite the signing of
the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement in December
2017, both the Government and the Opposition have
remained bent on armed confrontation, controlling
territory and forcing civilian displacement. In such a
situation, it is always the civilians who suffer, as they
are the ones who bear the brunt of the violence. It is
especially disconcerting that between the adjournment
of the High-level Revitalization Forum talks in February
and now, a period in which we would have expected the
parties to reflect on what compromises could be made
to end the violence in South Sudan and sow the seeds
of peace, military operations between the SPLA and
the SPLA-in-Opposition have escalated. There are no
signs of meaningful implementation of the Cessation
of Hostilities Agreement, and a ceasefire remains a
distant prospect.
We meet today on the heels of increased
hostilities in Unity state between the SPLA and
the SPLA-in-Opposition forces aimed at displacing
populations, securing hitherto Opposition-controlled
areas and supply routes between Bentiu and Leer.
Reports indicate that the fighting, which resumed
around the third week of April north of Mayendit and
subsequently spread to areas north and south east of Leer,
has resulted in mass civilian displacement, including
reports of civilians fleeing into the surrounding
swamplands and into the temporary protection areas
adjacent to the temporary base operated in Leer by

S/PV. 8249

UNMISS, to escape indiscriminate violence and the
burning and looting of property.
At present there are 1,744 internally displaced
persons seeking refuge in the temporary protection
area. UNMISS has reported the SPLA mobilization
of armoured personnel carriers to clear the routes and
that it has heard artillery fire. On 26 April, hostilities
near Leer found the UNMISS temporary operating
base subject to overhead fire. I should also add that,
amid the increasing hostilities, humanitarian partners
have been forced to evacuate from most of the affected
areas, interrupting a range of activities, including those
related to health, education, nutrition and water and
sanitation for thousands of people.
Against this marked deterioration of the security
situation, Special Representative Shearer travelled to
Leer last week and saw at first hand the devastating
results of the clashes, including deserted villages,
burnt tukuls and ransacked health facilities, as well as
civilians — including children — injured as a result
of the fighting. During his mission to the affected
areas, he met with both Government and Opposition
authorities and urged the parties to respect the Cessation
of Hostilities Agreement and reign in their forces.
In the meantime, the Mission has dispatched a rapid
investigation team from its human rights division to
verify numerous reports of civilians being deliberately
targeted by military forces allied to the SPLA and bands
of youth during these operations, including being burnt
alive in tukuls and pursued into the swamps. Insecurity
has also increased in Jonglei, with the SPLA’s successful
resupply of its position in Waat and subsequent clashes
in and around Opposition-controlled Akobo and its
environs. Meanwhile, reports of clashes across parts of
Central Equatoria state also continue.
I would like to add at this point that sexual
violence remains a prominent feature of the conflict.
The UNMISS human rights rapid investigation team
deployed to document the impact of recent fighting
in Unity state, in Leer and in surrounding areas has
received several disturbing accounts of conflict-related
sexual violence, including rape of young girls and gang
rape. These latest reports only compound what we
already know to be a desperate situation for women and
girls in South Sudan, who continue to be the victims
of appalling levels of violence. We must respond, and
respond quickly, to ensure accountability for these
violations and abuses and bring an end to these heinous
acts once and for all.

18-138413/12

S/PV.8249

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Meanwhile, the humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate as a direct result of the protracted conflict.
Nearly 4.3 million people have been displaced to date,
including 1.7 million internally and 2.5 million across
borders. In March, United Nations agencies reported
that conflict-induced displacement was worsening
the country’s already dire food security situation,
and anticipated that food security will continue to
deteriorate with the upcoming lean season from May
to July, likely to be the worst ever experienced in
the country.
Against this dire background, however, aid workers
continue to be a target in this conflict. Since the crisis
began in 2013, approximately 100 aid workers have
been killed, with numerous others targeted for attack
or kidnapping. This is simply unacceptable in a context
where these very individuals are racing against time to
save lives.
UNMISS continues its efforts to protect civilians
through an expansion of its protection activities, and
is also working hand in hand with partners to respond
to the worsening humanitarian situation, as well as
supporting resilience and reconciliation efforts at the
grass-roots level wherever possible. Success, however,
is relative in this complex environment of active
fighting and persistent insecurity.
It is against that backdrop that I reiterate that there
must be a tangible cost for the continuation of violence
in South Sudan. There must be consequences for blatant
violations of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement
and broken promises to protect civilians. As a first
step in that direction, I encourage the Security Council
to urge IGAD to make public the ceasefire-violations
reports drafted by the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism. The
Mechanism is working to monitor and verify the
reported violations, but these reports have yet to be
published and deliberated on. Without consequences,
we have no one to blame but ourselves for allowing the
crisis to escalate unchecked and perpetuating a lack of
confidence in a political solution to the crisis.
Finally, I also wish to urge the Security Council to
use its voice to dispel this unhealthy narrative of regime
change that some of South Sudan’s leaders would like
to use against the United Nations and the international
community in a bid to win popular support. This
narrative serves no one and only sows seeds of hate and
4/12

08/05/2018

paranoia in a country facing significant challenges and
where localized violence is becoming endemic.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Wais.
Mr. Wais: I thank you, Madam President, for
inviting me to brief the Security Council today on
the status of the implementation of the High-level
Revitalization Forum on the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, led by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD).
The Council will recall that I was given the task of
supporting the IGAD Council of Ministers in order to
facilitate the process leading to the revitalization of the
2015 South Sudan Peace Agreement. The mandate of
the revitalization entails bringing together the parties
to the Agreement and estranged groups deliberating
and agreeing on the following parameters of the Peace
Agreement: first, concrete measures to restore the
permanent ceasefire; secondly, steps to restore the
peaceful and inclusive implementation of the Peace
Agreement, and, thirdly, a revised and realistic timeline
for its implementation leading to a democratic election
at the end of the transitional period.
Pursuant to this mandate, my briefing will focus
on progress made in the revitalization process since the
previous briefing I made to the Council (see S/PV.8192).
I will also highlight the outstanding issues in the
revitalization process, including the remedial actions
undertaken to address them, and I will conclude with
the way forward.
The Council will recall that the revitalization
has been conducted in phases. The first phase of the
Revitalization Forum was successfully facilitated by
the IGAD mediators and culminated in the Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement, on the protection of civilians and
humanitarian actors, signed by the parties in December
2017. That was followed by the second phase, convened
in February. In line with the first two objectives of
the revitalization, which I have just highlighted, the
second phase of the Forum was dedicated to discussing
ways of restoring a full and inclusive Government
and the permanent ceasefire and transitional security
arrangement during the transitional period. Efforts
during that phase of the talks were invested in reviewing
the relevant chapters of the 2015 South Sudan peace
18-13841

08/05/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

agreement, which dealt primarily with governance and
security issues.
At the time of the adjournment of this phase of the
forum, we had made significant progress towards the
revitalization goals. Following structured deliberations
and intensive discussions, the parties and stakeholders
reached consensus on specific articles on governance
and security, and initialed those provisions. Despite that
progress, there remain some outstanding governance
and security issues. Cognizant of the wide gaps, the
South Sudanese parties and stakeholders at the talks
urged the IGAD Council of Ministers to intensify
its efforts to engage and assist them in making the
necessary compromises to resolve the outstanding
issues according to the IGAD Council of Ministers
decision during its sixty-first extraordinary session,
held on 26 March, in Addis Ababa to conduct shuttle
diplomacy between the parties in order to narrow the
existing gaps in their position and reach consensus.
Since 10 April, the IGAD Council and I have
engaged the South Sudanese parties and stakeholders,
including civil society and the South Sudanese
Opposition Alliance, the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-in-Opposition, other political parties
and the Transitional Government of National Unity.
The Council also held a discussion with Salva Kiir,
President of the Republic of South Sudan. During the
shuttle diplomacy, the IGAD Council of Ministers
heard the views of the parties and stakeholders on the
outstanding issues and the entire revitalization process.
It believes that there remain significant differences on
outstanding issues.
In that regard, the Council of Ministers will
include to enhance its engagement with the parties to
bridge the outstanding gaps. As such, the Council of
Ministers has invited the parties to an intensive session
of deliberations aimed at identifying possible areas
of compromise ahead of the resumption of the talks.
That meeting will convene in Addis Ababa ahead of the
resumption of the Forum, which commences 17 May.
The other challenge that could potentially
undermine the credibility of the current peace
process is the persistent violation of the Cessation
of Hostilities Agreement by some parties. The
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism has been documenting and
reporting violations of the Cessation of Hostilities
Agreement. There is therefore a need to hold violators

S/PV. 8249

and spoilers accountable in order to deter impunity.
Without consequences for violation of the Agreement,
it will be difficult to instil trust among the parties
and stakeholders participating in the peace process.
The credibility of the revitalization process would be
at risk, and adherence to outcomes of the revitalized
peace agreement would also be difficult to guarantee.
I commend the Security Council for its sustained
effort towards restoring peace and stability in the
Republic of South Sudan and its support for the
revitalization process. Finally, I urge the Council to
continue its support to IGAD and the region in pursuit of
sustainable peace and stability in the Republic of South
Sudan. It is also critical that the Council support IGAD
and the African Union whenever they take measures
against violators of the peace process.
The President: I thank Mr. Wais for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Nasiwa.
Ms. Nasiwa: On behalf of the Centre for Inclusive
Governance, Peace and Justice, allow me to sincerely
express my appreciation to Poland for inviting me to
brief the Security Council. I am honoured to speak to
the Council today on the situation in South Sudan as a
civil society leader and on behalf of the suffering South
Sudanese people, who have not known peace.
The 2011 referendum brought new hope of liberty,
prosperity and unity to the people of South Sudan. But
that hope was shattered by fighting among the political
leadership of the country from 2013 to date. As women,
we witness and experience gross violations of human
rights and humanitarian law, as well as death, mass
displacement, sexual abuse and rape. Although we
are resilient, we are frustrated as our leaders fail to
deliver a lasting political settlement to the crisis. We
have watched our young children recruited to fight a
senseless war. Our homes and our communities have
become unsafe due to increased insecurity, continued
fighting by the warring parties, increased rebellions
by estranged groups, militia and unknown gunmen,
inter-ethnic and communal cattle disputes. We are
deeply worried about the future as the transitional
period comes to an end amid the continued fighting.
We urge all the parties and the Government to
commit to the High-level Revitalization Forum process
as a priority and prerequisite for a peaceful transition
and inclusive, fair and free elections. We applaud
the efforts by the Intergovernmental Authority on

18-138415/12

S/PV.8249

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Development (IGAD), the Security Council, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), faithbased leaders and civil society in working to secure
peace and stability in South Sudan. However, the
Council should note that, although the revitalization
of the peace agreement is a premise for a stable,
prosperous and peaceful South Sudan, the continued
violation of its provisions undermines any stabilization
efforts within the country. The IGAD High-level
Revitalization Forum, which has been inclusive to date,
is an opportunity for the parties and other estranged
groups to make compromises for the sake of peace.
My organization recommends an enforcement
mechanism, monitoring, reporting and strict adherence
to declared ceasefires. We call upon IGAD, the
African Union and the Security Council to expedite
the establishment of transitional justice institutions.
Chapter V of the peace agreement, on transitional
justice, with a special focus on sexual violence against
women, must be preserved. A gender-sensitive approach
to the monitoring and reporting of ceasefire violations
is also essential, as is the need to reform governance,
justice, security institutions and for a comprehensive
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation programme. The competing geopolitical
and regional interests within IGAD countries and the
unlimited IGAD mandate further erodes the prospects
for peace. I call on the Security Council to remain united
and put more time and resources into ensuring that
an inclusive IGAD process, supported by the African
Union, reaches a final settlement without further delay
The Council should provide support to women leaders
and civil society groups during the transitional period
through funding and capacity-building for a gendered
and inclusive political process.
UNMISS remains critical and relevant to South
Sudan, especially with regard to the protection of
civilians, internally displaced persons and others in
conflict-affected areas, as military and para-military
groups and individuals continue to target women at
water, firewood collection and food-gathering points.
Women and children are frequently raped, sexually
abused, tortured or killed. Victims suffer stigma,
trauma, mental disorders, unwanted pregnancies
and rejection by their husbands, as well as diseases,
including HIV/AIDS. UNMISS should consult and
work with civil society organizations, women and
community leaders on conflict sensitivity and early6/12

08/05/2018

warning to develop and adopt a gender-sensitive
approach to civilian protection.
I furthermore call for a speedy recruitment and full
deployment of the Regional Protection Force, through
the African Union, to Juba and other areas. It should be
noted that, as the capital, Juba has experienced relative
peace and calm owing to the presence and patrols by
the Regional Protection Force. With the presence of
UNMISS in Yei, civilians have begun to return, and the
Lutaya market and shops, for example, have reopened.
We are disturbed by allegations of sexual
harassment and abuse by UNMISS peacekeepers in
Wau and in other sites. However, we welcome the strong
stance by the Secretary-General with regard to his zero
tolerance towards sexual abuse. We call upon UNMISS
to expedite the investigations of its peacekeepers and
make the reports public. We call for a United Nations
policy and action on mainstreaming orientation
and enforcing training on sexual harassment for its
peacekeepers and United Nations police, as a critical
element for disciplined peacekeeping missions.
Civil society is not an enemy. Civil society
organizations play an important role in monitoring and
bridging the gap between the Government and citizens
through the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
peacekeeping, the protection of human rights and
the promotion of good governance. However, civil
society representatives are often arrested, threatened
intimidated or killed owing to their work. The
diminishing space for civil society operations has
forced some of the leaders to leave the country. For
example, members of civil society are required to get
permission by all sides to a conflict before carrying out
their activities. The Security Council needs to express
support for the important role civil society plays by
speaking out against those actions.
I once more thank and commend the Security
Council for allowing me to discuss the current situation
in my country and the unbearable suffering of my
fellow citizens. I believe that this Council meeting will
bring peace to South Sudan and our suffering will come
to an end. I conclude by saying ana taban — the people
are tired. We need peace now.
The President: I thank Ms. Nasiwa for her briefing.
I shall now provide a briefing in my capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South
18-13841

08/05/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Sudan, on developments in the Committee since the
outgoing briefing of my predecessor on 8 December
2017 (see S/PV.8127). I intend to focus on the
recommendations set out in the final report of the Panel
of Experts (see S/2018/292), which was submitted to the
Committee on 14 March and published as a document
of the Council on 12 April, and which was discussed by
the Committee members on 11 April. I will also provide
a brief overview of developments in the Committee
since the start of the year to date, as well as what is
expected in the weeks ahead.
I will not repeat in detail the findings of the final
report, given that it was transmitted to the members
of the Council and is now published as an official
document. Let me only remind Council members that
the Panel of Experts has presented its findings with
regard to the political and security situation in South
Sudan; violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law; obstruction of humanitarian and
peacekeeping missions; arms procurement and the
implementation of the sanctions measures in South
Sudan. Based on those findings, the Panel made three
recommendations in its final report. Consistent with
the Panel’s conclusion that the patterns of the conflict
reported to the Council earlier have persisted, those
recommendations may be familiar to Council members
as well.

S/PV. 8249

resulted in the unprecedented humanitarian crisis. The
Committee took note of that recommendation, as it did
last year.
Finally, in response to the Panel’s third
recommendation, the Committee agreed to send letters
to the members of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, reiterating the importance of those States’
obligation to enforce the asset freeze established under
resolution 2206 (2015) and to specifically request that
the bank accounts and assets of designated individuals
Marial Chanuong Yol Mangok and Gabriel Jok Riak to
be frozen.
I would now like to provide a brief overview of the
Committee’s work since my predecessor’s briefing to
the Council last December.

First, in an appeal to the international community
to apply more pressure on the parties, and while
underscoring that without that the situation is likely
only to deteriorate, with enormous humanitarian and
regional security implications, the Panel reiterated its
recommendation from its first report, of August 2015
(see S/2015/656), that the Security Council impose
an arms embargo on South Sudan. Given that this
recommendation was addressed to the Council, the
Committee took note of it, but did not take any action
on it.

On 11 April, following the consideration of the
Panel’s final report, the Committee was briefed
by the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter. As also reflected
in the press release issued pursuant to the meeting, the
Committee received the alarming update that grave
violations against children had increased considerably
over the course of last year, as compared to the previous
two years. The United Nations had verified over 1,000
incidents of all six grave violations against children
identified by resolution 1261 (1999), on children and
armed conflict, affecting close to 1,400 children in
South Sudan. In particular, the recruitment and use of
children, by all parties to the conflict, was described
as endemic. Children were not just used on an ad hoc
basis to temporarily boost military capacities of parties
to the conflict or to provide services. Instead, it was
determined that the children of South Sudan were
being used to fuel the war and abused in a systematic
and sustained manner, which enabled war efforts
to continue.

Secondly, while underlining that impunity
continued to prevail in the country, the Panel renewed
its recommendation addressed to the Committee to
consider designating additional individuals and entities.
The Panel reiterated that there had been no sanctions
listings since the designation of six individuals on
1 July 2015, and that it had submitted to the Committee
specific statements of cases on a number of individuals
responsible for, or complicit in, actions and policies
described in paragraph 9 of resolution 2290 (2016),
including those responsible for the conditions that have

During the meeting held on 11 April, I reminded
the Committee of my intention to conduct the first
visit in my capacity as Chair of the Committee in
mid-June. Earlier, I had informally discussed it with
the Permanent Representative of South Sudan and
received a positive response. As agreed by Committee
members, I will visit South Sudan and other countries
in the region — Ethiopia, Kenya and Uganda — to
gain a first-hand account of the implementation of the
sanctions measures in place regarding South Sudan.
Additionally, as part of the second trip on behalf of the

18-138417/12

S/PV.8249

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Committee since its establishment in 2015, the country
visits will provide an opportunity to strengthen dialogue
and engagement with the States concerned with regard
to the implementation of the sanctions regime. I intend
to brief the 2206 Committee on my meetings and
observations upon my return to New York.
In the lead-up to my visit, the Committee will hold
its first open briefing on 31 May with States of the
region and all interested Member States to hear views
concerning the Panel’s final report and the overall
implementation of sanctions measures concerning
South Sudan. Beyond regular Committee meetings,
I intend to hold “informal informals” for interested
members of the Committee at the Permanent Mission
of Poland, such as the gathering this past Friday with
a representative of a non-governmental organization
dealing with South Sudan.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Ambassador Ismail Wais, Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) Special Envoy for South
Sudan; and Ms. Nasiwa, for their respective briefings
on the situation in South Sudan. We also thank you,
Madam President, in your capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015), concerning South Sudan, for your briefing on
the Committee’s activities within the framework of the
implementation of the sanctions regime involving that
country. Those briefings apprise us of the continued
threats that are hindering the process of exiting the
crisis in South Sudan. My statement will focus on the
following issues: the political process, the security
situation, the humanitarian situation and the human
rights situation in South Sudan.
Concerning the political process, my delegation
regrets the lack of genuine commitment by the parties
to the conflict to search for a viable solution to the
crisis in South Sudan, despite repeated calls from
the international community and initiatives taken
by IGAD, which Côte d’Ivoire commends for its
tireless work. My delegation welcomes the diplomatic
efforts of Ambassador Wais, as well as those of the
representatives of the IGAD Council of Ministers,
8/12

08/05/2018

aimed at holding consultations with the parties to the
conflict so as to overcome their differences and thereby
facilitate discussions during the resumption of the
High-level Revitalization Forum on the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. Côte d’Ivoire hopes that those consultations will
enable actors to reconcile their differences concerning
the governance and security issues that came up during
the second phase of the Revitalization Forum, held in
Addis Ababa from 5 to 16 February. My country urges
the parties to demonstrate political will and become
meaningfully involved in finding a political solution
so as reach sustainable agreements on sharing power
among members of the Transitional Government of
National Unity and on security issues at the third phase
of the Revitalization Forum, to be held from 17 to
21 May 2018 — in less than 10 days — in Addis Ababa.
The people of South Sudan have suffered for too long
and deserve peace and stability at long last. It is time
for the parties to the conflict to give the peace process
a meaningful chance.
Concerning the security situation, it is clear that,
almost five years since the conflict in South Sudan
began, the security situation remains worrisome.
Despite the fact that the parties to the conflict signed
the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities, Protection
of Civilians and Humanitarian Access on 21 December
2017 and their renewed commitment to respect it during
the second phase of the Revitalization Forum on the
peace process in February, the protection of civilians
and humanitarian access are significant challenges
that need to be addressed. My delegation is concerned
about continuing clashes and reports of high levels of
violence in Unity, Jonglei and Equatoria states. It is also
concerned about the magnitude of the ethnic dimension
of the conflict. My country therefore calls on the
warring parties to cease hostilities and to respect the
commitments made during the first two phases of the
High-level Revitalization Forum on the peace process.
Concerning the humanitarian dimension, Côte
d’Ivoire is concerned about the escalation of violence
and clashes in certain areas, which has led to the
displacement of thousands of people and hindered
humanitarian work. With more than 4 million displaced
persons and refugees and more than 7 million people
at risk of food insecurity, the humanitarian situation
in South Sudan is one of the most dire of its kind in
the world. Given that, it is urgent that the international
community and humanitarian organizations be
18-13841

08/05/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

allowed to respond to humanitarian needs and provide
assistance to those populations in urgent need within a
secure environment. My delegation reiterates its appeal
to the various parties to respect unconditionally the
agreement of 21 December 2017, which demands, inter
alia, unhindered access for humanitarian workers. In
that regard, my country firmly condemns the detention
of humanitarian workers, as well as any other act aimed
at preventing the delivery of humanitarian aid.
With regard to the human rights situation, Côte
d’Ivoire is concerned about allegations of continued
human rights violations and the destruction of
property and the livelihoods of the people. My country
encourages the South Sudan Transitional Government
of National Unity and the African Union Commission to
step up the establishment of the Hybrid Court of South
Sudan, responsible for prosecuting those responsible
for crimes under the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. Côte
d’Ivoire continues to believe that the establishment and
operationalization of the Hybrid Court will contribute
to bringing about peace and decreasing human rights
violations. We welcome the release by armed groups of
more than 200 children on 17 April. While we remind
all those involved in the South Sudan conflict that
the recruitment or use of children in armed conflicts
is prohibited, my country urges them to do more to
protect children and to speed up the release of those
who remain in their charge.
My country congratulates you, Madam, for the
work that you have done in your capacity as Chair of
the 2206 Committee and reaffirms its support for your
forthcoming visit to South Sudan and other countries
in the region.
In conclusion, my country calls on Members of
the United Nations, in particular the countries of the
region, to ensure strict compliance with the sanctions
imposed on South Sudan. That would contribute to
bringing stability to a country devastated by conflict
that has gone on too long.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would
like to thank the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) Special Envoy to South Sudan,
Mr. Ismael Wais, and Ms. Jackline Nasiwa for their
briefings. Similarly, we thank you, Madam President,
for your briefing and leadership at the helm of the work

S/PV. 8249

of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan.
Unfortunately, the situation in South Sudan
remains one of the most critical in the world. The
constant deterioration of security, the slow progress
in the political process and the complicated economic
situation are exacerbating the humanitarian crisis,
which is increasingly difficult to control and affects
a large swath of the population. Given that complex
backdrop, we are aware that it is very difficult to find
an immediate solution, especially if deep divides persist
between the parties. It is regrettable that the clashes
have continued despite the signing of the Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement, in December 2017.
For that reason, it is essential to work towards
reconciliation between the parties to the conflict, and
we therefore highlight the recent progress made in
the 2015 agreement on the reunification of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement. We also acknowledge
the recent statement by President Salva Kiir calling
for the return of the opposition leader, Riek Machar, to
Juba, which, if done, could ease tensions on the ground.
We also welcome IGAD’s efforts and commitment,
which continues its work to bring the Government and
opposition groups to the negotiating table through the
High-level Revitalization Forum of the peace process.
However, it is clear that the process will not have the
expected results until the parties take the commitments
made seriously and show real political will to deliver on
them. We expect full participation and flexibility from
the parties in the next phase of the forum, scheduled
from 17 to 21 May.
The humanitarian situation, as I mentioned, remains
alarming. The data presented by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs show us a very
difficult reality, in which more than half of the world’s
population needs humanitarian assistance. Millions of
refugees and internally displaced persons face a lack
of basic services, severe food insecurity and disease
outbreaks. We call on the international community to
continue to cooperate to ensure humanitarian assistance
in South Sudan.
South Sudan today is one of the most dangerous
places in the world for humanitarian workers. We
deeply regret the deaths of three of them last month,
with approximately 100 deaths since 2013. We condemn
the attacks on humanitarian workers and urgently call
on the Government and opposition groups to ensure

18-138419/12

S/PV.8249

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

unhindered and safe access for humanitarian assistance,
within the framework of respect for international
humanitarian law and an optimal operational
environment for the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan. In the same vein, we call on the parties to
uphold the status of forces agreement and take concrete
measures to prevent any breaches.
Another aspect that we believe is important to
mention is the request made by the delegation from the
African Union Peace and Security Council during its
visit to South Sudan last month, in which it called for
greater cooperation in the establishment of the Hybrid
Court to advance the fight against impunity. On the
other hand, with regard to the recommendations of the
Panel of Experts, we agree that the Security Council
should avail itself of all the tools at its disposal to adopt
measures against those who sabotage or do not comply
with the outcomes of the IGAD process.
In conclusion, there is a need for regional and
subregional organizations, the United Nations and
the international community at large to join forces in
support of IGAD’s efforts. We, the members of the
Security Council, have agreed that the only way to
resolve the conflict in South Sudan is through a process
of inclusive and sincere political dialogue between the
parties to implement the 2015 Agreement.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, allow me to thank you, Madam
President, for the information you have provided in your
capacity as Chair of Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan, and
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for the hard work he has
carried out in the context of his responsibilities and
especially for the excellent briefing he delivered. In the
same vein, we would also like to thank Mr. Ismael Wais,
Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and Ms. Jackline Nasiwa of the
Centre for Inclusive Governance, Peace and Justice.
The Government of Equatorial Guinea once again
commends the hard work and outstanding efforts of
IGAD, the African Union and the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to bring the warring
parties closer to constructive and direct dialogue
in search of peace and stability in South Sudan. We
believe that the participation of the parties in the round
of consultations to be held in Addis Ababa from 10 to
12 May will be crucial in providing continuity and
10/12

08/05/2018

reorienting the dialogues during the third phase of the
High-level Revitalization Forum.
However, it should be noted that the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea is entirely dismayed and concerned
by the content of the latest reports and statements
received on the situation in South Sudan. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations submitted an
information sheet on violations of the UNMISS status
of forces agreement, in which, among other obligations,
the Government of South Sudan undertook to take
“all appropriate measures to ensure the security
and safety of UNMISS, its members and associated
personnel and their property and assets”.
Without going into each of the violations set out
in the information sheet, we would like to remind
the Government of the Republic of South Sudan and
the other parties involved that, in addition to seeking
peace, there is a humanitarian obligation to save lives
and help the millions of South Sudanese who are
facing poverty, food insecurity and a shortage of basic
services. The fulfilment of that responsibility will be a
success only if humanitarian operations are facilitated
and the threats and risks faced by humanitarian
assistance organizations and their courageous staff are
eliminated. Therefore, the Government of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea urges the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan to cooperate with UNMISS,
so that together they may achieve the sole objective,
which is none other than to grant the peace and stability
that the people of South Sudan deserve.
For my country’s Government, the humanitarian
situation in South Sudan remains unacceptable. The
constant, increasing and ongoing violations of human
rights, and especially the violations perpetrated against
children in armed conflicts, which are even used as
tools of war, were confirmed by the report presented on
11 April by Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015). That practice must
cease immediately. To that end, we urge the department
of child protection to carry out its work to monitor and
denounce these serious violations in South Sudan and,
in collaboration with the Government of South Sudan,
to combat impunity for the perpetrators.
As we have done on previous occasions, we reiterate
that it is important that the parties to the conflict refrain
from taking actions that could worsen the situation and
18-13841

08/05/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

that they take action to implement and honour the signed
agreement, which entails the cessation of hostilities,
the protection of civilians, access to humanitarian aid
and an immediate return to the negotiating table. In
that regard, we understand that it is of vital importance
that the international community continue to support
existing mediation efforts, especially those of IGAD
and the African Union, and look for ways to ensure the
success of the new phase of the High-level Revitalization
Forum on the peace agreement.
I will conclude by expressing the joy felt by my
Government at the news of the liberation of more than
200 children by armed groups in South Sudan, bringing
the number of children released this year to more than
500. My Government also welcomes the news of the
liberation of seven humanitarian organization workers
in South Sudan, days after being detained by Sudan
People’s Liberation Army in Opposition forces in
Morobo county.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Allow me to
congratulate you, Madam, upon the assumption of your
duties as the President of the Security Council for the
month of May. I assure you of our delegation’s support
and cooperation during your presidency. We look
forward to your upcoming visit to South Sudan.
With your permission, Madam President, I
would like to officially extend our condolences to the
delegation of Côte d’Ivoire on the untimely passing of
their Head of Mission.
I would also like to acknowledge and welcome the
presence of Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Ambassador
Ismail Wais, Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) Special Envoy for South Sudan,
as well as Ms. Jackline Nasiwa, in Juba.
My delegation would like to make the following
brief observations for the record regarding the final
report of the Panel of Experts (see S/2018/292).
First, we are dismayed that the report is openly
tilted against the Government and its senior officials.
Although the Panel has been visiting Juba, it mainly
cites sources and information taken from interviews
conducted with members of the opposition in Nairobi
and Kampala. Government senior officials are
mentioned repeatedly as hardliners in order to paint

S/PV. 8249

their strong verbal defence of the Government as an
obstacle to peace. One cannot help but deduce that the
purpose of those officials being referred to in that way
is to lay the ground for the justification of international
sanctions against them.
Secondly, the report of the Panel of Experts is
biased, in our opinion. For example, paragraph 82
states that the opposition forces
“continue to have limited access to external arms
and ammunition. The shortage of ammunition,
in particular, has limited offensive operations by
opposition groups in many locations. Opposition
commanders reported that they were increasingly
limited to small-scale guerrilla tactics, dependent
on movement and the avoidance of direct
confrontation with Government forces.”
On the other hand, the Panel reports that the Government
is still receiving arms through the region, information
which leads them to recommend an arms embargo
against the Government.
Thirdly, as mentioned in paragraph 77, the
Permanent Mission of China to the United Nations
advised the Panel in an email “to carry out its activities
in accordance with the mandate of the resolutions and
in an objective and just manner”. Indeed, we would
like to associate ourselves with the response of the
Chinese Mission — that the Panel ought to confine
its investigation to the boundaries and time frame
of its mandate. In trying to establish certain facts,
connections and associations, the Panel has been
looking and reporting on events and arrangements that
happened before 15 December 2013 in South Sudan. The
Panel is even going after family members of those who
are under sanctions, because of information provided
by the opposition.
The Government of the Republic of South Sudan
is committed to cooperating with the Panel of Experts
in order to quickly end the crisis in South Sudan. But,
unfortunately, this report is full of one-sided examples
against the Government, which brings into question the
neutrality and the fairness of the Panel. The Government
of the Republic of South Sudan would like to see a panel
that is constituted by the Council to investigate and
report credible and balanced findings to the Council
in order for it to adopt fair, credible and realistic
resolutions. Calling for an arms embargo based on this
report aims only at punishing the Government, but will
not end the war or bring peace to South Sudan. If we

18-1384111/12

S/PV.8249

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

08/05/2018

may humbly state, the Council ought to focus on other
effective means of ending war and bring about lasting
peace in South Sudan, rather than risk prolonging it.

Sudan and of its continued commitment to finding

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate and assure
the Security Council of my Government’s commitment
to cooperate with the United Nations Mission in South

South Sudan.

12/12

lasting solutions to the various challenges facing
the Mission and the various humanitarian actors in
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

18-13841
