4. Strongly urges the Government of Mozambique and the Resistencia Nacional M~bicana to agree with, and to apply, without further
postponement, the revised timetable for the implementation of all
provisions of the General Peace Agreement as described in paragraphs
29 to 31 of the report of the Secretary-General,14 and appeals to the
parties to cooperate fully with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in this regard;

Agreement and to submit a report on the matter to the Council in good
time before 31 October 1993;

5. S1ressesonce again the urgent need for the early initiation of the
process of assembly and demobilization of troops, and its continuation,

Decisions

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

15.

Adopted unanimously at the 3274th meeting.

in accordance with the revised timetable without preconditions;
At its 3300th meeting, on 29 October 1993, the Council decided to

invite the representative of Mozambique to participate, without vote, in

6. Urges the Resistencia Nacional M04,ambicana to join the
Government of Mozarpbique in authorizing immediate assembly of
forces, and equally urges that both the Government of Mozambique
and the Resistencia Nacional immediately thereupon begin demobilization;

the discussion of the item entitled "The situation in Mozambique".

Resolution 879 (1993)

or 29 October 1993

7. Welcomes the progress made by the Joint Commission for the new
Mozambican Defence Force, in particular in relation to the training of
instructors at Nyanga, and also the progress on mine-clearing;

The Security Council,
Reaffirming its resolutions 782 (1992) of 13 October 1992, 797
(1992) of 16 December 1992, 818 (1993) of 14 April 1993, 850
(1993) of9 July 1993 and 863 (1993) of 13 September 1993,

8. Deplores the lack of progress in the multi-party consultative
conference, and urges the Resistencia Nacional M04,8mbicana and
other political parties to join with the Government of Mozambique in
quickly agreeing on an election law, which should include provision for
an effective national election commission;

Reiterating the importance it attaches to the General Peace Agreement for Mozambique12 and to the timely fulfilment by all parties in
good faith of obligations contained therein,

9. Calls on the Government of Mozambique and the Resistencia
Nacional to make operational without further delay the Commission for
State Administration, the National Information Commission and the
Police Affairs Commission;

I. Decides, pending examination of the report of the SecretaryGeneral due under resolution 863 (1993), to extend the mandate of the
United Nations Operation in Mozambique for an interim period
terminating on 5 November 1993;

Commends the agreements reached in the Maputo talks

10.

between the Government of Mozambique and the Resistencia Nacional

2. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

on the reintegration into the state administration of all areas now under
the control of the Resistencia Nacional as well as on the request for
monitoring by the United Nations of all police activities in Mozambique
and on undertaking additional tasks, as set out in document
S/26385/Add. I;

Adopted unanimously at the 3300th meeting.

Decisions

11.
Requesf.'J the Secretary-General to examine expeditiously the
proposal by the Government of Mozambique and the Resistencia
Nacional for United Nations monitoring of police activities in the
country, as set out in document S/26385/Add.1, and welcomes his
intention to send a survey team of experts in connection with the
proposed United Nations police contingent and to report thereon to the
Council;

At its 3305th meeting, on 5 November 1993, the Council decided to
invite the representative of Mozambique to participate, without vote, in
the discussion of the item entitled "The situation in Mozambique:
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique (S/26666 and Add.1)". 15

12.
Urges'theGovernment of Mozambique and the Resistencia
Nacional to ensure that the momentum towards implementing the
General Peace Agreement in full is maintained so that a just and lasting
peace in Mozambique can be established, and to this end encourages
the President of Mozambique and the President of the Resistencia
Nacional M04,Bmbicana to continue their direct talks;

Resolution 882 (1993)
or 5 November 1993

The Security Council,
Reaffirming its resolution 782 (1992) of 13 October 1992 and all
subsequent relevant resolutions,

13.
Encourages the international community to provide
appropriate and prompt assistance for the implementation of the
humanitarian programme carried out in the framework of the General
Peace Agreement, and urges the Government of Mozambique and the
Resistencia Nacional to continue to facilitate unimpeded access of
humanitarian assistance to the civilian population in need;

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of 1 and 2
November 1993 on the United Nations Operation in Mozambique,16

14.
Requesf.'Jthe Secretary-General to keep the Council informed
of developments regarding the implementation of the provisions of the

24

25
See Official Records ofthe Security Council, Forty-eighth
Year. Supplement/or October, November and December 1993.
26

Ibid., document S/26385.
44

Ibid., doc·Jments S/26666 and Add. I.

Reiterating the im~rtance it attaches to the General Peace Agreement for M07.IUllbique 1 and to the timely fulfilment in good faith by all
parties of the obligations contained therein,

10.
Underscores the importance of the parties making progress
on achieving agreed political goals, specifically, the approval of an
electoral law and establishment of an electoral commission by 30
November 1993 and the beginning of the concentration of troops in the
assembly areas, demobilization of 50 per cent of troops by 31 March
1994, sufficient progress to meet complete demobilization by 31 May
1994, and accelerated progress in training and integrating forces in the
new Mozambican Defence Forces so that the process is complete by
August 1994;

Commending the efforts of the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative and the personnel of the Operation to implement the
mandate fully,
Reaffirming its conviction that the resolution of conflict in Mozambique would r.ontribute to peace and stability in the region,

11.
Calls on the Government of Mozambique and the Resistencia Nacional M~mbicana to build on the progress which has
been achieved and to respect fully all the provisions of the General
Peace Agreement, in particular those concerning the cease-fire and the
movement of troops;

Emphasizing with satisfaction the recent positive developments in
the Mozambican peace process, including the direct talks between the
President ofM07.IUllbique, Mr. Joaquim Chissano, and the President of
the Resistencia Nacional M<l9ambicana, Mr. Afonso Dhlakama, and the
agreements signed on 3 September 1993,23

12.
Decides to renew the mandate of the United Nations
Operation in Mozambique for a period of six months, subject to the
proviso that the Security Council will review the status of the mandate
within ninety days on the basis of a report by the Secretary-General as
described in paragraph 13 below;

Stressing with mounting concem the continuing delays in the
implementation of the General Peace Agreement which both parties
signed,
Stressing once again the unacceptability of attempts to gain more
time or further concessions or to attach new conditions to the peace
process, and strongly urging the parties not to raise any further issues
which might jeopardize the implementation of the Agreement,
particularly in light of the commitments entered into during the
Secretary-General's recent visit to Mozambique,

13.
Requests the Secretary-General to report by 31 January 1994
and every three months thereafter on whether the parties have made
sufficient and tangible progress towards implementing the General
Peace Agreement and meeting the timetable laid out in paragraphs 3
and 10 above, and also to report on the situation concerning the
implementation of the mandate of the Operation, taking into consideration the need to achieve cost savings to the greatest extent possible,
while remaining mindful of the importance of an effective discharge of
its mandate;

1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;

2. Commends the agreements that were reached between President
Chissano and Mr. Dhlakama during the visit of the Secretary-General
to Maputo on outstanding issues that were impeding the peace process;

14.
Appeals to the international community to provide the
necessary financial assistance to facilitate the implementation of the
Agreement;

3. Reaffirms the vital importance it attaches to the holding of
elections no later than October 1994;

15.
Also appeals to the international community to make
voluntary financial contributions to the trust fund to be set up to support
electoral activities of the political parties upon the approval of the
electoral law;

4. Welcomes the approval by the Mozambican parties of the revised
timetable for the implementation of the General Peace Agreement for
Mozambique and urges the parties to adhere to it without any delay;
5. Urges the Mozambican parties to commence assembly of troops
in November 1993 and to initiate demobilization by January 1994 with
a view to ensuring the completion of the demobilization process by May
1994 on the basis of the revised timetable;

16.
Reiterates its encouragement to the international community
to provide appropriate and prompt assistance for the implementation of
the humanitarian programme carried out in the framework of the
General Peace Agreement, and urges the Government of Mozambique
and the Resistencia Nacional M~mbicana to facilitate unimpeded
access to humanitarian assistance to the civilian population in need;

6. Notes the progress made with regard to the formation of the new
Mozambican Defence Forces, particularly the commencement of fullscale training in Nyanga, Zimbabwe, of troops from the Government
and the Resistencia Nacional M~mbicana for the new national army;

17.
Calls 011 all parties to cooperate with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian agencies
operating in Mozambique to facilitate the speedy repatriation and
resettlement of refugees and displaced persons;

1. Welcomes the approval of the guidelines for the Cease-fire
Commission governing the movement of troops after signature of the
General Peace Agreement, and urges the parties to adhere to the
guidelines and to cooperate with the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique in the efforts to enforce them;

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

18.

Adopted una11imous/y al the 3305th meeting.

8. UmJer/inesthe need to make immediately operational the National
Commission for Administration, the National Police Affairs Commission and the National Commission for Information following the
agreements reached recently on their chairmanship;

Decision

In a letter dated 23 December 1993,17 addressed to the President of
the Security Council for the attention of the members of the Council,
the Secretary-General referred to Council 797 ( 1992) of 16 December
1992, in which the Council decided to establish the United Nations

9. Authorizes the Secretary-General to proceed with the selection and
deployment of the one hundred twenty-eight United Nations police
observers approved in resolution 797 (I 992) of 16 December 1992,
with a view to deploying them as soon as possible;

27

45

S/26920.
