United Nations

A/RES/55/105

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 March 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 114 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/55/602/Add.2 and Corr.1)]

55/105. Regional arrangements for the promotion and protection
of human rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/127 of 16 December 1977 and all its subsequent
resolutions concerning regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of
human rights,
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolution 1993/51 of 9 March
1993 1 and its subsequent resolutions in this regard,
Bearing in mind the relevant resolutions of the Commission concerning
advisory services and technical cooperation in the field of human rights, including
its most recent on that subject, resolution 2000/80 of 26 April 2000, 2
Bearing in mind also the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,
adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 3 which
reiterates, inter alia, the need to consider the possibility of establishing regional and
subregional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights where
they do not already exist,
Recalling that the World Conference recommended that more resources should
be made available for the strengthening of regional arrangements for the promotion
and protection of human rights under the programme of technical cooperation in the
field of human rights of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights,
Reaffirming that regional arrangements play a fundamental role in promoting
and protecting human rights and should reinforce universal human rights standards,
as contained in international human rights instruments, and their protection,
Noting the progress achieved so far in the promotion and protection of human
rights at the regional level under the auspices of the United Nations, the specialized
agencies and the regional intergovernmental organizations,
1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1993, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda
(E/1993/23 and Corr.2, 4 and 5), chap. II, sect. A.
2
Ibid., 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
3
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

00 56569

A/RES/55/105

Considering that cooperation between the United Nations and regional
arrangements in the field of human rights continues to be both substantive and
supportive and that possibilities exist for increased cooperation,
1.

Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General; 4

2.
Welcomes the continuing cooperation and assistance of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the further strengthening
of the existing regional arrangements and regional machinery for the promotion and
protection of human rights, in particular through technical cooperation which is
aimed at national capacity-building, public information and education, with a view
to exchanging information and experience in the field of human rights;
3.
Also welcomes, in that respect, the close cooperation of the Office of the
High Commissioner in the organization of regional and subregional training courses
and workshops in the field of human rights, high-level governmental expert
meetings and regional conferences of national human rights institutions, aimed at
creating greater understanding in the regions of issues concerning the promotion and
protection of human rights, improving procedures and examining the various
systems for the promotion and protection of universally accepted human rights
standards, and identifying obstacles to ratification of the principal international
human rights treaties and strategies to overcome them;
4.
Recognizes, therefore, that progress in promoting and protecting all
human rights depends primarily on efforts made at the national and local levels and
that the regional approach should imply intensive cooperation and coordination with
all partners involved;
5.
Stresses the importance of the programme of technical cooperation in the
field of human rights, renews its appeal to all Governments to consider making use
of the possibilities offered by the United Nations under this programme of
organizing information or training courses at the national level for government
personnel on the application of international human rights standards and the
experience of relevant international bodies, and notes with satisfaction, in that
respect, the establishment of technical cooperation projects with Governments of all
regions;
6.
Welcomes the growing exchanges between the United Nations and the
bodies created by the United Nations in accordance with the treaties dealing with
human rights, on the one hand, and regional intergovernmental organizations, such
as the Council of Europe, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and the African Commission on
Human and Peoples’ Rights, on the other;
7.
Also welcomes the appointment by the High Commissioner of four
human rights personalities to serve as regional advisors, who will play a significant
role in the promotion of human rights and human rights advocacy through the design
of strategies and the development of partnerships for human rights, facilitate
coordination of human rights technical cooperation in the region and assist regional
cooperation at large, for example, among national institutions, parliamentary human
rights bodies, bar associations and non-governmental organizations;

4

2

A/55/279.

A/RES/55/105

8.
Recalls in this regard the positive experience of the presence of the
Office of the High Commissioner in southern Africa, which will serve as guidance
in the development of the regional approach of the Office of the High
Commissioner;
9.
Notes with interest the programme for Africa of the Office of the High
Commissioner and the objective of strengthening cooperation between the Office of
the High Commissioner and the Organization of African Unity with a view to
reviewing, on a regular basis, needs in the area of human rights in the various
subregions;
10. Also notes with interest the further developments in the implementation
of the Framework for Regional Technical Cooperation for the Asia-Pacific Region,
which is enhancing technical cooperation in the promotion and protection of human
rights in the region; 5
11. Takes note with interest of the Quito Framework for Technical
Cooperation in the Field of Human Rights, which serves as a basis for the regional
strategy of the Office of the High Commissioner and aims at strengthening national
capacities for the promotion of human rights in Latin America and the Caribbean;
12. Welcomes the continued cooperation between the Office of the High
Commissioner and regional organizations in Europe and Central Asia, in particular
in the development, as a priority, of a regional approach to preventing trafficking in
persons;
13. Invites States in areas in which regional arrangements in the field of
human rights do not yet exist to consider concluding agreements with a view to
establishing, within their respective regions, suitable regional machinery for the
promotion and protection of human rights;
14. Requests the Secretary-General, as foreseen in programme 19 (Human
rights) of the medium-term plan for the period 1998–2001, 6 to continue to
strengthen exchanges between the United Nations and regional intergovernmental
organizations dealing with human rights and to make available adequate resources
from within the regular budget of technical cooperation to the activities of the Office
of the High Commissioner to promote regional arrangements;
15. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue to pay special
attention to the most appropriate ways of assisting, at their request, countries of the
various regions under the programme of technical cooperation and to make, where
necessary, relevant recommendations;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-seventh session a report on the state of regional arrangements for the
promotion and protection of human rights and to include therein the results of action
taken in pursuance of the present resolution;
17.

Decides to consider this question further at its fifty-seventh session.
81st plenary meeting
4 December 2000

5
6

Ibid., sect. III.B.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 6 (A/53/6/Rev.1).

3
