General Assembly-Seventh Emergency Special Session

D.

ES-7 / 1.

RESOLUTIONS2

4. Reaffirms also the inalienable rights in Palestine
of the Palestinian people, including:
(a) The right to self-determination without external interference, and to national independence and
sovereignty;
(b) The right to establish its own independent
sovereign State;
5. Reaffirms the right of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people, to participate on an equal footing in all efforts,
deliberations and conferences on the question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle East within the
framework of the United Nations;
6. Reaffirms the fundamental principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force;
7. Calls upon Israel to withdraw completely and unconditionally from all the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since June 1967, including J erusalem, with all property and services intact, and urges
that such withdrawal from all the occupied territories
should start before 15 November 1980;
8. Demands that Israel should fully comply with
provisions of resolution 465 (1980) adopted unanimously
by the Security Council on 1 March 1980;
9. Further demands that Israel should fully comply
with all United Nations resolutions relevant to the historic character of the Holy City of Jerusalem, in particular Security Council resolution 476 (1980) of
30 June 1980;
10. Expresses its opposition to all policies and plans
aimed at the resettlement of the Palestinians outside
their homeland;
11. Requests and authorizes the Secretary-General,
in consultation, as appropriate, with the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, to take the necessary measures towards the implementation of the recommendations contained in paragraphs 59 to 72 of the report of the Committee to the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session° as a basis for
the solution of the question of Palestine;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
13. Requests the Security Council, in the event of
non-compliance by Israel with the present resolution, to
convene m order to consider the situation and the adoption of effective measures under Chapter VII of the
Charter;
14. Decides to adjourn the seventh emergency
special session temporarily and to authorize the President of the latest regular session of the General Assembly
to resume its meetings upon request from Member States.

Credentials of representatives to the seventh
emergency special session of the General
Assembly

The General Assembly
Approves the report of the Credentials Committee. 8
11 th plenary meeting
29 July 1980

ES-7 /2.

Question of Palestine

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Palestine at an
emergency special session,
Convinced that the failure to solve this question poses
a grave threat to international peace and security,
Noting with regret and concern that the Security
Council, at its 2220th meeting on 30 April 1980, failed
to take a decision, as a result of the negative vote of the
United States of America, on the recommendations of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolutions 31/20 of 24 J•.Tovember 1976,
32/40 A of 2 December 1977, 33/28 A of 7 December 1978 and 34/65 A of 29 November 1979,
Having considered the letter dated 1 July 1980 from
the Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United
Nations, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,4
Having heard the statement by the Observer of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of
the Palestinian people, 5
l. Recalls and reaffirms its resolutions 3236 (XXIX)
and 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974 and all other
relevant United Nations resolutions pertinent to the
question of Palestine;
2. Reaffirms, in particular, that a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East cannot be established, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant United Nations resolutions,
without the withdrawal of Israel from all the occupied
Palestinian and other Arab territories, including Jerusalem, and without the achievement of a just solution of
the problem of Palestine on the basis of the attainment
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people in
Palestine;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the Palestinians
to return to their homes and property in Palestine, from
which they have been displaced and uprooted, and calls
for their return;
2 Resolutions adopted without reference to ? Main Committee,
the General Assembly having convened in p!,.nary n•eeting only
in accordance with rule 63 of its rules of procedu:<'
3 Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventh Emergency
Special Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document A/ES-7/13
4 Ibid., agenda item 5, document A/ES-7 /l, annex.
5 lbid., Seventh Emergency Special Session, Plenary Meetings,
1st meeting, paras. 171-217.

11 th plenary meeting
29 July 1980
6

3

lbid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 35 (A/31/35).
