General Assembly-Forty-third Session
11.

Guidelines for steps to be taken at the
international level

15. lnternational action will be necessary to support the activities of
countries in their endeavour to improve the housing situation of their
poor and disadvantaged inhabitants. Such assistance should support national programmes and use know-how available locally and within the
international community.
16. The goal of externa! assistance should be to enhance and support
national capabilities to develop and implement national action components of the Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000.
17. Mutual co-operation and exchange of information and expertise
bctween developing countries in human settlement work stimulate and
enrich national human settlement work.
18. The United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat)
will act as the co-ordinating agency in the implementation of the Global
Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000, on the basis of biennial plans to be
drawn up with the involvement of experts working with Governments
and the Centre al the regional and subregional levels.
19. As the co-ordinating agency for the Strategy, the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements (Habita!) will stimulate international and
national action by incorporating the Strategy in its future medium-term
plans and biennial work programmes.
20. An inter-agency-level working arrangement will be made within
the existing budget to provide continuous co-ordination of the Strategy.
21. The United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat)
will prepare a reporting format to facilitate monitoring by the Commission on Human Settlement~ of progress achieved in the implementation
of the Global Strategy.

43/182.

Preparation of an international development
strategy for the fourth United Nations development decade

secretariats of the United Nations system to the formulation of the strategy.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988

43/183.

Twenty-fifth anniversary of the establishment
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December
1964,
Noting that the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development intends to celebrate its twenty-fifth anniversary in 1989,
Noting a/so that the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development will use the occasion of its
twenty-fifth anniversary as an important opportunity to
inform and mobilize ali concerned, with a view to achieving its goals and objectives as contained in its mandate,
Expressing its appreciation of the important achievements of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development in fulfilling its mandate,
1. Decides to observe, at its forty-fourth session, the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in a manner befitting the
role and achievements of that organ;
2. Invites the Trade and Development Board to contribute, as appropriate, to the celebration of that anniversary.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 42/193 of 11 December 1987
and Economic and Social Council resolution 1988/76 of
29 July 1988 on an international development strategy for
the fourth United Nations development decade,
1. Decides to establish an Ad Hoc Committee of the
Whole for the Preparation of the International Development Strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development Decade, and requests the Ad Hoc Committee to submit a progress report to the General Assembly for
consideration at its forty-fourth session, with a view to finalizing the strategy in time for its adoption in 1990;
2. Invites the Committee for Development Planning to
continue its activities related to the preparation of the
strategy in support of the work and consideration of the
Ad Hoc Committee;
3. Invitesthe United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the regional commissions and other organizations and specialized agencies ofthe United Nations system to include in their agendas, during 1989, items regarding their contributions to the preparation of the strategy;
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the executive heads of the other organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to contribute effectively
to the preparatory process for the strategy by providing ali
appropriate input, including relevant documentation, using comprehensive analytical studies;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in this context, to
entrust the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation with the responsibility
for overall co-ordination of the contributions of relevant

43/184.

Reverse transfer of technology

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, 3362 (SVII) of 16 September 1975, 35/56 of5 December 1980 and
40/191 of 17 December 1985,
Conscious that the development process of the developing countries is crucially dependent on the availability of
highly trained personnel and that the acquisition of skills
and their efficient utilization are a crucial component of
the social, economic and technological transformation of
those countries,
Convinced that the continuing outflow of skilled personnel from developing countries seriously hampers their development and has implications of global concern,
Recognizing the urgent need to formulate appropriate
policies to avoid the "brain drain" and to obviate its adverse effects,
1. Takes note of the outcome of the Fourth Meeting of
Governmental Experts on the Reverse Transfer of Technology, held at Geneva from 14 to 18 March 1988; 20
2. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to make the
necessary arrangements so that future work on the reverse
transfer of technology can be considered by the Committee on Transfer of Technology in the context of the elabo-

20 Official Records of the General Assembly. Forty-third Session,
Supplement No. 15 (A/43/15), vol. 1, annex 111.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

ration of its work programme, taking into account the
conclusions and recommendations of the Fourth Meeting
of Governmental Experts 20 and of the work accomplished
by previous meetings of governmental experts on the subject;
3. Invites other relevant organs and bodies of the
United Nations system and other relevant international
organizations to take into consideration in their work, as
appropriate, individually and in the context ofthe work of
the lnter-Agency Group on Reverse Transfer of Technology, the economic, social and developmental aspects of
the reverse transfer oftechnology and international policy
initiatives in this area at the multilateral level.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988

43/185.

Trade embargo against Nicaragua

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 40/188 of 17 December 1985,
41/164 of 5 December 1986 and 42/176 of 11 December
1987, as well as its resolutions 42/204 of 11 December
1987 and 42/231 of 12 May 1988,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the trade embargo against Nicaragua, 21
l. Deplores the continuation ofthe trade embargo contrary to its resolutions 40/188, 41/164 and 42/176 and to
the Judgment of the lnternational Court of Justice of
27 June 1986, 22 and once again requests that those measures be immediately revoked;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988

43/186.

Second United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 42/177 of 11 December 1987, in
which it decided to convene the Second United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries at a high
level in París in September 1990,
Recalling also its decision to convene one session of the
Meeting of Governmental Experts of Donar Countries
and Multilateral and Bilateral Financia! and Technical
Assistance Institutions with Representatives of the Least
Developed Countries early in 1989 followed by one session
of the Intergovernmental Group on the Least Developed
Countries, as Preparatory Committee for the Second
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries, early in 1990 in arder to prepare for the Conference,
Reiterating its request to the Secretary-General to obtain, as has been the past practice, extrabudgetary resources to ensure the effective participation of the representatives of the least developed countries through
provision of the resources necessary to finance the travel

21 A/43/612.
22 See Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua

(Nicaragua v. United States
l. C. J. Reports. 1986, p. 14.

of America),

Merits,

Judgment,

139

expenses of at least two representatives from each leas_t developed country to attend the two preparatory meetmgs,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries,2 3
Expressing deep concern at the continuing deterioration
in the overall socio-economic situation of the least developed countries,
1. Emphasizes the crucial importance of adequate
preparation for the Second United Nations Conference on
the Least Developed Countries, taking into account the
priorities to be put forward by the least developed countries themselves;
2. Calls upan all Governments, intergovernmental and
multilateral institutions and others concerned to take appropriate steps to ensure that adequate preparations are
made for the Conference and to participate effectively in
the two above-mentioned preparatory meetings, as well as
in the Conference itself;
3. Requests all concerned organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system to submit, befare the
first preparatory meeting, reports containing a review of
the implementation ofthe Substantial New Programme of
Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries4
within their fields of competence and proposals for further
action as input to the preparations for the Conference;
4. Notes the steps being taken by the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, with the assistance of the
Director-General for Development and International
Economic Co-operation and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
and urges them to ensure full mobilization and coordination of ali organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system in the preparations for the Conference;
5. Takes note with appreciation of decision 88/30 on
the Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, adopted by the Governing Council of
the United Nations Development Programme on 1 July
1988, 24 in which the Administrator ofthe United Nations
Development Programme was requested, in close consultation with the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, to assist the least
developed countries to ensure that they are able to participate fully in the preparations, including preparatory meetings, for the Conference and in the Conference itself;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session on the
state of preparations for the Conference.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988

43/187.

lnternational conference on money and finance

The General Assembly,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on current international monetary issues, 25
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to monitor
the international monetary situation and to prepare an updated version of bis report thereon for submission to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session and to pro23 A/43/698.
24 See Official

Records of the Economic and Social Council. 1988,
Supp/ement No. 9 (E/1988/19), annex l.
2~ A/43/749 and Corr.1.
