A/63/PV.42

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

42

nd plenary meeting
Monday, 10 November 2008, at 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(n) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States
Draft resolution (A/63/L.20)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to introduce draft resolution A/63/L.20.
Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): Mr. President, I take great pleasure in
congratulating you for the second time on your wise,
effective conduct of this sixty-third session of the
General Assembly. On behalf of my country, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, in its capacity as Chairman of
the Arab Group for the month of November 2008, and
on behalf of Algeria, Bahrain, the Comoros, Djibouti,
Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Mauritania,
Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, the
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, the United
Arab Emirates and Yemen, I have the honour of
introducing draft resolution A/63/L.20, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States”.
The draft resolution emphasizes the need to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and
other organizations and specialized agencies of the
United Nations system and the League of Arab States

in order to achieve the common goals of the two
organizations. It also requests the Secretariat of the
United Nations and the General Secretariat of the
League of Arab States, within their respective fields of
competence, to intensify further their cooperation for
the realization of the purposes and principles embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations, the strengthening
of international peace and security, economic and
social development, disarmament, decolonization,
self-determination and the eradication of all forms of
racism and racial discrimination.
Draft resolution A/63/L.20 also calls upon the
specialized agencies and other organizations and
programmes of the United Nations system to increase
their cooperation with the League of Arab States and
its specialized organizations in the priority sectors of
energy, rural development, desertification and green
belts, training and vocational education, technology,
environment, information and documentation, trade
and finance, water resources, development of the
agricultural sector, empowerment of women, transport,
communications and information, promotion of the role
of the private sector and capacity-building.
It also encourages periodic consultation between
representatives of the Secretariat of the United Nations
and of the General Secretariat of the League of Arab
States in order to strengthen coordination mechanisms
between the two organizations.
We hope that the draft resolution will enjoy the
support of all delegations, and we are sure that it will
be adopted by consensus, because it seeks greater

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-59517 (E)

*0859517*

A/63/PV.42

international cooperation towards achieving the goals
of the United Nations, in accordance with the text and
spirit of the Organization’s Charter.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/63/L.20.
Before proceeding to the vote, I should like to
announce that, since the introduction of the draft
resolution, Bosnia and Herzegovina has joined the list
of sponsors.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides
to adopt draft resolution A/63/L.20?
Draft resolution
(resolution 63/17).

A/63/L.20

was

adopted

The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of sub-item (n) of agenda item 114?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before
proceeding to the next agenda item, I would like to
appeal to those Member States intending to submit
draft resolutions on the remaining sub-items of agenda
item 114 to do so as soon as possible.
Agenda item 17
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/372)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.17)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany to introduce
draft resolution A/63/L.17.
Mr. Matussek (Germany): As in previous years,
Germany has the honour to introduce today the draft
resolution on the situation in Afghanistan (A/63/L.17).
The draft resolution is the result of several weeks of
intensive consultations in the General Assembly. First
of all, I would like to thank all the delegations involved
for their constructive input and their never-ending
spirit of cooperation.
We fullу support the statement that will be
delivered by the French presidency of the European
Union. However, as facilitator, Germany would like to
highlight the following aspects.

2

The reconstruction and development of
Afghanistan is at the heart of the efforts of the
international community. Our common objective is to
help to improve the everyday lives of Afghans. By
adopting the draft resolution by consensus we, the
members of the General Assembly, can once again
emphasize our solidarity with the Afghan people and
send a strong message of support for the efforts of the
international community to help the Afghan people
rebuild their country and develop their democratic
society after devastating years of Taliban terror.
Seven years ago, Afghanistan was a country
where the population generally did not have access to
basic health services, where human rights were
violated and where women were denied access to
education or public office. Against that background, we
can clearly acknowledge the very important and
encouraging achievements of the Afghan Government,
supported by the international community. Today,
85 per cent of the Afghan population has access to
medical treatment; roads, schools, bridges and water
infrastructure have been built or reconstructed; and
large parts of the country have been successfully
cleared of landmines. To all those who want to
question the successes achieved in Afghanistan, our
answer is: Every strip of land that is cultivated by a
farmer again, every child that can attend school again,
every new hospital and every kilometre of new road is
a small victory of humanity.
The Paris Declaration provides the strategy and
road map for the renewed and strengthened efforts of
the Government of Afghanistan and the international
community in facing the remaining challenges. And we
stress the importance of the Paris commitments being
translated into concrete political action in a timely
fashion.
We strongly support the concept of increasing
Afghan ownership in all aspects of governance, as
exemplified in the launch of the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy, and we would like to recall that
the Afghanistan Compact will remain the agreed basis
of our work. Germany clearly welcomes the leading
role of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Kai Eide, in
coordinating the international civilian effort.
I would like to underline the need to ensure that
UNAMA is adequately resourced to fulfil its extended

08-59517

A/63/PV.42

mandate.
Germany
has
supported
UNAMA
substantially from its inception and we will continue to
do so. On the part of the Afghan Government, we see a
need for further efforts to improve governance across
the board. We encourage the Afghan Government to
take further decisive action in combating terrorism,
drug production and trafficking, including precursors
to drugs, and corruption and to continue the reform of
the justice sector in order to be able to continue to
meaningfully improve the human rights situation.
In that regard, we welcome the recent decisions
of the Afghan Government reflecting the invigorated
political will to strengthen the fight against corruption,
build up the Afghan National Police and enhance
economic growth through rural development.
Germany is strongly committed to continuing its
comprehensive support of the international efforts
under the umbrella of the United Nations. My
Government recently increased its development aid for
Afghanistan to a total of approximately €170 million in
2008, representing an increase of €30 million. Also, the
funds for humanitarian aid and humanitarian demining
have been significantly increased in 2008 to more than
€15 million.
In light of the imminent food crisis, we have
made available additional funds at short notice.
Germany decided to substantially increase its
personnel for the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) to 4,500 soldiers — an increase of
1,000 soldiers. At the same time, we are ready to
double the number of German police officers in the
framework of the European Union Police Mission in
Afghanistan in line with the Union’s efforts to
reinforce the Mission.
The international community is appalled by the
significant increase in the number of attacks against aid
workers, convoys and facilities, as stated in the recent
report of the Secretary-General. As reflected in the
draft resolution, we share great concern about the
number of civilian casualties, mainly because of the
increased violent and terrorist activity of the Taliban,
Al-Qaida and other extremist and criminal groups and
their asymmetric tactics. ISAF has taken the necessary
steps to minimize the risk of unintended civilian
casualties and has installed procedures for after-action
review. We recognize the need for continued efforts by
the international forces to avoid civilian casualties
during military operations.

08-59517

Intensified and improved regional cooperation in
all fields will be key to the success of all international
assistance to improve the living conditions in
Afghanistan. We would like to take the opportunity to
encourage all regional partners to continue their
initiatives towards improved regional cooperation in all
fields.
Last but not least, I would like to express my
sincere gratitude to all the women and men involved in
the work on the ground in Afghanistan, whether they
be security personnel, humanitarian aid workers,
diplomats or others. They serve in order to help to
create a better future for the people of Afghanistan and
for all of us. They deserve our greatest respect.
In conclusion, I would like to extend my heartfelt
thanks to my colleague Ambassador Zahir Tanin, and
his Minister Counsellor, Erfani Ayoob, for their trust
and friendship and for the excellent cooperation we
have been privileged to encounter, and not only in
recent days. May Afghanistan successfully continue
down the road towards peace, security and
development. The upcoming elections will be an
important step for their country.
The General Assembly’s approval of the draft
resolution today will be a clear sign that the
international community remains willing and prepared
to actively assist the Afghan delegation and its country
in that endeavour.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): It is a great honour for
me to address the Assembly on the occasion of the
consideration of the annual resolution on the situation
in Afghanistan. I would like to thank the delegation of
Germany for their dedicated work in drafting and
negotiating the draft resolution before us (A/63/L.17)
and to convey my gratitude for the support of all of its
sponsors. With the draft, their voices have spoken out
in renewed solidarity with a stronger, more peaceful
Afghanistan.
It has been more than seven years since
international forces entered our country. With so much
time having passed, and with so much focus on
particular complexities, we may sometimes lose sight
of the original noble purpose of our work in
Afghanistan.
What is that noble purpose? We are in
Afghanistan to prevent the malady of terrorism from
infesting a nation and the world. We are here to

3

A/63/PV.42

proclaim together that never again will the Taliban
regime have control of a country and crush the hopes,
dreams and lives of its own people. Never again should
Al-Qaida have sanctuaries in Afghanistan and
elsewhere to project its extremist terror with the aim of
killing thousands of innocent people across the world.
We are also here so that the region and the world
can enjoy the new wealth and prosperity of a stable
Afghanistan that can offer new avenues for economic
cooperation and trade routes. We are here so that a
strong Afghanistan can serve as an example of a
democratic Islamic country that can unite communities
and peoples of all faiths and cultures.
Let us carry that original purpose as the torch
lighting the way against the dark challenges that lie
before us today. Those challenges are critical.
Terrorists are committing increasingly brutal acts,
killing teachers, aid workers and families. Terrorist
activities also have an increasingly strong correlation
with crime and narcotics. In addition, the Government
of Afghanistan faces serious obstacles in its quest to
fight corruption, hold elections, build a strong justice
sector and increase economic development. Most
importantly, a food shortage is threatening more than
8 million Afghans this coming winter, which is only a
few weeks away.
Simultaneously, the world is facing the worst
financial and credit crisis since the Second World War.
Just as terrorism poses a threat without boundaries, the
financial squeeze is affecting us all. While Afghanistan
is fighting serious challenges with international
ramifications, there is also a tightening of resources. It
seems that we must do more with less.
To meet that challenge, we in Afghanistan need to
embark on a smart and sustainable strategy that can
harness our resources most effectively. Such a strategy
must always be guided primarily by the interests of the
people of Afghanistan and have as its foremost goal the
creation of a self-sustaining nation. The strategy should
have the following components.
First, Afghan ownership should increase at every
level and in every dimension. The Afghan National
Army and National Police must increase in number and
in strength for Afghans to protect Afghans. To that end,
the Government of Afghanistan has ambitious goals to
increase training, develop a comprehensive reform
strategy and expand the size of our army to 134,000

4

troops by the year 2010. To meet those goals, we need
continued international support.
In addition, the Government of Afghanistan is
fighting corruption through the reorganization of its
ministries, the work of an Independent Directorate of
Local Governance and the launching of a High Office
of Oversight to combat corruption. International
support for those Government initiatives would allow it
to improve the delivery of national services to the
Afghan people.
The Government of Afghanistan also aims to
increase Afghan ownership of reconstruction and
development efforts. While international support is
necessary to strengthen our agricultural sector, create
new infrastructure projects and sources of energy, and
find new areas for local economy, we hope that
international support will increasingly be delivered
through the framework provided by our Afghan
National Development Strategy.
Furthermore, the upcoming elections are a most
important opportunity to increase ownership of
Afghanistan by qualified Afghans. Fair, credible and
timely elections are essential to strengthening
legitimacy and creating a self-sustaining Afghanistan.
However, security is the main precondition for holding
elections. The Government of Afghanistan is hoping
for the support of the international community in its
efforts to provide that security.
The ingredients of a political solution to the
situation in Afghanistan must involve the Afghan
people and their communities. In order for any talks for
reconciliation and the peace process to be successful,
we must win the confidence of the Afghan people by
including them substantively in the process.
Secondly, international involvement should
refocus on the overall security of the Afghan people.
The Government of Afghanistan recognizes the need
for increased international troops to quell today’s
insecurity. To ensure that the increase in international
involvement would effectively protect the Afghan
people, we should ascertain that, first, international
troops in Afghanistan should expand their focus. Their
goal must go beyond the targeting of the Taliban; the
goal should be to protect the comprehensive security of
the Afghan people. Moreover, the Government of
Afghanistan urges that any increase in deployment of
troops be accomplished through further collaboration
with the Government. Thirdly, international troops

08-59517

A/63/PV.42

need to review the problem of civilian casualties.
Although the Taliban are the reason for the majority of
civilian casualties, the international forces for their part
can do more to reduce the risk of civilian casualties. To
build a self-sustaining Afghanistan, the people must be
able to trust their Government and its allies to protect
their lives and their families.
In addition, the Government of Afghanistan
deeply appreciates the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to
address the human development component of security.
Its mandate of delivering aid more effectively is an
enormously important one at this time of limited
resources. But in order for Kai Eide and UNAMA to
accomplish that task, the financial resources they need
to operate effectively must be addressed by Member
States. In turn, the Government of Afghanistan pledges
to continue to work collaboratively with UNAMA.
Thirdly, a re-emphasis on regional partnerships is
necessary. The challenges Afghanistan faces today are
regional challenges. The Taliban and Al-Qaida, the
movement of refugees and the narcotics trade are
transborder problems. Moreover, regional solutions
promise great regional benefits in the areas of security,
trade, energy, infrastructure and more positive peopleto-people relationships. Thus, we should strive together
to find regional solutions to our shared challenges. Our
first priority is the relationship Afghanistan shares with
our friends in Pakistan. They suffer equal harm at the
hands of the Taliban and Al-Qaida. To fight the
terrorists who would kill our people, we must work
together to eliminate their sanctuaries. The
Government of Afghanistan increasingly recognizes
that the only lasting peace is one that is forged together
with our allies in the region. Thus, the support of the
international community for such regional efforts is
essential.
At this time of great challenge, there is also
reason for great hope. Over the past seven years, we
have taken some significant steps forward. We have
built
schools,
health
clinics,
roads
and
telecommunications infrastructure. We are making
progress on human rights and the rule of law. Even as
we speak, we are seeing a breakthrough in counternarcotics efforts.
As we stated in October, the Taliban is fighting a
war of perception. Its goal is to persuade the Afghan
people that the international community is failing,

08-59517

especially at this time of transition following the
elections in the United States. To counter that, we must
be equally vigilant in demonstrating our successes to
the Afghan people. We know that there are two
Afghanistans: one conveyed by news reports
broadcasting only the atrocities; another experienced
by millions of Afghans building daily lives in peace.
Let us not forget this second Afghanistan. Our efforts
are not in vain and we are making progress.
Today is also a day of great hope because there is
a new beginning in two of Afghanistan’s most
important allies. With Pakistan’s new President, His
Excellency Mr. Asif Ali Zardari, we are witnessing the
first moves towards collaboration and cooperation that
we hope will lead to peace and security. With the
United States, we welcome the recent historic election
and look forward to working with the President-elect,
Mr. Barack Obama. We appreciate the continued
support of the United States in Afghanistan.
Today is a most important day. We have reminded
ourselves of the original noble purpose of our work in
Afghanistan. Success in Afghanistan is as vital today as
it was seven years ago. And, in the context of a global
financial crisis, we have identified the components of a
smart and sustainable strategy to harness our resources
most effectively.
For our part, the Government of Afghanistan is
fully and absolutely dedicated to creating a stronger
Afghanistan. Every international commitment made
today to meeting the objectives of today’s draft
resolution will be matched twofold by efforts on the
part of our Government. In the upcoming months, let
us together have the courage to determinedly and
resolutely walk the path towards a self-sustaining,
peaceful, prosperous and democratic Afghanistan.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
European Union. Croatia, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Iceland, Moldavia, Montenegro, Serbia,
Turkey and Ukraine align themselves with this
declaration, the detailed text of which has been
distributed. I will limit myself to making a few points.
The annual resolution of the General Assembly
on the situation in Afghanistan is an opportunity for the
international community to show its unanimous
commitment to the consolidation of a stable,
prosperous and democratic Afghanistan. We understand
the scale of the challenges that must be met in order to

5

A/63/PV.42

achieve those objectives. This is the time not to lose
heart, however, but for patient and determined action.
We thank the German delegation, the principal author
of the draft resolution before us (A/63/L.17), which
was able to achieve a consensus that reflects the
international community’s resolve.
The United Nations plays a leading role in
Afghanistan, which is embodied by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kai Eide,
who enjoys the full support of the European Union.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) has been entrusted with an enhanced
mandate, specifically in the coordination of
international assistance. It is essential that all
international actors actively support that role. We must
also give UNAMA adequate financial and human
resources.
The developments of recent months present
mixed results. We have seen real progress, in particular
in the continued strengthening of the Afghan National
Army, in the economic area and in the fight against
narcotics trafficking. However, there also continue to
be several areas of concern: the security situation, the
risk of a humanitarian crisis and the human rights
situation. The problem of good governance remains a
challenge that will require increased efforts. We are
also concerned about the issue of civilian casualties.
Let us not forget that the vast majority of those victims
is caused by the indiscriminate violence of terrorists
and extremists. Nonetheless, the European Union is
aware of the need for international forces to vigorously
pursue efforts to avoid all civilian casualties.
The difficulties of the situation should not,
however, obscure the progress made over the past
seven years in the economic and social sectors as well
as in the consolidation of democratic institutions. The
Afghan people clearly expressed their choice for
democracy and stability in 2004 and 2005. We are
ready to provide strong support to the Afghan
authorities in preparation for the elections in 2009 and
2010.
We share the sense of urgency expressed by the
Secretary-General in his report (A/63/372). The
international community and Afghanistan have a
strategy, defined in London in 2006 and now continued
in the Afghan National Development Strategy, as well
as a road map developed at the International
Conference in support of Afghanistan held in Paris in

6

June 2008. The road map is based on a renewed
partnership centred on mutual commitments to better
take into account the specific needs of the population.
To implement those commitments, decisive
measures must be taken rapidly, not only by the
international community but also by the Afghan
authorities. The Afghan authorities will need to assume
an increasing share of the responsibility and, to that
end, they must step up efforts to improve governance
and fight corruption.
Afghanistan and the United Nations can count on
the unwavering commitment of the European Union,
which is the second largest financial contributor to the
reconstruction of Afghanistan. It contributes in
particular to building the capacity of the Afghan police,
particularly through the European Union Police
Mission in Afghanistan (EUPOL), which will be
significantly strengthened. EUPOL acts in full respect
of the leading role taken by the Afghan authorities and
in close cooperation with the other international actors.
With regard to the military situation, 25 member
countries of the European Union participate in the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF).
Together, they compose half of the total ISAF
contingent. They renewed their commitment at the
NATO summit in Bucharest.
I would like to pay tribute to the courage and
determination of the soldiers who are fighting in our
name, often at the cost of their lives. I would like to
express my condolences to the Spanish Government, to
the victims and to the families of the two soldiers who
died in an attack on Sunday. I would also like to
recognize the work of all humanitarian personnel, of
both the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations, who operate in increasingly dangerous
conditions and who also often risk their lives.
If a solution to the challenges facing Afghanistan
is to be sustainable, it must be political. To that end, we
must develop a comprehensive approach based on a
better integration of civilian and military efforts. The
European Union encourages the development of a
national political dialogue with as broad a participation
as possible at all levels. That dialogue should be
conducted in full respect of the Constitution and under
the leadership of Afghan authorities.
Stability in Afghanistan is also intrinsically
linked to the stability of the region. In that regard, we

08-59517

A/63/PV.42

welcome the strengthening of the cooperation between
Afghanistan and its neighbours against such threats as
terrorism and drug trafficking.
The European Union noted with interest the
peace jirga between Pakistan and Afghan officials held
on 27 and 28 October. The European Union expresses
its support for that hopeful process. The European
Union also marks its appreciation for the efforts by the
Pakistani authorities to deny access to their territory to
terrorist groups targeting Afghanistan and encourages
both countries to step up their cooperation.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
resolute commitment of the European Union in support
of the efforts of the Afghan people so that they may
attain peace, security and development as soon as
possible.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): It is a great honour for me to speak on behalf
of the States members of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO), namely, the People’s Republic of
China, the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz
Republic, the Russian Federation, the Republic of
Tajikistan and the Republic of Uzbekistan.
Our countries maintain long-standing and close
relations with Afghanistan. One of the important
priorities of the activities of the SCO is to provide
assistance in developing Afghanistan’s new statehood
and to establish sustainable democratic institutions in
that country. As close neighbours of Afghanistan, we
are of course concerned about the serious problems and
challenges that State faces today, as they adversely
affect the situation in the region. The continuing
deterioration of the military and political situation in
Afghanistan and the increasing rise in drug trafficking,
transborder organized crime and other threats call for
concerted action by the international community.
The member States of our Organization have
been actively involved, both bilaterally and
multilaterally, in efforts to help provide security and
stability on the territory of Afghanistan and to assist
with its social and economic reconstruction. We will
continue to use the organization’s Afghanistan contact
group and other mechanisms to halt threats emanating
from the territory of that country.
The security situation remains a source of serious
concern, given the intensified terrorist activity by the
Taliban, Al-Qaida forces and other extremists. The

08-59517

scale of terrorist attacks in Kabul and other regions of
the country and the increasingly frequent attacks on
humanitarian personnel and United Nations staff
members are evidence of aggression by radical forces
who are striving to gain power and who are ready to
sacrifice the lives of peaceful civilians in order to
achieve their goals and gain control over the country.
In that context, we believe it is essential that we
not reverse the policy of isolating extremist leaders,
especially those who are on the sanctions list of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), while leaving open the
opportunity for rank-and-file Taliban members who are
not tainted by military crimes to return to peaceful
lives. It is only on the basis of that understanding that
the process of national reconciliation can be effective.
We pay special attention to combating drug
trafficking, which has become one of the main sources
of financing terrorist activities. Increasingly, terrorists
and drug dealers coordinate their activities closely. At
the same time, unfortunately, international efforts to
combat the illicit production of, and trafficking in,
drugs from the territory of Afghanistan remain
ineffective. The large-scale production of drugs in
Afghanistan poses a real threat to the entire
international community.
In that context, we think it important to intensify
antidrug efforts both on the territory of Afghanistan
itself — including the destruction of drug crops, the
prosecution of drug dealers, the introduction of
alternative agricultural crops and efforts to curb
unemployment — as well as around it, by setting up a
system of antidrug and financial security belts, with a
coordinating role for the United Nations and with the
involvement of neighbouring countries. It is not just by
intercepting drug shipments that we will achieve our
goals, but also by tightening control over transnational
money transfers derived from the proceeds of illicit
drug trafficking, money laundering and other criminal
activities, including the financing of terrorism.
SCO States believe that it is necessary for the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), which
is deployed in Afghanistan under a Security Council
mandate, to pay more attention to the task of
countering the production of, and smuggling in,
Afghan drugs — of course, in cooperation with the
Government of Afghanistan and neighbouring and
other concerned countries. It is important that

7

A/63/PV.42

resolution 1833 (2008), which was recently adopted by
the Security Council, focuses the efforts of ISAF on
strengthening cooperation with the Government of
Afghanistan and other interested stakeholders,
including regional ones. Given the close link between
terrorist activities and drug production, ISAF’s efforts
will not be fully effective without combating the drug
threat.
We are continuing our joint efforts to establish
close interaction with other interested countries and
international and regional organizations to establish a
broad partnership network to counter terrorist and drug
threats. We are making practical preparations for a
special conference on Afghanistan, to be convened
under the aegis of the SCO, to discuss joint efforts
aimed at countering terrorism, illicit drug trafficking
and organized crime. We hope that that initiative will
be supported by the United Nations and all the States
actively involved in providing assistance to
Afghanistan.
We share the Secretary-General’s opinion that the
civilian population of Afghanistan must be afforded
protection not only from terrorists but also from the
unintended consequences of the operations of the
coalition forces. Incidents involving civilians, which
have become more frequent recently, are undermining
the trust of the local population in the international
efforts in Afghanistan. It is essential that ISAF take
measures to prevent the deaths of peaceful civilians as
a result of the indiscriminate or excessive use of force,
including bombings.
In that regard, we should like to emphasize once
again that there is no alternative to the crucial need
enshrined in the Security Council’s recent resolution to
comply with international humanitarian law to prevent
the loss of life among the civilian population. That is
an extremely important goal in the context of the longterm stabilization of Afghanistan, which was
reaffirmed both by the Afghan leadership and by
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
SCO member States are convinced that
effectively settling the situation in Afghanistan and
resolving the serious problems now facing the
country’s Government will be impossible without an
integrated approach on the part of the international
community led by the United Nations. Nor will it be
possible without giving Kabul greater independence in
resolving domestic problems. First of all, conditions

8

must be created to allow the Afghan Government to
independently provide security on the territory of the
country. Of particular importance in that regard is the
establishment of genuinely operational national armed
forces and law enforcement agencies that are equipped
with modern weapons.
The situation in Afghanistan cannot be resolved
by purely military means. Durable peace and stability
in Afghanistan will be impossible to achieve without
the economic recovery of the country. The steps taken
in the area of security must be backed by real measures
aimed at the socio-economic reconstruction of
Afghanistan. In that regard, we intend to further
develop our diversified cooperation with Afghanistan,
including by implementing projects for the
socio-economic recovery and development of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.
It is essential to respect the national and religious
values and the centuries-long customs and traditions of
the multi-ethnic and multireligious people of
Afghanistan and, on that basis, bring together the
belligerent forces in Afghanistan.
SCO member States support the draft resolution
(A/63/L.17) on Afghanistan prepared by a large group
of sponsors. We hope that its adoption by consensus
will be conducive to stepping up the efforts of the
international community in Afghanistan.
Mr. Martirosyan (Armenia) (spoke in Russian):
It is a great honour for me to speak on behalf of the
States members of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO), namely, Armenia, Belarus,
Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, the Russian
Federation, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.
Since the overthrow of the Taliban, Afghanistan,
with the help of the international community, has had
considerable success in the areas of nation-building
and strengthening democratic institutions in the
country. At the same time, the country continues to
face serious threats and challenges in the area of
security. The military and political situation in the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan continues to be a
source of considerable concern for the international
community, and in particular for the member States of
the CSTO.
Taliban and Al-Qaida extremists have intensified
their efforts to combat Government and international
community forces in the country. They periodically

08-59517

A/63/PV.42

control regions of the country, where they establish
parallel government structures. The activities of the
terrorists are organized, with the Taliban actively
employing suicide bombings and kidnapping to
terrorize civilians who support the legitimate
Government.
It is clear that efforts to involve so-called
moderate Taliban in Government structures have not
led to concrete results. Moreover, those extremists
have used that opportunity to strengthen their positions
in Government in several of provinces. The resulting
situation raises doubt about the entire notion that it is
possible to achieve anything by being friendly with
extremists. We believe it is essential to isolate
extremists, especially those on the sanctions list of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999).
Despite the reduction in the cultivation of poppy
recorded this year and the decreased volume of opiates
produced, the situation with regard to the production
of, and trafficking in, drugs in the territory of
Afghanistan continues to be very serious. Cooperation
between drug producers and terrorist groups has
intensified, especially in the south-western part of the
country. We believe that only the full-fledged
socio-economic reconstruction of Afghanistan and
coordinated efforts by the international community to
combat illegal drug trafficking will make it possible to
put an end to the drug trade, which is a main source of
financing for terrorists.
We are in favour of comprehensive international
cooperation to achieve the goals of the final declaration
of the Moscow Ministerial Conference on Drug
Trafficking Routes from Afghanistan. That would
entail establishing antidrug and financial security belts
around Afghanistan. Of course, we must also ensure
the full implementation of Security Council resolution
1735 (2006), especially with respect to individuals who
support terrorist groups. Countering the large-scale
production and distribution of heroin produced in
Afghanistan will only be possible through the
establishment of an international system to effectively
control the trafficking in that illegal substance.
Mr. Swe (Myanmar), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The member States of the CSTO reiterate the
need to fully implement Security Council resolution
1817 (2008), and we are prepared to work towards that

08-59517

end. The CSTO has considerable experience in
combating illegal trafficking in drugs and their
precursors in Afghanistan. Operation Channel, which
became a standing effort in September of this year, is
one of the most successful and effective examples of
CSTO cooperation in addressing the international drug
trade. Participation in Operation Channel has grown
every year. In addition to the member States of the
CSTO, this year’s Operation included several observer
States, such as Azerbaijan, China, Estonia, Latvia,
Lithuania, Mongolia, Poland, Turkmenistan, Ukraine
and the United States of America. For the first time,
representatives from law enforcement agencies from
Romania and Syria also participated, as did
representatives from the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Eurasian Group on
Combating Money-Laundering and the Financing of
Terrorism.
In the context of the Operation, effective
mechanisms have been established in recent years to
combat drug trafficking along northern routes from
Afghanistan to Europe. As a result of the 2008
Operation, security agencies of CSTO member States
seized about 11.5 tons of drugs, including 1 ton of
heroin, 4.5 tons of hashish, more than 11 kilograms of
cocaine and 40 kilograms of synthetic drugs.
The work to strengthen antidrug buffers should
be complemented by efforts to establish financial
security belts around Afghanistan. The idea is to
strengthen control over transnational movements of
cash flows generated by illegal drug trafficking, money
laundering and other transnational criminal activities
aimed, among other things, at financing terrorism.
Stabilizing the military and security situation in
Afghanistan cannot be accomplished without
coordinating the efforts of the international community
under the auspices of the United Nations. Members of
the CSTO are ready to provide support for the nationbuilding efforts in Afghanistan. In particular, we are
prepared to provide support in the area of regional
cooperation in such areas as security, economic
reconstruction and combating drug trafficking.
We also think it is important to utilize the
potential of Afghanistan’s regional partners to
implement projects to rebuild the energy and transport
infrastructure of the country.
Comprehensive cooperation between Afghanistan
and the countries of the region could be an important

9

A/63/PV.42

element in finding an overall solution to the conflict.
We believe that the efforts of the international
community to stabilize the situation in Afghanistan and
combat the terrorist and extremist threats emanating
from the country will only be successful if the
conditions are established to equip the Afghan
Government with the independent capacity to provide
security on its territory. Of particular importance in
that regard is the establishment of operationally viable
national armed forces and law enforcement agencies
with modern equipment.
Efforts to improve the security situation in the
region must be bolstered by efforts by the international
community to create economic opportunities and jobs
for the people of Afghanistan, especially its young
people. First and foremost, stabilizing the situation in
Afghanistan can be achieved by strengthening
Government structures, rebuilding the economy,
addressing the most acute social problems and
improving the lives of the Afghan people. The
members of the CSTO will continue to contribute to
that effort.
Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): As we mark the seventh anniversary of the fall
of the backward Taliban regime in Afghanistan — an
event that raised hopes among the Afghan people for
the dawning of a new era that would end years of
isolation and war and bring about security and
prosperity to the country — the situation in that
country, unfortunately, does not lead to the conclusion
that many of the dreams of the Afghan people have by
and large been achieved, according to the report
contained in document A/63/372. This is due to
numerous factors, including the increased activities of
the Taliban movement and other armed groups that
oppose the Afghan Government, the weakness of State
institutions and the Government’s inability to meet the
basic socio-economic needs of the Afghan people in a
State whose economy is based primarily on the
production and sale of drugs.
The report also emphasizes that conditions have
deteriorated radically since the fall of the Taliban in
2001 and that civilian casualties resulting from military
action have risen to 1,445 during the first eight months
of 2008, an increase of 39 per cent as compared to the
same period in 2007. Of particular concern is the fact
that 40 per cent of those deaths were the result of raids
carried out by international forces and forces
supporting the Afghan Government. That has taken

10

place despite all the domestic and international
criticism, appeals and declarations calling for taking all
necessary measures to protect civilians and to foster
confidence among Afghan citizens, the Afghan
Government and the international community.
Members of the Assembly have also heard the
statement by the Afghan President in that regard.
That situation leads me to the conclusion that a
solution to the problem requires a comprehensive
approach that is not based on air raids and force to
achieve stability; instead, it requires, first and
foremost, comprehensive national reconciliation among
the entire Afghan people, as called for time and again
by President Hâmid Karzai, and by the loya jirga
before him. Reconciliation should include parallel
development efforts to provide the socio-economic
conditions that will ensure lives of dignity for the
people of Afghanistan without resorting to illegal
means to survive, including through drug trafficking.
That would contribute to the fight against corruption
and militancy while helping to restore confidence
among the people and meet their basic needs. Turning a
blind eye to a situation will not change it. Security,
stability, peace and prosperity in Afghanistan will not
be
achieved
without
comprehensive
national
reconciliation that includes all Afghan groups and
factions. Were the attainment of peace possible through
weapons and military operations, it would have been
achieved long ago in Afghanistan.
My delegation would like to express its grave
concern over the crisis faced by the Afghan people as a
result of drought and the rising cost of food. We fear
that the worsening international financial crisis will
aggravate the food crisis in Afghanistan as is the case
in other developing countries. We join the SecretaryGeneral in calling on the international community to
respond positively to the appeal launched by the VicePresident of the Republic of Afghanistan and the
United Nations for $404 million to address the crisis.
We hope that the implementation of the Afghan
National Development Strategy will be stepped up and
that the financial pledges made at the Paris Conference
held last June will be honoured.
The report of the Secretary-General published
last March (A/62/722) referred to cases of torture and
ill treatment of detainees, including allegations of
long-term arbitrary detention in facilities run by
international forces. The report also indicated that the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan

08-59517

A/63/PV.42

(UNAMA) was unable to assess those allegations. His
most recent report (A/63/372) makes no mention of
any progress in that respect and states that the situation
remains the same and that prisoners in Afghanistan are
in a serious state of neglect. My delegation would like
to express its grave concern about the situation of
prisoners in Afghanistan. We call for respect for human
rights, international law and international humanitarian
law.
Despite the situations to which I have referred,
there is no doubt that progress has been made in many
areas — especially with regard to mine clearance,
combating the drug trade, and basic infrastructure.
However, despite the international commitments and
efforts made, there are, nevertheless, shortcomings that
we must address in order to identify their causes and
sources.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize the
need to provide UNAMA with the necessary resources
and expertise to carry out the expanded mandate
entrusted to it by Security Council resolution 1806
(2008). In that connection, we hope that donor
countries will honour their pledges made at the Paris
Conference. UNAMA must have the resources needed
to carry out its responsibilities and mandate, especially
with regard to credibly supporting and protecting the
electoral process. In that connection, we would like to
emphasize that the success of those elections depends
both on the preparations and the participation of all
groups and factions within Afghanistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Today is indeed an
auspicious day, as the world gathers to speak on a topic
that for long has been ignored and has not received its
due share of world attention. I speak of the ongoing
war and travesty in Afghanistan for the past 30 to
35 years and the unimaginable pain and suffering of a
nation that has largely been reported only in by-lines in
the international media. I would like to explain why I
feel so strongly about the situation in Afghanistan.
Pakistan has had a very long relationship with
that part of the world. It is not a relationship that was
borne out of the creation of Pakistan. It is a
relationship with the Indian subcontinent as a whole,
stretching its vast dominions under Hinduism and
Buddhism, from the Volga to the Strait of Ceylon.
Islam came much later. It is in that vast region,
especially in Central Asia, that the people of the Indian
subcontinent in fact reciprocated cultural ties with

08-59517

peoples over many millennia. As such, it is not just
Pakistan but the Indian subcontinent that shares not
only a great relationship but also great empathy with
the people of Afghanistan.
For the past 35 years, Pakistan has had a deeply
rooted common destiny with Afghanistan specifically.
It is a little-known fact that, if one tries to sum up the
expenditures that Pakistan has had to bear in sharing
with its brethren from Afghanistan, one might be
amazed to know that, with more than 3 million Afghan
refugees incurring food costs for more than 33 years in
Pakistan at roughly 1 dollar per day per person, the
sum comes to $35 billion so far. As food is 50 per cent
of people’s daily expenses, one would have to add
another 50 per cent for education, health and many
other things, and the total sum is over $72 billion spent
in that period of time. If one takes the capital
expenditure of housing and many other such things,
one can practically double that figure again. Over
$150 billion has been spent over many years, but at a
tremendous cost to a nation like Pakistan. Participants
might be amused to know that Pakistan has a gross
domestic product of about $150 billion a year, and
$150 billion is what we spent or shared with
Afghanistan over these many years.
That is why we share a common destiny. Peace
and stability in the one country is a sine qua non for
peace and stability in the other. We are deeply
committed to a peaceful and stable environment in the
region, which is necessary for prosperity and the
development of our two peoples. It is with this
perspective that we participate in this debate, and I
must tell the Assembly that, as my mother is an
Afghan, I also participate with a share of Afghan
blood.
The achievement of durable peace, stability and
development in Afghanistan is a shared objective of the
international community. The success of international
efforts in Afghanistan is critical for regional and
international peace and security. A peaceful and
prosperous Afghanistan is, first and foremost, in the
best interest of, not only Pakistan, but the world. Let
me inform the Assembly that, other than our Afghan
brothers, no country or people has suffered more than
Pakistan has from the direct consequences of the
decades of conflict and instability in Afghanistan.
Pakistan has hosted the largest refugee population
in the world since the 1980s. We have endured political

11

A/63/PV.42

insecurity and the social, economic and environmental
consequences of the protracted war in Afghanistan and
the presence of vast numbers of refugees in Pakistan,
which manifests itself today in the faces of the
Al-Qaida and Taliban elements that cross the border
into Pakistan and encourage the same on our side of
the border.
Pakistan’s contribution and sacrifice in the fight
against terrorism are unmatched. The Assembly must
know by now that over 10,000 troops have been
committed by Pakistan to United Nations peacekeeping
efforts and that we are the largest contributors in this
field. The Assembly will be amazed to know, however,
that we also have 110,000 troops on our Afghan border
trying to prevent that vast war from spilling over into
other parts of, not only Pakistan, but also our
neighbours towards the Arabian Sea and our neighbour,
India. This contribution is one that is funded totally
through our own financial arrangements and coffers
and one that has cost us dearly, having brought us to
the brink with the severe financial difficulties we are
facing today.
The backlash has been most severe in Pakistan.
As a result of our role in the counter-terrorism
campaign, the security environment on our side has
deteriorated sharply. Thousands of innocent civilians
have fallen victim to terrorism in Pakistan, and,
sensitive to the sentiments of our people, the new
democratic Government is striving to bring about a
national consensus in order to confront and defeat the
terrorists.
Our support for the international efforts in
Afghanistan demands reciprocal cooperation based on
goodwill, respect for each other’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity, and mutual commitment not to
allow our respective territories to be used against each
other. As President Zardari has said, we cannot allow
our territory and our sovereignty to be violated by
these people.
Security cooperation is only one aspect of our
multidimensional relationship with Afghanistan, which
is now being further strengthened and encouraged by
various measures that I would like to name. First of all,
it was recently decided to upgrade bilateral relations
with Afghanistan and to regularly hold a strategic
dialogue at the Foreign Minister level.
Secondly, Pakistan hosted a meeting in
October — a Jirgagai or Mini Jirga — which

12

unanimously adopted the Islamabad Declaration,
setting forth a number of important decisions that will
help increase cooperation between the two peoples of
our nations.
Thirdly, the trilateral meeting in which President
Karzai, Prime Minister Gilani and Prime Minister
Erdogan participated on 30 October in Istanbul
underlined the commitment to the continuation of the
process. We greatly appreciate the positive, sincere and
constructive contribution of Turkey, which is an
exemplary role model in the context of efforts to
promote regional cooperation.
Fourthly,
the
Pakistan-Afghanistan
Joint
Economic Commission is expected to meet in Kabul in
November. Preparations are under way for the third
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan to be held in Islamabad in January 2009.
Despite its own problems, Pakistan continues to
help the reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan. Of our
total commitment of $320 million, $130 million have
already been utilized in various socio-economic and
infrastructure projects in Afghanistan. Despite
shortages of wheat in Pakistan, we are providing
50,000 tons of that staple at a preferential rate to our
friends and neighbours in Afghanistan. Meanwhile, we
continue to host over 2 million refugees in our own
country at enormous continuing cost to ourselves.
The recent report of the Secretary-General
(A/63/372) presents a mixed picture and an overall
deterioration of the situation in Afghanistan. The
challenges are daunting but not insurmountable. They
require an integrated and holistic response. There is no
quick fix. It is clear that Afghanistan cannot address
these challenges on its own. It needs sustained
engagement and commitment from the international
community. Afghanistan has made considerable
progress in recent years. It is now imperative to
consolidate this position and foundation.
To ensure effectiveness and success, such a
strategy must be built around and pursued with full
Afghan ownership. Capacity-building in all fields and
at all levels has to be an essential element of this
strategy. The report of the Secretary-General points out
serious gaps and shortfalls in this regard that must be
addressed.
Lack of security remains a major problem and
concern. Security has to be addressed in all its aspects,

08-59517

A/63/PV.42

including the threats posed by the Taliban and
Al-Qaida insurgencies, lingering warlordism, factional
rivalries, criminal and other illegal armed groups, as
well as the increasingly strong nexus with the drug
trade. It is obvious that these problems are primarily
rooted in Afghanistan and have to be addressed
accordingly. Besides, security cannot be detached from
the wider issues of reconciliation, improved
governance, development and reconstruction. This
myriad of challenges requires a collective effort based
on cooperation and responsibility shared by all.
Control of the international border between
Afghanistan and Pakistan is also a joint responsibility.
Pakistan has proposed several steps, including
capacity-building, intelligence sharing and matching
military measures that can be taken by all sides to
promote cooperative efforts based on shared
responsibility and the avoidance of unilateral actions,
in order to more effectively address the security
challenge. We are determined to carry out our part. We
remain committed to working together with
Afghanistan and the international forces towards that
objective. The Tripartite Commission continues to play
an important role, and should be fully utilized in that
regard.
The international community should also address,
on an urgent basis, the worsening humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan, which is particularly
aggravated by rising food prices. In the battle for
hearts and minds, the freedom from want is equally
essential as the freedom from fear, which unfortunately
is also being impacted negatively by the unjustified
and rising toll of civilian casualties in Afghanistan.
We need to build peace in Afghanistan region by
region, using incentives and peace dividends.
Genuine national reconciliation is also crucial for
the success of Afghan and international efforts to bring
peace and stability to the country. Winning the support
of the peaceful majority is essential to isolate and
break the insurgency. We support reconciliation efforts
by Afghans and others as part of the comprehensive
approach.
The United Nations has a central role in the
international efforts in Afghanistan. The United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan has a welldefined mandate. We support the efforts of Special
Representative Kai Eide in implementing that mandate,
particularly with regard to enhancing overall

08-59517

coordination for more robust and delivery-oriented
support.
We agree with the observations of the SecretaryGeneral that success will eventually depend on the full
implementation of the commitments undertaken by the
international community with regard to Afghanistan.
His recommendation to bring about a political surge
strikes the right cord. It underlines the need to look
beyond the military option which, although necessary,
is not the sole solution. In our view, that should be
complemented by a surge in economic development
and reconstruction. A huge developmental effort is
required to turn the situation in Afghanistan around.
We are grateful to the delegation of Germany for
once again coordinating our work on this year’s draft
resolution
(A/63/L.17),
which
presents
a
comprehensive overview of the situation in
Afghanistan. Pakistan is pleased to be a sponsor the
draft resolution, which we hope will be adopted by
consensus.
Only through mutual cooperation and support can
we achieve peace, stability and prosperity in
Afghanistan and the region. Pakistan’s interest in, and
commitment to, that objective is clear and resolute.
Along with Afghanistan, Pakistan will be the primary
beneficiary of peace in Afghanistan. It will enable us to
restore calm in our frontier regions. It will enable the
dignified and sustainable repatriation of the remaining
millions of Afghan refugees. Strategically, it will
enable our two countries to serve as the hub for the
interregional trade, transit and energy corridor with our
Indian neighbour, which can provide a major boost to
our objectives of peace and economic development. We
are determined to spare no effort to achieve those
objectives for the peace and prosperity of our people
and our region, and specifically the people of
Afghanistan.
Mr. Al-Mutairi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): My
country’s delegation wishes to convey to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon its gratitude for his sincere
efforts to achieve success and ensure security and
stability in Afghanistan. We also wish to commend the
efforts of his Special Representative for Afghanistan
and those of all United Nations staff in the country,
who continue to carry out their work under difficult
and increasingly dangerous conditions and whose
bravery and commitment have been fundamental to
achieving progress on the ground in Afghanistan.

13

A/63/PV.42

We would also like to thank the representative of
Germany, who introduced draft resolution A/63/L.17
concerning the situation in Afghanistan. The draft, of
which my delegation is a sponsor, emphasizes the
fundamental and neutral role that the United Nations
plays in fostering peace and stability in Afghanistan by
leading the efforts of the international community
there.
Afghanistan has suffered from the scourge of
several wars that have destroyed the basic
infrastructure that provides water, electricity,
transportation and communications services to the
general public. Those wars have also severely affected
the education, health and agricultural sectors, to say
nothing of the enormous loss of life among Afghan
civilians, foreigners and humanitarian relief workers.
Given that 2008 has been the worst year since the
beginning of military operations, the humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan has become dangerously
worse. Acts of violence are taking place in almost
every part of the country. International forces are
facing a real dilemma, given that the goals of the
military campaign had been to eliminate the Taliban
and Al-Qaida movements, help Afghanistan complete
the process of political transformation and provide
support to the Government and people of Afghanistan
in their effort to rebuild their country and strengthen
the foundations of constitutional democracy. However,
seven years after the beginning of the campaign, what
has been achieved to date is far less than what was
hoped for.
Nevertheless, we do not deny that there have
been some achievements, in particular as regards
efforts at demining, developing the national army and
police forces, reforming the judiciary, expanding the
rule of law and combating drugs. However, the pace of
that progress continues to be slow in the light of recent
developments in Afghanistan.
Having reviewed the Secretary-General’s report
(A/63/372) concerning the situation in Afghanistan, the
State of Kuwait expresses its concern about the
deteriorating situation in the country. The challenges
there are far greater than what the Afghan Government
can face on its own, in particular given the succession
of crises that have resulted in the Government losing
control over a substantial area of its national territory,
thereby providing rebel groups with an opportunity to
return to them, and new reports of an increase in the

14

influence of those groups in the southern and eastern
parts of the country.
Afghanistan is suffering as a result of longstanding difficult conditions. The security situation
continues to deteriorate, especially given the increase
in the killing and kidnapping of innocent civilians, who
have become easy targets for terrorist groups. Not long
ago, in September, a suicide attack killed two medical
doctors and their driver while they worked as part of a
campaign to inoculate children against polio. In
addition, 20 Afghan and foreign soldiers were killed
last week in a suicide attack by the Taliban movement
in the province of Wardek, south of the Afghan capital.
In that regard, the State of Kuwait condemns the
escalation of violence and suicide attacks, which have
led to an increase in the number of victims among
civilians, the Afghan National Police, Afghan and
international aid organizations and others working in
the area of humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian needs rose to a new level in the
course of the past year in Afghanistan, especially given
the shortage of food due to drought and the global rise
in food prices. The State of Kuwait urgently appeals to
all Member States, the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations to quickly provide as
much assistance as they can to Afghanistan. We also
call on States to adhere to the decisions of the Paris
Conference of donor countries, held in June 2008 to
focus on a national strategy for the development of
Afghanistan.
In that connection, we wish to refer to Kuwait’s
contributions to the building of infrastructure in
Afghanistan. The Kuwaiti Fund for Economic
Development has granted a $30 million loan for that
purpose, in fulfilment of the pledge it made at the
Tokyo donor conference. Of that amount, $15 million
has been allocated to rehabilitation of the KandaharSpeen Bwaldak road and the other $15 million to the
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund. The Kuwait
Red Crescent Society has also provided more than
$6.5 million in assistance over the past five years, and
other domestic organizations and charities have
continued to provide aid.
Finally, we hope that the United Nations will
continue its efforts to provide assistance to the Afghan
Government with a view to the consolidation of peace
and stability in Afghanistan.

08-59517

A/63/PV.42

Mr. Yerrannaidu (India): Let me begin by
expressing India's appreciation for the scheduling of
this discussion on a subject of great significance for us,
our region and the world. I commend the efforts made
by the delegation of Germany in coordinating the
intergovernmental negotiations that led to this annual
General Assembly draft resolution on the situation in
Afghanistan. We are happy to continue to be a sponsor
of the draft resolution, which is traditionally adopted
by consensus.
This draft resolution is arranged around a few
central themes. Thus, the operative section of the text
begins with issues relating to security and follows up
with paragraphs on governance, human rights, the rule
of law, economic and social development, counternarcotics efforts and, finally, coordination issues. It
therefore accords with our perspective on the substance
of the challenge that the international community faces
in Afghanistan. A similar perspective is borne out in
the latest report of the Secretary-General (A/63/372) on
the scale of the challenges and difficulties that beset
our efforts to assist Afghanistan.
Thus, as both the draft resolution and the
Secretary-General's report before us underscore, the
escalation in the number of asymmetric attacks in areas
cleared of the Taliban and Al-Qaida is deeply worrying.
Civilians, humanitarian workers, international staff and
diplomatic personnel — including our Mission in
Kabul — have been attacked. While we correctly
condemn the perpetrators of those savage acts, the
ultimate responsibility lies with those who support,
finance and empower the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other
terrorist and criminal groups. Their acts of violence are
callous and brutal but not mindless, since they
deliberately aim to weaken the resolve of the Afghan
people and the international community. In fact,
however, the increase in the number of random acts of
violence targeting civilians only illustrates the
desperation of terrorist groups in seeking to transform
strategic defeat into tactical advantage.
It is for that reason that we need to pay attention
to the signals that we are sending through our actions
and messages. Not only must we avoid inadvertently
giving terrorists and their supporters comfort; we must
also ensure that our legitimate concern at the
complexity of the challenge is not mistaken for a
weakening of our collective will to win this war. It is
also important that we ensure that we do not accord the
terrorists parity with the legitimate Government of

08-59517

Afghanistan or with the international community that
acts in support of it. Most of all, however, it is
essential that we focus on ensuring that our message is
clear and unequivocal — something that we
occasionally neglect in the annual General Assembly
draft resolution on Afghanistan. It is in that sense that
we commend the effort made this year to sharpen the
focus of the text on several key messages.
To India, the central thrust of the message that we
see in this draft resolution is very clear: our support for
and commitment to the central challenge in
Afghanistan is unshaken. We will not be diverted from
the task of helping the people of Afghanistan to bring
back to their nation peace, order, stability, governance
and development based on the traditionally moderate
and inclusive culture of Afghanistan. We may differ
individually in prioritizing and selecting strategies for
achieving that goal, but there should be no mistaking
the collective determination of the international
community to achieve the larger goal.
From that standpoint, therefore, the road ahead is
very clear. India believes that there is no alternative but
to work to simultaneously implement a three-pronged
strategy in Afghanistan. One element of that strategy
must be security, for, without security, neither the
people of Afghanistan nor our own citizens can hope to
see a peace dividend after decades of strife in
Afghanistan. While we accept the argument — which
seems to be made more regularly of late — that
Afghanistan cannot be secured through military means
alone, the converse is also true: without a robust
military effort, we cannot secure Afghanistan through
any other means either. It is for that reason that India
sees a need for much closer alignment between the
consistent application of force wherever terrorist
groups are present and the attainment of the political
objectives of our efforts in Afghanistan.
A second element must be enhancing governance
capacities in Afghanistan in order to ensure that our
Afghan partners will have the capacity and the
resources to chart their own course, whenever the time
to do so comes. Developmental efforts are an important
part of that, because any long-term strategy for
stabilizing Afghanistan must be predicated upon the
creation of impetus on the ground, building upon
ground cleared through military measures. Here too,
we must collectively ensure better coordination of our
collective efforts in support of the Government of
Afghanistan. To begin with, we must make a greater

15

A/63/PV.42

effort to offset the humanitarian challenge posed by
drought, climatic hardship and food scarcity.
The third element is ensuring that Afghanistan is
at peace within its region and vice versa. Without that,
we cannot hope to stabilize Afghanistan solely from
within. This includes but is not limited to regional
economic cooperation. Afghanistan's entry into the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation and
its membership in other regional groups are aimed at
revitalizing its historical linkages with the countries of
its region. The central challenge remains to ensure that
programmes developed within regional mechanisms
are implemented. That includes overcoming barriers to
effective overland trade and transit and to the operation
of mechanisms to deal with the challenges posed by
drug trafficking, cross-border terrorism and so on. This
is particularly true in the southern and eastern regions,
where narcotics production remains an endemic
problem. Unless robust security measures are followed
by a larger strategy of crop substitution and securing
market access for farmers, we cannot expect long-term
success in countering the production of narcotics in the
region.
In the context of the regional aspect, I should like
to reaffirm India's national commitment to assisting
Afghanistan in this complex moment in its transition.
We do so not only because of the long historical and
cultural ties between our peoples and the excellent
relationship that our two countries enjoy, but also
because history has shown us that regional prosperity,
security and progress are indivisible. Therefore, our
consistent effort has been to design our assistance
programmes in a manner that focuses upon bringing
development benefits both to the local level and to the
larger, national level.
Not only has India recently announced an
increase in its commitment to Afghanistan, amounting
to $1.2 billion, but we are also pleased to have
completed the construction of the Zaranj-Delaram
highway in western Afghanistan. It is one of three
major infrastructure projects India is undertaking in
Afghanistan, the others being a large hydroelectric
project and a large power-transmission project. Another
project of considerable symbolic value for us is the
construction of a parliament building in Afghanistan.
We hope to begin construction later this month.
In conclusion, I should like to come back to the
message of our draft resolution. For India, it is

16

important that the clarity of our message not be diluted
by adding excessive expectations based on efforts that
ultimately
tend
to
replicate
our
national
socio-economic models in an inappropriate setting. We
need to remind ourselves that we cannot realistically
resolve all of Afghanistan’s problems at once. Given
the challenge that faced us a little over seven years
ago, we should recognize that progress will continue,
but sector by sector and piece by piece.
Patience and perseverance are essential for the
long-term success of our investment, alongside a
willingness to listen to those whom we seek to help. It
is for that reason that an Afghan-led process of
prioritization of tasks remains essential.
Mr. Okuda (Japan): Japan welcomes this
opportunity to address the General Assembly on the
situation in Afghanistan.
We are pleased to be a sponsor of the draft
resolution before us (A/63/L.17). Given the
challenging situation Afghanistan faces today, it is of
particular importance to demonstrate the unity of the
international community in supporting Afghanistan by
adopting the draft resolution by consensus.
Appreciation is also due to our colleagues of the
German delegation, who led the consultations on the
draft resolution.
We all know that the situation in the country is
difficult, and that those who oppose the democratic
Government are trying to plant fear and doubt in the
minds of the Afghan people, but let me highlight the
progress that Afghanistan has achieved in the past
seven years.
The economy has grown steadily, with an annual
growth rate of approximately 10 per cent over the past
five years. In five years, the number of students
enrolled in school has soared from less than 1 million
in 2001 to more than 5.6 million. Children’s access to
health services has significantly improved. Six million
children have received polio vaccinations to date. Such
progress could not have been achieved without the
resolve of the Government and people of Afghanistan,
with the assistance of the international community.
We should not and will not give in to attempts to
undermine that progress. We, the international
community, will continue to firmly stand by
Afghanistan in its endeavours for stability and
prosperity.

08-59517

A/63/PV.42

At the same time, we must squarely face the
challenges on the ground. Security is the foremost
concern, as candidly described in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (A/63/372). We are
pleased to note that the capacity of the Afghan National
Army has been enhanced, and congratulate it on taking
over responsibility for the security of Kabul. We also
pay tribute to the countries participating in the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the
Operation Enduring Freedom coalition for their
dedication in the fight against terrorism.
It is also true that the problems cannot be solved
by military means alone. We have advocated the
necessity of a holistic approach to addressing the
various challenges Afghanistan faces. The goals of
security, governance and development cannot be
achieved independently of each other.
At the centre of international efforts in the
country is the United Nations. We support the
implementation of UNAMA’s priorities, and in that
connection, Japan also supports the strengthening of
the Mission’s structure so that it can better meet the
expectations of the Afghan people and the world.
We
commend
Mr.
Kai
Eide,
Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Afghanistan, for his dedication in leading the Mission.
Mr. Eide provided a useful outline of his goals for the
next six months in his most recent briefing to the
Security Council. We thank him for that and will
support him in achieving those goals.
For its part, Japan has been fully committed to
contributing to the nation-building of the country. In
the area of assistance for reconstruction, for example,
Japan has disbursed its pledged contribution of
$1.45 billion. We were glad to see the completion of
the construction of the Kabul International Airport
Terminal Building, welcomed by the Afghan people at
a ceremony held just last week. Japan made an
additional pledge of $550 million at the Paris
Conference, bringing its total pledged assistance to
$2 billion.
On the security side, Japan is pleased to have
been the lead country in the process of disbanding
illegally armed groups, which we strongly believe has
made a significant difference in improving the security
situation. We have also been participating in the fight
against terrorism by replenishing the fleet of the

08-59517

Operation Enduring Freedom coalition in the Indian
Ocean.
Even with the continued commitment of the
international community, much rests on the shoulders
of the Afghan Government. We take the recent
reshuffle of the cabinet as a demonstration of President
Karzai’s resolve to address the issues more effectively.
While supporting the Government’s efforts to
promote national reconciliation, we hope that issues
such as governance, corruption, reform of the police
force and the Ministry of the Interior, and counternarcotics will be effectively dealt with in a
strengthened Government.
The most important events ahead in the political
calendar are the elections in 2009 and 2010. Voter
registration has begun smoothly and that is a good
launching pad for the holding of legitimate elections.
Thorough preparations, including the successful
completion of voter registration, are necessary so that
the Government’s commitment to holding the elections
as planned will be carried out.
The importance of the regional dimension cannot
be overemphasized. We welcome the recent active
dialogues among Afghanistan and neighbouring
countries. We also welcome the recent fruitful visit of
the Foreign Minister of Afghanistan to Pakistan, as
well as the trilateral meeting of leaders of Afghanistan,
Pakistan and Turkey.
Regarding our own efforts in that area, Japan
appreciates the encouragement in the General
Assembly draft resolution for the Group of Eight’s
initiatives. We hope that the implementation of the
initiatives will contribute to regional efforts to stabilize
and develop the border area.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate Japan’s
unwavering commitment to fulfilling its role for the
future of Afghanistan. Afghanistan will remain one of
our focuses at the United Nations.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish
to extend our thanks to the Secretary-General for his
latest report on the situation in Afghanistan (A/63/372).
We also thank him and his Special Representative, as
well as the personnel of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, for their steadfast commitment
to and unwavering support for peace, stability and
development in Afghanistan.

17

A/63/PV.42

In the past several years, many commendable
efforts have been made by the people and the
Government of Afghanistan in rebuilding their country,
taking their destiny into their own hands, establishing
democratic institutions and developing a vibrant
political system, and, indeed, fighting terrorism and
extremism in the country.
Also, much has been accomplished in areas such
as economic growth, education, health, infrastructurebuilding, rural development and capacity-building. The
Afghan people and Government deserve our collective
admiration for all the achievements they have made
thus far. They also need the continued support of all of
us while they move forward in their journey towards a
stable, secure and prosperous Afghanistan.
Despite all the accomplishments however, much
remains to be done and serious challenges are yet to be
tackled. As the report at hand indicates, we are today
facing a mixed picture in Afghanistan. Afghanistan
seems to be at a crossroads again. Given the threats
that the presence of extremist and terrorists in
Afghanistan has posed to international peace and
security in the past — a threat that still exists — the
whole world has no doubt that it has a vital interest in a
stable, secure and prosperous Afghanistan and in an
Afghanistan free from terrorism and extremism.
Extremists and terrorists will spare no effort to
explore and misuse any signs or missteps by some that
could in any way be misinterpreted as a weakening of
the international community's resolve to help
Afghanistan in its fight against terrorism and
extremism. Unfortunately, certain countries have made
statements or taken steps that give rise to such
concerns on the part of the Afghan people and
Government, as well as the world community. That is a
matter of grave concern and may only bring a new
phase of extremism to the region.
In our view, the insecurity in Afghanistan can be
best addressed by strengthening the autonomy and
integrity of the Afghan national security forces and by
expediting full national ownership by Afghans of the
security of their country. Moreover, capacity-building,
training, education, the development of important
sectors and ensuring that ordinary Afghans feel the
results of the help and support of the international
community in their day-to-day lives could help to
improve the overall situation in Afghanistan.

18

Unfortunately, the cultivation and production of
and traffic in narcotic drugs in Afghanistan continue
unabated. They not only affect the security and
development of Afghanistan, but pose serious threats to
the region and the world at large. We have noted and
welcome the efforts made by the Afghan Government
in countering that menace, yet more resolute
endeavours need to be made both by Afghanistan and
the international community if the world is to
effectively rid itself of that daunting challenge.
As various reports by relevant United Nations
bodies and agencies attest, throughout the past three
decades the Islamic Republic of Iran has fought a
deadly and costly war against drug traffickers — a war
that has cost our nation the lives of about 4,000 of its
great and brave law-enforcement personnel, while
another 12,000 have been maimed. We expect more
support and determination on the part of the
international community as we continue that fight with
utmost seriousness.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has also been
actively participating in the reconstruction process of
Afghanistan. Road and railroad construction,
manpower
training,
electricity
projects
and
humanitarian services are but a few of the important
contributions we have made in that regard.
Furthermore, we have shouldered a huge burden during
the past three decades by hosting millions of our
Afghan brothers and sisters. Throughout all those
years, those Afghan nationals have been enjoying
educational and welfare facilities in Iran and have
benefited from the same subsidies that our own people
enjoy. Our country is today hosting about 2 million
Afghan nationals, half of whom are living in our
country illegally. We expect more assistance and
efforts from the international community in the process
of helping Afghan nationals to return to their home
country in a more timely manner.
I wish to conclude by stressing that, as in the past
several years, the Afghan people and Government will
always find us at their side, offering our sincere help
and support as they continue their difficult but valuable
and necessary journey towards peace, stability and
prosperity.
I also wish to thank the delegation of Germany
for its efforts in the preparation of and negotiating
process on the draft resolution on Afghanistan
(A/63/L.17).

08-59517

A/63/PV.42

Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to co-sponsor the draft
resolution (A/63/L.17) reaffirming the solidarity of the
international community with Afghanistan. We thank
the German delegation for its hard work in ensuring
that the resolution receive the broadest possible
support. The draft resolution underscores the leading
role that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) is playing as the central
coordinator for all civilian international assistance and
for ensuring that such assistance is coordinated with
the Afghans and with the military efforts.
The United States commends the work of Special
Representative Kai Eide and the UNAMA staff. We
call on Member States to join us in supporting a surge
in UNAMA’s capabilities. We urge the Secretariat and
Member States to do everything in their power to give
Mr. Eide the support and resources that he needs to
carry out his very important mission. We must find
ways to allow him to hire the people he needs and get
them on board immediately, not months from now.
Mr. Eide, in turn, needs to use those capabilities and
the promising relationships he has built with the
Afghans and with the international community to
develop targets, plans and timelines for achieving each
of the major tasks of his mandate.
The United States is gravely concerned about the
humanitarian conditions in Afghanistan. The situation
is worsening and many lives are in jeopardy, both from
possible food shortages and from extreme cold
weather. The United States is the largest donor to
Afghanistan, financially and in kind. We are prepared
to do more. We urge Member States to respond to
Afghan Government and United Nations appeals to
avoid a worsening humanitarian situation this winter.
Preparations for winter should aim at assisting needy
Afghans in dealing with food shortages and cold
weather.
The security situation in Afghanistan has become
more challenging as the number of anti-Government
incidents have increased and the Taliban has continued
to wage deadly attacks on Afghan security forces, the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the
civilian population. The Afghan people face an
increasingly vicious campaign of violence and
intimidation by Al-Qaida and extremist Taliban. We
appreciate the sacrifices so many countries are making
to help Afghanistan. Just yesterday, two Spanish ISAF

08-59517

soldiers were reportedly killed in a suicide attack in
Herat province.
Despite the security challenges, the United States
believes that success can be achieved in Afghanistan.
Success requires that the Government in Afghanistan
implement its National Development Strategy, making
tough decisions and implementing agreed policies
specifically in the areas of local governance,
combating corruption, enforcing the rule of law,
achieving economic development, and pursuing robust
counter-narcotics and reform of the police forces.
We hope that the recent changes in the
Government can assist with making progress with
regard to those goals. We welcome and, indeed, believe
it crucial that Afghan security forces take increasing
responsibility for protecting the Afghan people as their
capabilities grow and as conditions warrant.
President Karzai has committed his Government
to holding elections in 2009. That is very important.
We welcome UNAMA’s efforts to support the Afghan
Government in preparing for the elections. Last
Wednesday, the second phase of the voter registration
got under way. It is imperative that the international
community redouble its efforts to ensure credible
elections. We call on the Afghan Government to
maintain its commitment to carrying out the elections
as scheduled in order to further instil a culture of
representative, democratic Government in the country
and to sustain international support.
For Afghanistan’s success, I would like to
underscore the importance of the role of the country’s
neighbours. The recent election of a new Government
in Pakistan provides an opportunity for increased
cooperation between the two countries against
terrorists and extremists who threaten Afghanistan,
Pakistan and, indeed, the world. The agenda for
regional cooperation is clear: no sanctuaries for hostile
forces, no use of extremists and terrorists to advance
national interests, intelligence-sharing, precluding
regional
geopolitical
rivalry,
encouraging
reconciliation, and integrating Afghanistan into
regional institutions and the regional economy.
Progress on those fronts is crucial to Afghanistan’s
stability and development. Both the Afghan and the
Pakistani Governments need international support to
resist extremists and terrorists.
The United States deeply regrets the accidental
loss of civilian lives, and we do not take that issue

19

A/63/PV.42

lightly. We share the Secretary-General’s grave concern
over the issue of civilian casualties. I want to assure
Member States that we will do everything in our power
to ensure that ISAF and Operation Enduring Freedom
take every precaution to prevent civilian casualties. We
have intensified our efforts with the Government of
Afghanistan
to
improve
coordination
and
communication in operations to prevent future
incidents, and our military’s Central Command has
issued guidance to United States forces to continue to
take steps to prevent civilian casualties and to
acknowledge them when they occur.
At the same time, we should not lose sight of the
fundamental cause of this increase in casualties, clearly
spelled out in the Secretary-General’s recent report
(A/63/372). The Taliban and other anti-Government
elements are waging a systematic campaign of violence
and intimidation against civilians. They deliberately
target civilians and use them as shields and, as the
report points out, the Taliban is increasingly resorting
to asymmetric attacks on population centres, aidrelated targets and non-governmental organizations.
Last June, the international community endorsed
the Afghanistan National Development Strategy, and
there was an unprecedented level of pledges. Those are
clear signs of our determination to help Afghans
succeed. As Afghans do their part, donors must also
follow through on their commitments.
In closing, it is clear that Afghanistan faces
significant difficulties and challenges. Those
challenges should serve to reaffirm and renew
commitment to Afghanistan’s success — by making the
necessary changes and adjustments — on the part of
Afghanistan and the international community. The
United States is committed to doing so and remains
firmly
committed
to
Afghanistan’s
success.
Afghanistan’s success is the world’s success.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): Norway welcomes
today’s draft resolution on Afghanistan (A/63/L.17).
The broad support it enjoys sends an important
message that we are united and committed to helping
Afghanistan build a democratic country and to helping
heal the wounds inflicted by decades of war and terror.
At the Paris Conference in June, a great number
of us pledged to renew our partnership with
Afghanistan, and the Afghan Government promised to
step up its fight against corruption and narcotics. On
that occasion, Norway reaffirmed its long-term

20

commitment by pledging €500 million for the time
period covered by the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy.
How can we here at the United Nations make an
immediate difference, now and for the future? I would
answer by focusing on three particular issues.
The first is the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). A grave
responsibility has been placed on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and on Special
Representative Kai Eide. They have been called upon
to lead the international civilian effort in Afghanistan.
At Paris, we pledged substantial resources to really
assist the Afghan Government. Now, expectations are
high. The people of Afghanistan are waiting to see the
results that would justify our rhetoric in Paris.
But many, alas, have yet to experience the
benefits of development or to see hope on the horizon.
True, we see important improvements, not least with
regard to school enrolment, for girls in particular but
also for boys, and with respect to public health. But
other sectors are lagging behind, and development is
also uneven between the regions. We must let ourselves
be coordinated by UNAMA, and we must ensure that
UNAMA and Kai Eide have the necessary resources
and sufficient qualified personnel to meet those
expectations.
That may require some practical adaptation of
rules and regulations regarding budgets and staffing.
The General Assembly will consider UNAMA’s budget
later next month, and we urge all Member States to
provide UNAMA with the necessary resources to carry
out its strengthened mandate. We also urge the
Secretariat to cut red tape and to speed up the process
of putting qualified people in the field.
Secondly, we need to focus on the humanitarian
situation. The people of Afghanistan are facing a harsh
winter. The consequences of the global food crisis are
being felt, and are compounded by drought. That is
why we must assist the Government of Afghanistan in
alleviating the serious humanitarian situation. Norway
has recently increased its humanitarian support
significantly, also in relation to facilitating the
establishment of the new United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) office
in Kabul. We take it, moreover, that OCHA will
quickly assume its responsibility for humanitarian
coordination, in close cooperation with UNAMA.

08-59517

A/63/PV.42

Thirdly, we must focus on the elections. The
United Nations Development Programme is advising
the Afghan Government on how to register voters and
inform them about the election, and it is doing so with
great skill and creativity. Of the more than 820,000
voters registered in the first phase of the process,
women make up 38 per cent, which is a high figure,
given that those initial regions are the most difficult
ones to access. The broad participation of women is
heartening and bodes well for the election. In order to
consolidate Afghan democracy, it is vital that the
elections take place according to plan in September
2009 and in 2010. Norway has committed resources to
the registration process, and we will also support the
holding of elections. Consolidating democracy also
requires improving the rule of law and respect for
human rights. The recent changes in the Afghan
Government — and there was one even today —
demonstrate renewed commitment to fighting
corruption and improving security.
Let me conclude by paying my respects to the
men and women on the ground and to those who paid
with their lives so that others may live. We owe it to
them and to millions of others to ensure that the
Taliban will never again be able to terrorize the Afghan
people.
Mr. Hill (Australia): Australia welcomes the
opportunity to endorse draft resolution A/63/L.17, on
Afghanistan, and to reaffirm our commitment to
continuing international efforts to help build a more
secure and stable Afghan State. We do so against the
background of continuing sacrifice on the part of the
Afghan people and international forces, and today we
pay tribute in particular to the Spanish soldiers who
lost their lives last weekend.
On a brighter note, we have seen important steps
taken this year, most particularly the renewed
commitments and comprehensive political-military
plan adopted by International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) partners at the NATO summit in
Bucharest in April and the important outcomes of the
Afghanistan Review Conference in Paris in June. We
take this opportunity to commend again the efforts of
France, Afghanistan and the United Nations to bring
the Review Conference together and to launch the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy. We note
that around 80 countries participated in the
Conference, pledging over $20 billion to the
Development Strategy, and that the Strategy provides a

08-59517

sound framework for planning for Afghanistan’s
national development needs over the next five years.
But we must be realistic about the enormous
challenges facing Afghanistan and its international
partners and recognize the fact that, without basic
security, much of what is needed, such as building the
Afghan people’s capacity to manage their own affairs
and creating conditions for economic and social
development, will not be realized.
There is no question that the Taliban-led
insurgency remains a serious threat to sustained
progress and to the Afghan people. It is determined to
prevail not on the battlefield, but by sapping the
resolve and public support of Afghanistan and its
friends for our sacrifices through fear and intimidation
of the Afghan civilian population.
We also know of the insurgents’ tactics to
manipulate and disseminate information to discredit
and our efforts. Australia, like others, continues to
deeply regret civilian casualties that arise from the
actions of international forces, but we have strict rules
of engagement to minimize those risks and processes to
review and ensure that our actions comply with those
rules. Our enemies, in contrast, have no moral issue
with using civilians as shields or instruments of terror.
The international community clearly has a
responsibility to the Afghan people, as recognized by
numerous United Nations resolutions, to prevent the
return to rule of the violent ideology that bred hatred,
brutalized women and fostered only extreme poverty
and repression of basic human rights. Equally
important, we all have a responsibility to our own
people to prevent the Taliban-led insurgency from
re-establishing safe havens for terrorist groups that
seek to export violence across the globe.
Australia is proud to be part of the group of
approximately 40 countries contributing forces to assist
Afghans in fighting the Taliban-led insurgency and
international terrorists, including Al-Qaida. Those
terrorists were behind attacks as far apart as New York
and Indonesia, including the attacks in Bali that killed
202 people, including many of my countrymen and
countrywomen.
Australia is committed. With 1,100 troops, we are
the largest non-NATO contributor to ISAF. We have
also committed over $600 million in development
assistance to Afghanistan since 2001. We will subject

21

A/63/PV.42

our commitment to annual review against the mission
we have set for ourselves. We welcome the fact that the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General has set
out before the Security Council some achievable goals
for UNAMA over the next six months. We support
UNAMA and look forward to being constructive in
consideration of its budget in the Fifth Committee for
additional resources to allow it to fulfil its mandate,
particularly in relation to support for election
preparations.
Australia’s stabilization and reconstruction efforts
in Afghanistan are concentrated in Oruzgan province in
the South of the country, where we are working in
partnership with the Afghan Government and the
Netherlands, which we praise for their partnership. Our
reconstruction task force has built schools, provided
basic training in trades such as carpentry, and has
rebuilt bridges and irrigation systems. While positive,
those are only small steps. Oruzgan demonstrates the
critical need for a coherent and integrated military and
civilian strategy that provides the basis to secure and
sustain progress. And that is equally true in other
provinces of the country.
We know that there needs to be much greater
focus on building Afghanistan’s capacity to take
responsibility for security, which will enable important
reconstruction and development activity to take place. I
am pleased to state that Australia’s first operational
mentor and liaison team is currently establishing itself
in the province and will soon be actively training and
mentoring Afghan military units.
There also needs to be greater focus on more
effective coordination of civilian efforts in relief,
rebuilding and governance activity within a
comprehensive political-military strategy. And we
believe that the United Nations has a strong role to
play in pursuing that objective.
We very much value the work and efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the UNAMA team, in particular in their lead role in
coordinating international donor activity in support of
the Afghan Government. We know the difficult
circumstances in which they work. We are pleased that
a special allowance was introduced for them. Australia
is committed to working with the Secretariat and other
Member States to ensure that UNAMA is capable of
fulfilling the demanding role we have set it.

22

We also reiterate our support for President Karzai
and Afghan parties committed to strengthening
Afghanistan’s institutions. The next two years will see
the crucial tests of further elections and we call on all
to assist in ensuring that those elections are conducted
in a secure, free and fair fashion. We can be certain that
those utterly opposed to the Afghan people making up
their own minds will do all they can to disrupt the
elections. They must be prevented from doing so.
Australia also takes this opportunity to praise the
new Government of Pakistan for its recent efforts to
improve relations with the Afghan Government. The
Taliban poses a common threat and both countries must
work together to address it. We also note the valuable
and constructive role that Afghanistan’s other
neighbours can play to promote and support Afghan
stability, in particular in areas such as border security,
trafficking and counter-narcotics.
The challenges ahead are substantial, but
collectively we can meet them. To do so will require
our continued commitment and cooperation. We
support the draft resolution and we are proud to have
co-sponsored it.
Mr. McNee (Canada): At the outset, I would like
to express the Canadian Government’s deep
condolences regarding the Spanish soldiers who gave
their lives in Afghanistan this weekend.
Canada welcomes today’s draft resolution
(A/63/L.17) and we would like to thank the German
delegation for its excellent work in facilitating
negotiations on it. Canada is proud to have contributed
to efforts to draft the draft resolution. We are pleased to
co-sponsor its passage today. Its adoption will be a
testament to the ongoing strength of the partnership
between the international community and Government
of Afghanistan. It also affirms our collective
commitment to a safe, secure and stable Afghanistan.
Canada
acknowledges
the
strengthened
leadership the United Nations has provided this past
year, with a sharpened mandate for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to lead
the coordination of international efforts and the
appointment of Kai Eide as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. Initial progress has already been
made. Canada welcomes the efforts of the UNAMA
and the Government of Afghanistan to restructure the
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board to make it a
more efficient and more decisive instrument.

08-59517

A/63/PV.42

UNAMA’s role in Afghanistan is, after all, to
shape and focus our collective efforts. However, the
United Nations is not a solitary actor — it is only as
empowered as Member States allow it to be. Member
States must ensure that it has the financial resources
and the political support required to do its job.
The international community has much to learn
from the Afghan people who continue to demonstrate
remarkable resilience and determination. In the face of
a fierce insurgency, the Afghan National Army
continues to grow in numbers, capacity and
professionalism.
With the support of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF), this Afghan institution is now
able to lead a growing number of operations —
something unthinkable just a year ago. And just over
two months ago, Afghan security forces assumed lead
security responsibility for Kabul from ISAF — a proud
and significant achievement.
Canada welcomes Afghanistan’s ratification of
the United Nations Convention Against Corruption in
August of this year, meeting one of the benchmarks of
the Afghanistan Compact. While much still needs to be
done, Canada is also encouraged by the creation in
June of this year of the High Office for Oversight for
the implementation of the National Anti-Corruption
Strategy.
Canada remains committed to working with
Afghans and the international community to help
rebuild Afghanistan. This past year, Canada further
increased its development commitment, pledging an
additional $600 million. This brings Canada’s total
assistance contribution to $1.9 billion over a ten-year
period. This is, of course, in addition to our continued
military engagement in Kandahar Province.
Canada has also announced its commitment to the
repair of the Dahla Dam and its irrigation system in
Kandahar Province. Once completed, this dam will
provide a secure irrigation water supply to the majority
of the people of Kandahar Province, as well as create
the potential to revitalize agriculture in the province
and provide thousands of much needed jobs to
Kandaharis.
Canada’s polio eradication programme will see
the immunization of an estimated 7 million children
across Afghanistan.

08-59517

Canada is also committed to increasing
development programming in Kandahar. At the same
time, at least half of Canadian funding will be
dedicated to national level initiatives, such as
strengthening vital national institutions, rebuilding the
Afghan National Police, justice and corrections
systems.
Canada is committed to supporting free, fair,
secure, Afghan-led elections in 2009 and 2010 and
echoes the resolution’s call to the international
community to continue to provide sustained support
and financial assistance.
With voter registration currently underway, the
Afghan people are commencing their second electoral
process in recent times. This is a crucial step in the
establishment of democracy in Afghanistan.
(spoke in French)
As the Secretary-General noted in his September
report on the situation in Afghanistan (A/63/372),
Afghanistan’s neighbours and regional partners play a
crucial role in promoting Afghanistan’s development
and stability. Canada therefore welcomes the
resolution’s emphasis on regional cooperation as an
effective means to promote security and development.
Canada has been working to build cooperation between
Afghanistan and Pakistan, facilitating technical
discussions among border management officials. We
are also very supportive of the Afghanistan-Pakistan
Joint Peace Jirga process and congratulate the two
countries on the recent meeting of the Jirgagai.
The progress we have seen must not blind us to
the harsh reality that these gains are precarious.
Security has deteriorated in some parts of Afghanistan
adversely affecting our governance and development
efforts and ambitions. Rising global food prices have
not spared Afghanistan, while drought and a failed
harvest are compounding food shortages across the
country.
These are the immediate and pressing concerns of
Afghans. For this reason, Canada has named
humanitarian relief among its priorities. In doing so,
we are making clear to the Afghan people that the
international community remains committed to
supporting them. But it is action and change, not
words, that will convince them.
Ms. Banks (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes progress made in Afghanistan since this time

23

A/63/PV.42

last year and is pleased once again to be a sponsor of
draft resolution A/63/L.17, prepared and introduced by
Germany.
We congratulate the Government of Afghanistan
on its efforts to improve the situation, including in the
areas of security, drug control, justice sector reform,
gender equality and local governance. We welcome
Afghanistan’s ratification of the United Nations
Convention against Corruption and encourage the
Government to continue to fight corruption, which it
has acknowledged as an impediment to progress in
Afghanistan.
Although there has been positive progress in
Afghanistan, the overall situation remains of major
concern with ongoing insurgent attacks and a continued
high level of opium production. New Zealand
condemns the insurgent attacks which often jeopardize
the lives of innocent civilians.
These extreme security challenges must not,
however,
be
allowed
to
justify
continuing
infringements of fundamental human rights, including
access to justice, the right to due process and freedom
of expression.
We thank Afghanistan’s neighbours for their
positive efforts to help improve the situation in
Afghanistan. We encourage them to continue to
coordinate their efforts with those of the rest of the
international community to stabilize Afghanistan.
Otherwise, these efforts at stabilization will be
undermined by cross-border activities.
The NATO summit in Bucharest earlier in the
year reviewed the situation in Afghanistan and put
forward a plan aimed primarily at improving the
security situation. At the summit, New Zealand Prime
Minister, Helen Clark, highlighted the importance of a
comprehensive, multipronged approach covering
security, governance and development interventions,
with a rebalancing of effort towards governance and
development. The
approach
also
emphasizes
reconciliation.
The international community needs to increase
non-military assistance. The Paris Conference
outcomes addressed development priorities articulated
in the new Afghanistan National Development
Strategy.
We encourage all nations to implement the
commitments they have made to improve the

24

circumstances in Afghanistan. It is essential that the
required resources are made available so that the
Afghanistan that Ambassador Tanin spoke about this
morning can become a reality — an Afghanistan where
people can rebuild their lives in peace.
New
Zealand
welcomes
the
improved
coordinating role of the United Nations through the
strengthening of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan. That will enhance the efficiency and
effectiveness of the international community’s
assistance. We fully support the work of Special
Representative Kai Eide, and we note the progress that
he has made within a short period of time.
New Zealand looks forward to the holding of free
and fair elections in 2009 and 2010 as building blocks
for democracy in Afghanistan. Since 2001, New
Zealand has made a substantial commitment to the
international effort to restore peace and security in
Afghanistan. Our Provincial Reconstruction Team in
Bamyan province is the centrepiece of that
commitment.
In closing, I should like to acknowledge the
efforts and sacrifices made by all those nations that are
working in partnership with the Government of
Afghanistan and to join others in expressing sympathy
on the loss of the lives of two Spanish soldiers over the
weekend.
Mr. Towpik (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to associate myself with the statement delivered by the
representative of France on behalf of the European
Union. Permit me to make a few additional comments
from the Polish perspective on this important and vital
issue for the international community.
I wish to begin by thanking the delegation of
Germany for its significant effort in facilitating the
consultation process that resulted in the draft resolution
before us. In addition, the annual debate on
Afghanistan is the best opportunity to underline the
prominent role that the United Nations plays in the
process
of
that
country’s
stabilization
and
reconstruction. The coordinating role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and the activities undertaken by Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, enjoy our full
support and respect. Let me also convey our sincere
condolences to our Spanish friends. We share their
grief on the loss of the lives of the Spanish soldiers in
Afghanistan.

08-59517

A/63/PV.42

Poland strongly believes that the engagement of
the international community in Afghanistan should and
would facilitate the creation of conditions in which the
Afghan authorities would be able to take full
responsibility for the security, stability and
development of their country. That is the main purpose
of our presence in the country. Bearing that in mind,
Poland also decided to increase its engagement in the
stabilization and reconstruction process within the
International Security Assistance Force from
100 troops in 2006 to 1,600 troops at present.
Moreover, in October this year, Poland took over the
responsibility for the security situation throughout
Ghazni province.
In our view, the most important challenges to the
international community in Afghanistan are the
following. First is the stabilization of the security
situation. We still have major concerns related to the
security situation in Afghanistan, and we continue to
do our utmost to address them. The creation of
conditions conducive to the development of a
prosperous country with effective, well-functioning
and transparent Government structures is the best
strategy for stabilizing Afghanistan. For that reason,
Poland contributes actively to the development of
Provincial
Reconstruction
Teams
(PRTs)
in
Afghanistan. We plan to gradually increase our civilian
engagement in the activities of the PRT in Ghazni
province.
Secondly, we must address the humanitarian
situation. We cannot ignore the increase in the number
of the serious humanitarian challenges ahead of us or
the need for the international community and donors to
face them in order to meet their commitments in that
field. Moreover, in the context of worrisome news
concerning the social and living standards of the
Afghan population, we must focus on ways to
effectively
distribute
humanitarian
assistance.
Humanitarian capacity must be enhanced, especially in
the light of the threat posed by the food crisis. Since
2002, the Polish Government has been actively
involved in providing humanitarian assistance to the
Afghan people, and in 2004 Afghanistan was included
on Poland’s list of priorities in the Asian region in the
field of humanitarian aid. In 2008, Polish official
development assistance to Afghanistan amounted to
more than $3 million.
Thirdly, we need better coordination of activities,
especially among UNAMA, ISAF, the European Union

08-59517

Police Mission in Afghanistan and other international
actors involved in Afghanistan.
Fourthly and finally, let me stress the importance
of regional cooperation. There is an urgent need to
develop such cooperation in order to stabilize
Afghanistan. In that context, I would like to welcome
and commend the improved relations between
Afghanistan
and
Pakistan.
The
international
community should continuously support both countries
in their efforts to combat extremism and terrorism. The
efforts of the Tripartite Commission — including
ISAF, Afghanistan and Pakistan — in the AfghaniPakistani border zone should contribute more
substantially to the achievement of that goal.
Afghanistan will need our significant and
continuous support in its reconstruction and
stabilization efforts for some years to come. At the
same time, we should try to develop programmes and
initiatives that, in a long-term perspective, would
enable the Afghan people to take full responsibility for
the peaceful and prosperous development of their
country and their region.
Mr. Ali (Malaysia): First of all, let me express
my delegation’s appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his report on the situation in Afghanistan as
contained in document A/63/372. The report provides
useful observations on efforts to bring peace, security
and stability to Afghanistan. We would also like to
express our appreciation to Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Afghanistan, for his valuable work and to the members
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their dedication in carrying
out their responsibilities despite a difficult and
challenging situation.
We also congratulate the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan on the successful
launching of the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy at the Paris Conference held on 12 June 2008,
which, together with the pledged support of the
international community at the Conference, provide the
road map and the means for national efforts to bring
long-term security and prosperity to Afghanistan.
My delegation takes note of the SecretaryGeneral’s overall assessment that Afghanistan is facing
an ever-more-challenging situation. We note with deep
concern the marked deterioration of the security
situation resulting from insurgent attacks that are

25

A/63/PV.42

spreading into more sensitive areas and the deployment
of asymmetrical tactics in those attacks. The increasing
violence is a matter of concern for all, as security is the
major factor making it possible to carry out urgently
needed humanitarian relief work and efforts to achieve
long-term success in the reconstruction and
socio-economic development of the country. The
actions by the insurgents will definitely retard the
Government’s efforts to bring much needed
development to those areas.
In a similar vein, we are deeply concerned with
the high number of civilian casualties, which is in no
way acceptable. In the first eight months of 2008 alone,
we note that UNAMA recorded 1,445 civilian deaths,
which represents a 39 per cent increase over the same
period last year. We condemn the cowardly terrorist
acts perpetrated by the insurgents and other extremist
groups that wilfully target civilian populations,
including humanitarian aid workers.
We are equally concerned at the civilian
casualties resulting from military actions by
pro-Government forces. We note from the report that
during the first eight-month period of 2008,
393 deaths, or 27 per cent of civilian deaths, were
attributed to air strikes by pro-Government forces. We
share the Secretary-General’s view that civilians
should be protected at all times from any form of
danger, particularly from grave injury or death, not
only from terrorist acts and insurgency, but also from
the unintended consequences of pro-Government
military operations. We therefore call on and urge all
parties to ensure the protection of these civilians, as
required under international humanitarian and human
rights laws. We also call on the relevant authorities to
continually review their rules of engagement and
procedures in this regard in order to ensure the
protection of civilian lives.
Another issue of concern is the narcotics situation
in Afghanistan, in view of the nexus between the drug
trade and the activities of the insurgents and criminal
groups that finance terrorism and corruption. My
delegation is encouraged by the reported albeit modest
decrease in both poppy cultivation area and opium
production. We note that opium production is now
confined to only seven provinces where the insurgents
remain very active, out of a total of 34 provinces where
such production took place previously.

26

With regard to counter-narcotics efforts, we
recognize the monumental task that remains for
Afghanistan if it is to eradicate the drug trade, in view
of the insurgency and the task of providing alternative
livelihoods to poppy growers. In addition, counternarcotics officials and enforcers are constantly
threatened and intimidated by corrupt officials and
traffickers.
From the report, we learn that some 77 members
of the eradication force were killed this year, a six-fold
increase over the casualties from last year. While
efforts appear to be being taken at the country level to
further ensure success in the counter-narcotic efforts in
Afghanistan, the international community also needs to
curtail the demand side of the opium trade in
Afghanistan, including by reinvigorating international
efforts to clamp down on the drug route going out of
Afghanistan. The adoption of Security Council
resolution 1817 (2008) to, inter alia, curtail the
diversion and trafficking of precursors from exporting
countries to Afghanistan and neighbouring countries
should, if implemented thoroughly, contribute towards
greater success in counter-narcotics efforts in
Afghanistan.
Security challenges in Afghanistan are as much
the cause as well as the result of the socio-political
situation in the country. The resolution of the situation
will require an integrated and concerted civilian and
military approach. Military actions alone are
insufficient when it comes to addressing the root
causes of the problem. At the same time, the
Government should also work to improve its delivery
systems, the quality of its governance and its respect
for human rights in order to foster credibility and
galvanize support for itself and its initiatives.
Furthermore, an all-inclusive national reconciliation
process is needed to avoid the marginalization of any
groups. My delegation is encouraged by the efforts
undertaken by the Afghan Government in this
direction.
For far too long now, Afghanistan has been
saddled with many daunting challenges that have
placed its people in a very precarious situation. The
time should come soon for Afghanistan to be raised out
of this hardship, which will only be possible if there is
continued support and assistance from the international
community. For Malaysia’s part, we reiterate our
commitment to cooperate and work closely with
Afghanistan and, where appropriate, with other

08-59517

A/63/PV.42

members of the international community. We will
continue to extend assistance to Afghanistan under the
Malaysian technical cooperation programme to develop
the much needed human capital in the various fields of
Afghanistan’s development.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): Turkey aligns itself with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
France on behalf of the European Union. However,
given the importance we attach to the situation in
Afghanistan, I would like to make a few additional
remarks in my national capacity.
At the outset, allow me to express our satisfaction
with the draft resolution that the General Assembly
intends to adopt this afternoon (A/63/L.17). We see this
draft resolution as a balanced document that reflects
both the progress made and the challenges remaining in
Afghanistan. It also builds upon and complements the
report of the Secretary-General (A/63/372), which
depicts the situation in a realistic manner and offers
helpful suggestions for the road ahead. We are
therefore proud to sponsor the draft resolution, and we
thank Germany for facilitating a broad consensus
around it.
First of all, we are as committed as ever to
helping Afghanistan build a secure, stable and
prosperous country. Turkey shares unique ties with
Afghanistan, so our commitment to see this country
thrive and prosper is indeed deep-rooted. On the other
hand, as far as our concrete contributions to
reconstruction efforts go, I kindly refer participants to
the note annexed to the text of my speech, which
includes the inventory of our security and development
assistance.
Secondly, we are not at all pessimistic about the
prospects in Afghanistan. Despite continuing
challenges, mainly in the security, counter-narcotics
and governance fields, we are also aware of the
progress being made on many fronts. The statement
made by the representative of the European Union
touched upon many of these heartening achievements,
and I would like to emphasize them once again.
Accordingly, we urge everyone concerned not to
be discouraged by some temporary setbacks, which are
only inevitable in a war-torn country like Afghanistan.
We must always bear in mind the ultimate objective
that led us into Afghanistan in the first place. Of
course, the responsibility to achieve this ultimate
objective rests, first and foremost, on the shoulders of

08-59517

the Afghan people and their Government. And, indeed,
they have a long way to go. However, some of the
recent measures taken by the Government, including a
number of very encouraging steps in the fight against
corruption, give us additional reasons to be hopeful.
We thus call upon the Government to continue to build
upon this momentum and effectively fulfil the
legitimate expectations of the Afghan people.
At this point, I would also like to acknowledge
the importance of the national political dialogue, which
has recently gained renewed impetus in the country,
and we express our hope for it to yield the desired
results, namely, for a meaningful reconciliation under
the ownership and leadership of the Afghan
Government.
Thirdly, the Government and the people of
Afghanistan need and deserve the full support of the
international community in their endeavours to
transform their country. In this regard, we are pleased
to see the United Nations assuming a more active and
central role in coordinating and steering the efforts of
the
international
community.
The
Special
Representative’s focused and committed leadership to
this end merits particular commendation. It is now
imperative to translate this conceptual and
organizational improvement into practical progress on
the ground, while furnishing the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) with the
necessary resources. In this context, it is of paramount
importance that we increase the effectiveness of our
humanitarian and development assistance in a way that
will enable the ordinary people to feel the positive
impact in their daily lives. We should also heed the call
of the Secretary-General for a political surge and
deliver it in the form of a policy surge that will win the
hearts and minds of the Afghan people. That becomes
particularly important at this time with the increasing
numbers of civilian casualties, although the
responsibility for this unfortunate phenomenon rests
mainly with the terrorists and extremists. Furthermore,
the approaching winter, which brings the risk of a new
humanitarian crisis, also compels us to be vigilant and
responsive.
So, as our immediate target, we should all exert
every effort to make the next four to six months until
next spring a period of fulfilled promises and tangible
benefits for Afghanistan. Among other things,
improved regional cooperation is imperative for
achieving that goal. We are thus pleased to see

27

A/63/PV.42

emerging a new environment of dialogue and
cooperation between Afghanistan and Pakistan. For our
part, we are committed to contribute in every possible
way to this promising relationship, including through
the trilateral cooperation process between our
countries, which recently had its second summit
meeting in Istanbul.
In conclusion, I will recap very briefly. We are
moving in the right direction, but the road ahead is still
full of challenges. Therefore, we need to be even more
watchful and resolute. There is no doubt that the
Afghans themselves should be in the driving seat.
However, it is also imperative that the international
community continue to act in a spirit of partnership and
with a long-term vision and commitment. Turkey is
ready and willing to do its fair share in this regard.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.

28

The General Assembly will now take a decision
on draft resolution A/63/L.17. I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution the following countries have become
sponsors: Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Cambodia,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kuwait, Madagascar,
Mauritania, Palau, Paraguay, Qatar, Seychelles, Sri
Lanka, Thailand, Togo and the United Arab Emirates.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.17?
Draft resolution
(resolution 63/18).

A/63/L.17

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 17?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

08-59517
