UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

2574*

MEETING:

NEW

12 MARCH

1985

YORK

CONTENTS

pose
Provisional agenda (S/Agendal2574)

.. ... .. .... .... .... ... ... ... .... ... ..

I

Adoption of the agenda ,*..............................................

I

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 28 February 1985 from the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Egypt to the United Nations addressed to the Resident of the Security Council
(S/Mm)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..~..............

I

VW.2574

NOTE
Symbol of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United. Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol W . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Offlcl Records
of the SecurityCorutcil.The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The nsolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutims
andDecisions of the
Secur&y Cot&/. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before I January 1965. became fully operative on that date.

2574th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 12 MaRb 198§, at 4.30 p.m.
Prpsident; Mr. Blake RABETAFIKA

3. I shall now make a statement in my capacity a’ repte.
sentative of MADAGASCAR.

(Madagascar).

Present; The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China. Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Provkio~I
1. Adoption

4. Since the entry into force of a so-called new constitution, the Pretoria authorities have been stepping up their
delaying tactics to pewtuate the white minority’s domination and power.
5. That is why the Pretoria regime, anxious to improve
its image in the eyes of the international community and
to break out of its isolation, announced a series of lpforms
which appeared to be in the interests of the black population and proposed to the African National Congress of
South Africa (ANC) the beginnings of a conditional diilogue. Regional bodies and municipal councils. ilected by
a small minority, have been set up in order to give the
impression that black South Africans will be exercising
their political rights through these new institutions. In the
same way, it is intended to establish an “infomlal forum”
which would enable black to discuss their political
future. Another example of this was the decision to gralu
16 ghettos their own police units, which would relieve
white police oflicers of their increasingly d&red&d
role
in the alleged maintenance of order.

apeada (s/Agead;r/zS74)

of the agenda

2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 28 February 1985 from the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Egypt to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (s/16991)
The meeting was called to order at 5.15 p.m.
Adllp4haruwageadp
The age&

was adopted.

llleqlestkoor!8alibArriau
Letter WetI 211 Pebmary 1835 frcnn tlw Deputy I%manertt Represeatative of Egypt to ti United Nations
lIdd~tOUW-dtbesocprhycwadl
(!3.46991)

6. Finally, we must recall the recent oNer to release Nelson Mandela and other South African political prisoners
on the condition that they renounce violence as a political
means. even though the United Nations, in many resolutions, has urged the Pntoria authoritk to release without
prior conditions all those imprisoned under the arbitrary
State ncurity laws and all those detained for their opposition to the apartheti r&me.

1. The PRESIDENT: (htterp~tation from French): In
accordance with decisions taken by the Council at its
2J7lst meeting, 1 invite the representative of Guinea to
take a place at the Council table; 1 invite the rcpresentatives of Democratic Yemen. South Africa, the Syrian Arab
Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania and Viet Nam
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

7. Naturally, the black population and its leaders, the
black trade unions and all opponents of upor&& have
rejected these alleged reforms. Indeed. all these vague
reformist gestures are designed only to strengthen the
domination of white State power over the non-white
majority, both in the political and economic spheres and
in all other areas.

At the invitation of the Resi&nt, Mr. To& (G&tea)
took a place at the Council table; Mr. AI-AI/I (Democratic
Yemen), Mr. von S&n&g
(South Aftica), Mr, I3Fattal
(Syrtan Arab Rep&c), Mr. Lweno (United Republic of Tanson@ and Mr, Le Kim Chung lViet Nom) took the places
reserved for tkem at the skie of the Council chamber.

8. Thus. it is hardly surprising to see a strengthening of
the black population’s resistance to the oppressive opprrheld r&me. This resistance takes several forms. Schoolchildren continue to shun the teaching system imposed
upon .them: labour unions issue strike orders; and the
action launched by the miners’ unions on 5 and 6 November I984 bears witness to the vitality of their movement.
Ghetto dwellers refuse to be moved by force to “concentration camps” and rebel openly against the racist r&lime.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/l7013/Rev.l,
which contains the text of a revised draft
reJdution submitted by Burkina Faso, Egypt, India, Madagascar. Peru and Trinidad and Tobago,
I

9. In the face of this determination of the population to
tight injustice and inequality, the racist rfgime has
unmasked itself and has begun a new escalation of repression. The police apparatus, already infamous for its blind
massacms, no longer sutliced. and the South African
Government called out the army to put down the rebellion
of the defenceless inhabitants of Crossroads, killing some
20 victims and wounding 230.

14. My delegation pays a tribute to the oppressed people
of South Africa for their heroic resistance to the upartheid
regime and reatlirms the legitimacy of that people’s strugglc to eradicate the apartheid
system in order that a
united, non-racial and democratic South Africa may
become a reality and not just a hypothesis or a mirage

IO. The forced displacement of the inhabitants of the
townships is part of the policy of bantustanitation. whose
ultimate goal is to prevent the formation of a South African nation, to dispossess the majority of their land, and to
strengthen the political and economic domination of the
white minority.

16. The reprcsentativc of Guinea wishes to make a statcment as Chairman of the Group of African States for the
month of March, and I now call on him.

IS.

I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT.

17. Mr. TOUR& (Guinea) (kterpretation
from French):
With the permission of the Council, we should like to
extend to the Soviet delegation. on behalf of the Group of
African States and on our own behalf, deep sympathy on
the death of the President of the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
and General Secretary of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The death of Mr.
Konstantin Chernenko is a gtvat loss to the Soviet people
and the peoples of the entire world. Africa has lost in Mr.
Chernenko a friend in the African people’s struggle against
the policy of apartheid of the racist South African regime.
We ask the Soviet delegation to be kind enough to extend
to the family of the deceased and to the people and
Government of the Soviet Union our deepest condolences.

I I. Worse still, on Ig February the racist authorities of
South Africa, casting off their mask of pcacefuhtess and
new dialogue, arrested eight leaders of the United Democratic Front (UDF). Those leaders have now joined their
e+ht companions-in-struggle
who have been languishing
in gaol since August 1984. At the same time, labour union
leaders, students and leaders of mass organizations have
been detained. Sixteen of them have been charged with
high treason and therefote ate liable to the death penalty.
Titus, almost 30 years after the notorious trials of South
African patriots, the methods of the racist regime have
scarcely changed.

18. Having said that, we wish at this stage, on behalf of
the Group of African States, to thank the delegations that
contributed, during the intensive consultations that took
place following last Friday’s meeting [ibid..] of the Council, to the revision of the draft resolution which we hope
will be adopted unanimously by the Council. The unanimous adoption of the draft resolution by the Council will,
we are sum. be a message reflecting the international community’s indignation and its condemnation of the barbaric acts committed by the racist regime against the
African majority and reallirming the right of the people
of South Africa to struggle by all means to regain their
legitimate rights.

12. The international community cannot remain indifferent to the dangerous developments in South Africa. In the
face of the inttartsigenee, cruelty and continuous brutality
of the uponircld *me,
we can only teatlirm the legitimacy of the struggle of the South African people for liberation and renew our total support for the struggle of the
oppressed people of South Africa, under the leadership of
its national liberation movement. It is encouraging to see
that public opinion in the countries that are held to be
allies of South Africa is becoming aware of the plight of
the South Aftican people and bringing pressure to bear on
the leaders of those countries with a view to securing the
effective implementation of United Nations resolutions
designed to isolate South Africa.

19. The PRESIDENT (I#tfer~~~af~oa/rom Fimch): It is
my understanding that the Council is prepared to proceed
to the vote on the draft resolution now before it. I I hear
no objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.

13. My delegation isstill convinced that the present situation in South Africa derives from the continued imposition
of the policy of aprfheti
and racial discrimination by the
South African minority r&me, as well as from its contemptuous dismissal of Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions. The members of the Council were
not fcloled by the arrogant and hypocritical statement of
the representative of South Africa [257/r/ mpermrrl, who
denied the justification for the agenda of the present meeting. The Pretoria agent even insulted the wisdom of the
Council by his sly. underhand criticism of the countries
sponsoring the draft resolution before the Council. But
those countries have nothing to learn from the exponents
of racial discrimination and oppression. If racist South
Africa wishes to be readmitted to the comity of crvilized
nations, it must completely eliminate the practice of apartheid, which is a crime against mankind.

20. First, I shall call on members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting
21. Sir John THOMSON (United Kingdom): The fact
that for the fourth time in seven months the Council is
considering a draf! resolution on South Africa reflects the
turmoil which continues in that country. We have
recorded the United Kingdom’s views during the adop
tion of Council resolutions 554 ( 1984), 5% t i984) and 558
(1984). The further spate of deaths, injury and violence.
this time focused on the community of Crossroads, has
provoked uniform condemnation. Likewise. the continuing exclusion of black South Africans from political life,
the denial to the large majority of the population of South
2

Africa of the civil and political rights which, in the democratic nations, we regard as fundamental, and the policy
of forced removals are deplored throughout the world,
No wonder there was widespread disappointment at the
statement by the representative of South Africa. It is
because the United Kingdom fully shares the concern
about these events already expressed by other members of
the Council that we shall vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

The draft resolu~iun
was adopted unanimously [resolution
560 (1985-J.
27. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation frum French): I
now call on those representatives who havt asked to be
allowed to make statements after the voting.

28. Mr. CLARK
(United States of America): The
Government and the people of the United States share the
deep sense of concern expressed by other member: of this
body in mgard to a number of recent developments inside
South Africa, in particular the continuing civil unrest in
various parts of the country and the arrest of I6 opposition
leaden on charges of high treason. We share also. therefore, in the general sentiments contained in the resolution
we have just adopted and in the deep feelings of those who
put it forward.

22. At the same time, we in the United Kingdom have
acknowledged that some highly significant developments
are taking place in South Africa. It is impossible to tell
where they will lead but. equally, it would be prejudicial
to pretend that they are not happening. In his important
speech of 25 January, the South African State President
indicated greater flexibility and a commitment to a fuller
dialogue between his Government and black opinion in
South Africa. The Council should encourage dialogue
between the South African Government and a fully representative cross+ection of black South African opinion.
The Council must not rule out peaceful change, but must
press for the fundamental reforms which will be needed to
satisfy the legitimate aspirations of South Africa’s black
majority. We therefore do not interpret the reference to
the legitimacy of the struggle as relating to armed struggle
or extending to the use of force.

29. The view of the United States Government on the
question of a@teid
is very clear. We have stated it frequently, forcefully and at the highest level: we abhor
upurtheid. Institutionalixed racial discrimination is contrary to those ideals which animate political and economic life in our country. It is contrary to everything our
country stands for and believes in. We have made our
feelings on uprtheid known, moreover, not in rhetorical
flourishes and by hurling insults and condemnations, but
in direct and forceful discussions with the South African
Government itself.

23. My Government’s concern about the recent arrest of
leading members of the UDF, a non-violent organisation,
is a matter of public record and has been expressed
directly to the South African Government. It would of
course be wrong for the Council to prejudge the outcome
of legal proceedings, or to take action which could have
an adverse etfect on those concerned. That is not the purpose of the draft tesolution. which in its nvised form
simply appeals for the charges of high treason to be
dropped.

30. Our goal has been to promote reform in South
Africa. We seek to encourage the transformation of South
Africa into a society that provides equal opportunity for
all its people4
society that provides all people the
opportunity to live in dignity and to enjoy the full social,
political and economic beneftts of the land of their birth.
We seek this transformation through peace, not through
violence; through evolution, not revolution. We have
committed ourselves and our influence to this endeavour.

24. In the klief that a message from a divided Council
would have been counter-productive, my delegation has
worked hard with other members to try to secure a consensus. While I must reiterate my Government’s previous
reservations about certain aspects of the draft resolution,
including the tendency to exaggerate an already serious
situation, I must also express our satisfaction that, thanks
to the constructive spirii on all sides, a consensus ha9 been
achieved which reflects the broad concerns of the Council.

31. The pocesr of transformation4
transformation
that can lead to a government fully tep,esentative of all
South Africa’s peoples and based on the consent of the
governed-is a process in which all South Africam should
be involved. The prm
is complex and is bound to be
arduous. Our role is to encourage and, to the extent possible, to facilitate the process of change. It is our judgement
that a genuine process of reform is under way in South
Africa and that the Government of that country has made
its decision to move away from a~r/he~. This has created
a new dynamic of change. Further change is not only desirable, it is inevitable. Important decisions and commitments have already been made and we recognize these. At
the same time, much more must be done.

25. Like others who are looking for rapid and peaceful
change in South Africa, the Rritish Government hopes
that the ideas outlined in Resident Rotha’s speech will k
followed, at a very early date, by the implementation of
major reforms; and that we shall forthwith see an end to
violence and repression, and the urgent initiation of a
genuine dialogue within South Africa.

32. It is our strongly held view that a dialogue among all
South Africans is a key step-indeed, an essential stepin the process ot dorm. it is in this context that we
deeply mgret the arrest of I6 opposition loaders in South
Africa and the decision to press charges of treason against
those individuals. It is not for us to take a position on the
validity of these charges, since as yet the trials have not
begun and no evidence has been presented. There is a real

26. The PRESIDENT (Inrerpneru/lon fim Frpnek): I
shall now put the draft resolution contained in document
S/I70IYRev.I
to the vote.
A vote wus taken

by show of hands.
3

question, moreover, of the capacity of the United Nations
to sit in judgement over the legal processes of a Member
State. One is reminded of the saying about glass houses.
Rather, our concern over the impending trials in South
Africa stems not only from our strong commitment to
human rights throughout the world but also from the fact
that the very decision of the South African Government
to seek these trials detracts from that Government’s own
stated commitment to seek a dialogue with black leaders.
In the present cinzumstanccs. the trials are inopportune
and are bound to detract from the success of this
dialogue.

race. I should like to request the representative of the
Soviet Union to convey our sentiments of sympathy and
condolence to his Government and to the bereaved
family.
37. 4110~ me also to take a moment to convey my gratitude to the many speakers here this morning and earlier
this month who have made many kind references to my
country and to me personally for my conduct of the presidency of the Council for the month of February. May I
also take this opportunity to felicitate you, Mr. President.
on your exemplary conduct of our proceedings and to
renew to you our fullest support in the discharge of your
onerous responsibilities.

33. The continuing civil unrest in South Africa is also a
matter of deep concern to the United States. Our sympathy of ame
goes out to the homeless, the jobless, to
those unable to acquire an adequate education and to the
other downtrodden elements of that society, In South
Africa, as &where,
we tecognize the need to remedy the
injustices of the past and, especially, to put an end to
those that continue. We can only reiterate our encouragement and our willingness and determination to help in
any way we can. It is our deepst desire that the changes
that must come. and will come, to South Africa be undertaken without recourse to further bloodshed, and that
dialogue replace confrontation, We call on the Government of South Africa to move forward with all possible
haste on the reforms it has outlined, to move forward
with the upgrading of Crossroads and its transformation
into a permanent residential area, to move forward to end
all fotced removals. to move forward with the expansion
of tesidency rights for all its people and, indeed, to move
forward towards the society of equal justice under law
that we all wish to see.

38. The Council has just adopted resolution S&)0( 1985). It
has done so unanimously. The sponsors of the resolution-But kina Faso, Egypt, India. Madagascar, Peru and
Trinidad and Tobago-feel gratilied that the spirit oftlexibility and accommodation displayed by them in agreeing
to a number of amendments has helped secure unanimity
in support for the text from members of the Council.
39. With this resolution the Council has sent a clear and
unequivocal message to Pretoria-a message which reiterates the universal condemnation of the policies of the
mcist minority @me, a message which categorically
affrms that the Council and the international community
cannot and will not countenance the continued practice of
agc&eid. that it will not tolerate the killing of defenceless
people, that opposition to and struggle against uprtheid
is not treason but, quite on the contrary, entirely legitimate, to be commended and deserving of support. The
Council has called directly on South Africa to withdraw
the charges of high treason against the UDF offtcials concerned and immediately and unconditionally
to release
them, as well as all political prisoners and detainees in
South Africa.

34. aSpite our strongly held views on the need for
change in South Africa, there are specific formulations in
the tesolution which we have just adopted to which we
must take some exception. ln particular, we have objected
to the prejudghtg of the judicial process in South Africa.
We tegtet that the tesolution neglected to call for observance of jttdiiial due process, including such important
elements aa a speedy trial and access to legal counsel. We
afso tagmt deviations from language proper to a Security
Council molution.

40. To the many freedom-loving persons now languishing in South African prisons, the message is that they and
the millions of opptessed and dispossessed people of
South Africa are not forgotten in their plight and ptcdicament. The Council’s resolution is a beacon of hope and a
manifestation of the international community’s solidarity
with and support for them in their noble cause and just
struggle.

33. In spite of these reservations, our strongly held views
on the situation in South Africa have led us to join with
otheta in consensus within the Council.

41. The arrogant statement of the representative of
South Africa to which you, Mr. President. speaking as
representative of Madagascar a few minutes ago, referred,
deserves an appropriate rebuttal. The resolution now
adopted by the Council represents just that.

36. Mr. KRISHNAN (India): Permit me first of all to
exptess the heartfelt sympathy and condolences of my
delegation to the representative of the Soviet Union and
his delegation on the sad passing away of Mr. Konstantin
Chcmenko, General Secretary of the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union and Chairman of the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet of the USSR. As our Prime Minister, Mr.
Rajiv Gandhi, stated m his message oi condolence, President Citernenko dedicated his life to the welfare of his
country and served the people of the Soviet Union from a
young age in many diffeerent and responsible capacities. In
the international field too, President Chernenko took
many initiatives for peace and to contain the nuclear arms

42. The Council has spoken with one voice. The significance of this fact will. we are sure, not be lost on the
Pretoria r&hne.
43. Mr. OLEANDROV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (inrprprerorlan fiefrt &.&I):
The Soviet delegation expresses its deep thanks to the representative of
Guinea, who spoke also as the Chairman of the Group of
African States. and the representative of India, who
4

I

expressed their qmpat&
bn the death of the General
Secretary of the Cent& Committee of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union and President of the Presidium
of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Konstantin Ustin*
vich Chemenko. We shall pass an these expressions of
sympathy to the Soviet Government and to the family of
Mr. Chernenko.

44. The PRESIDENT (inrerpretutlcm fi& lihcdt): The
Council has thus completed the present stage of its cons&Jeration of the agenda item before it.
Tile meerhg rose at 5.45 p.m

L!tboinUnltdNUhme.NoarYorlt

00300

90&439-JMIK

1994--I.925
