UN1

I

NATI‘ONS

TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 5 DECEMBER 1969

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 5 17) . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

I

Statement by the President ....................................

1

Adoption of the agenda ......................................

1

Letter dated 27 November 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/95 13) . . . . . . , . . , . . .

1

S/PV.1517

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of fhe Official Records of the Security Council, The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

ED AND SEVENTEENTH ,MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 5 December 1969, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. V. J. MWAANGA (Zambia),
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

Sierra Leoneand Tunisia,which hasbeencirculated today
in, document S/9531. Those four representativeshave
expresseda desire to be allowed to participate in the
Council’sdiscussionon the questionbeforeit. If I hearno
objection, I proposeto invite them,in accordancewith the
usualpractice of the Council and the provisionalrulesof
procedure, to participate in our discussion,without the
right to vote.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l517)
1. Adoption

of the agenda.

2. Letter dated 27 November 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Senegal addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9513).
Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT:
Before we proceed with the adoption of the agenda and before we resume our consideration
of the question on our agenda, I wish to inform members
that our schedule of meetings for this month so far does
not promise to be an easy one and I appeal to members
who wish to make statements and to take part in the
present debate to inscribe their names with the Secretariat
with a minimum of delay. This will enable us to speed up
our work and I am sure you all want to spend the
forthcoming Christmas holidays with your families.
Adoption of the agenda

4. SinceI seeor hear no objections,I take it the Council
agreesto the invitations. Owingto the lack of spaceat the
Council table I shallinvite the four representatives
to take
seats at the side of the Council chamber, it being
understoodthat they will be invited to take a placeat the
Counciltablewhenit comestheir turn to take the floor.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. L. H. Diggs
(Liberia), Mr. B. Rabetafika (Madagascar),Mr. D. Nicol
(Sierra Leone) and Mr, A. M’Sadek (Tunisia) took the
placesreservedfor them.
5. Mr, BOYE (Senegal)(translatedfrom French): Mr. President, may I just saythat Senegal
challenges
the representative of Portugal to prove that Senegal’s
troops supported
the attacks of the PAIGC (Partido Africano de Indeperzdenciada Guint; e CaboVerde).The truth is contrary to the
affirmation madeby Mr. Miranda.
6. The PRESIDENT: Doesthe representativeof Portugal
wish to answerthe questionjust posedby the representative of Senegal?

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 27 November 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Senegal addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9513)
2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the usual practice of the Council and with the provisional rules of
procedure, and with the decision taken at the 1516th
meeting yesterday afternoon, I propose now, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Portugal, Guinea and Morocco to take seats at the Council
table in order to participate in our discussion, without the
right to vote.
At the invitation of the President,Mr. F. B. de Miranda
(Portugal), Mr. M. L. Conde (Guinea) and Mr. A. T.
Benhima (Morocco) took placesat the Counciltable.

7. Mr. MIRANDA (Portugal):I shallcertainly reply to the
statementjust madeby the representative
of Senegal,but I
will askfor the floor at alater stage,if you will permit.
8. Mr, BERARD (France) (translated from French):
Mr. President,I shouldlike to add my warmestcongratula
tions to thoseyou haveaddressed
to your two predecessors
as Presidents.The rare qualitiesof both have beenknown
andappreciatedfor manyyearsin the UnitedNations.YOU,
Mr. President, belong to a younger generation, but the
often quoted lines of the Frenchpoet, “La valeur n ‘attend
pas le nombre desan&es’: could neverhave beenapplied
more aptly. Since you have been working with us in the
United Nations, and more particularly in the Security
Council, each one of us has acquired full and friendly
confidence in the manner in which YOU conduct our
meetings.

9. On severaloccasionsalready the Security Council has
3. The PRESIDENT: Last eveningI receiveda letter from
the Permanent Representativesof Liberia, Madagascar, had before it complaintsmadeby African Statesafter the

violation of their territorial integrity by elements of the
Portuguese armed forces. Senegal, a long-time friend of
ours, which. since its independence has made a constant
contribution to the development of cordial relations between States and which since 1961 has evinced a long-suffering and pra$eworthy patience when subjected to continuous pressures on its frontiers, has unfortunately not
been spared, On two occasions already, in April 1963 and
May 1965, Portuguese military forays on its territory have
compelled Senegal to bring highly regrettable incidents
before the Council which, in its resolutions 178 (1963) and
204 (1965), has deplored these violations of sovereignty
and requested the Lisbon Government to take all necessary
action to avoid any repetition thereof,

which he has addressed to me, and particularly his
recognition of the fact that I belong to the younger
generation. My presence in this important chamber is proof
of the determination of the United Nations to bridge the
generation gap.
15. The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Sierra Leone, Mr. Nicol, and I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and make his statement.
16. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, my delegation wishes to congratulate you on your assumption of the
office of President of the Security Council, We are certain
that your wisdom and objectivity will ensure for the
Council a satisfactory period this month. We also wish to
congratulate Lord Caradon of the United Kingdom and
Mr. Yost of the United States on the successful completion
of their terms of office in the Chair.

10. My delegation is bound to note that such action as
may have been taken by the Portuguese Government has
not been as effective as the Council would have wished,
since once again the Council is called upon to consider a
complaint by Senegal in connexion with an incident which
caused one death and eight wounded, mostly women and
children. The complaint states, in fact, that the shelling,
apparently from 105 mm guns, caused only civilian victims.
My delegation had taken note with satisfaction of the
declared intention of the Portuguese Government, mentioned in resolution 178 (1963), scrupulously to respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Senegal. My delegation regrets all the more this commitment could not be
kept, even though, as the representative of Portugal
maintains, the action of the armed forces of his country is
to be considered as a reply to the provocation of armed
bands, probably not Senegalese, but which found refuge in
the territory of Senegal.

17. During the current twenty-fourth
session of the
General Assembly, the Manifesto on Southern Africa1 of
the Organization of African Unity received the overwhelming support of Member States. It is a declaration
championing freedom, the elimination of racism and the
maintenance of the territorial integrity of independent
African States. We have now received, in document S/9513
of 27 November 1969, less than a month later, news of a
savage attack by Portugal on an independent African State,
Senegal, during which there was at least one death, and
several were wounded, In his contribution to the debate on
the Manifesto, the representative of Portugal, in concluding
his speech, said that his country wished to extend the’hand
of friendship to African countries, By this latest act of
aggression, it is obvious that his country is bent on
extending, not a hand of friendship but one of wanton
destruction and brutal attack. My delegation has joined
other States in asking for the convening of the Security
Council to consider this matter [S/9524 and Add. I].

11. Throughout the centuries France and Portugal, which
are almost neighbour countries, both on the European
seaboard of the Atlantic, have had relations marked by
mutual esteem and cordiality, However, my delegation feels
today it is in duty bound to pronounce itself clearly. It
cannot, whatever the reasons advanced by Portugal, approve of actions that ace contrary to Article 2 of the
Charter, which calls upon Members of the Organization to
“settle their international disputes by peaceful means”, and
to “refrain in their international relations from the threat
or use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State”.

18. Guinea (Bissau)borders, in the north, on the Casamance region of the free and independent Republic of
Senegaland, in the south, on the northern portion of the
Republic of Guinea, In 1951, to precludethe surveillance
of the United Nations, Portugal declared Mozambique,
Angola, Guinea (Bissau)and its other colonial territories
overseasprovincesof Portugal, with the intention of leaving
the impressionthat they constituted an integral part of
Portugal. Ten years later, in 1961,legislationwaspassed
to
grant the inhabitants of these territories citizenship and
representationin Lisbon, So far asAfricans are concerned,
however, these acts have proved to be untruthful and
dishonest,and millions of Africans are still being governed
by dictatorial Portugueseadministratorsand still suffer
from iniquitous identification procedureswhich are tantamount to passlaws and which virtually classify themas
second-class
citizens. The franchise has been arrangedin
such a way that in someterritories lessthan 2 per cent of
the Africans are qualified voters.

12. Bearing these principles in mind my delegation would
have wished that, rather than having recourse to military
action, Portugal would have sought by way of bilateral
negotiations a solution to the difficulties for which Senegal
does not appear to be in any way responsible. My
delegation recalls furthermore that the delegation of Portugal, in particular at the 1486th meeting of the Security
Council on 18 July 1969 on the complaint of Zambia, had
stated it was in favour of such negotiations.
13. For these reasons my delegation requests that the
Council should adopt a resolution which may be deemed
satisfactory by Senegal and which will help to bring a
lasting solution to the problems Senegal had laid before us.

19. The statement, often quoted, that racismis absentin
PortugueseTerritories is equally dishonestin fact sincetIlis

14. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
France, Mr. Berard, for the over-generous compliments

1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fotrrth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 106, document A/7754.

2

4

to international peaceand security and, in the view of my
delegation, should be condemnedstrongly by the Council.

touches only a fragment, certainly less than 5 per cent of
the population, and most assimilados,that is Africans
thought worthy to be given Portuguesecitizenship, mulattos and Goansare condemnedto a statuswhere they can
seldom reach the highest position in their country in
mattersof social,economicandpolitical power.

24. It appearsto us to be a shockingviolation of human
rights and an insensitive,if not brutal, responseto a modern
progressiveoutlook that, on the eve of the tenth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independenceto
Colonial Countries and Peoples, Portugal, armed and
supported by wealthy allies,shouldhave continued to carry
out attacks on three independentAfrican countries.

20. Against such a dictatorship of forced labour and
arbitrary cruelty and murder, it is not surprisingthat in all
these so-calledoverseasprovinces of Angola, Mozambique
and Guinea(Bissau)Africans have beenforced to fight and
struggle for their freedom. Guinea (Bissau),Angola and
Mozambiqueare not provincesof Portugal,asthat colonial
country would like to have us believe. They are, rather,
Non-Self-GoverningTerritories within the meaningof Chapter XI of the United Nations Charter. This fact is amply
substantiatedby General Assemblyresolution 1542 (XV)
of 15 December1960, as well asby other resolutionsof
that body.

27. My delegation is unable to support the concept of
reprisalsin so-calledself-defencewhich the representative
of Portugal has given as the reasonfor the action of his
Government’s forces. We disagreecompletely with any
notion, expressed or implied, that countries which aid
liberation movementsin furthering their natural rights and
aspirations-the ultimate attainment of independencefor
colonial countries and peoples-are committing a crime.
Such an interpretation would in essenceconflict with
existing resolutionsof this Organization.

21. Portugal has armed itself well for its oppressionof
Africans and the suppressionof their’inalienablerights of
liberty and freedom, The budget for its military expenditure for this purposehas reachedover $200 million a year.
It continues to receive support from the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization(NATO) countriesunder the guisethat
it is a strong link in the defencepattern of that organization, an argumentthat is becomingincreasinglyirrelevant
with agreements
beingreachedtowards disarmamentand a
d&e&e being sought between the super-Powers.
It is an
argumentmade even more irrelevant when one considers
the evident and manifest ability of African countrieslike
Zambia, Senegaland Guinea neighbouring the oppressed
Portuguesecolonies,countries which are able to conduct
their affairswith skill and all evidenceof stability.

28. The representative of Portigal hasquoted Article 33
of the Charter, which reads:
“1. The parties to any dispute, the continuance of
which is likely to endangerthe maintenanceof international peaceand security, shall,first of all, seeka solution
by negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional agenciesor
arrangements, or other peaceful means of their own
choice.
“2. The Security Council shall, when it deemsnecessary, call upon the parties,to settle their dispute by such
means.”
It is the view of my delegationthat the present complaint
falls well within the provisionsof that Article.

22. Africans in Guinea(Bissau)are virtually in control of
large areasof the interior of the country andhaveparalysed
the PortugueseAdministration on the clear evidence of
such distinguishedcommentatorsas Basil Davidson who
have visitedthe country,

29. The whole argumentof the representativeof Portugal
and his air of sweet reasonableness
are basedon the false
premise that the overseasprovinces of Portugal are Portuguese.This, asmy delegationhaspointed out, is not so. The
inhabitants of theseTerritories do not appearto agreewith
this. The presence of 50,000 refugees in Senegalfrom
Guinea (Bissau) is not the response of people to a
we&loved regime.

23. Portugal,obviously disconcertedby its reversesat the
hands of freedom fighters, has now embarked upon
dangerousacts of aggression
againstneighbouringSenegal,
whose President, Leopold Se&or, was in fact once
reported to have sought, by persuasion,to bring about a
peacefulend to Portuguesecolonialism.

30. The truth of the matter is that the continued
persecution of Africans in these areas, the wholesale
burning of villages, the bombing of innocent women and
children, have driven thousands of Africans acrossthe
borders into free and independent African countries for
refuge, The Portuguesearmy haspursuedthem acrossthe
frontiers and haskilled those who have given them shelter.
If the representativeof Portugal wassodefinite about dates
of casualtiescausedby attacks of Senggalese
forces, why
did he not give details of those killed and wounded, aswas
done by the representativeof Senegal,who plainly showed
that women, children and old people had been wounded
and killed.

24. This Portugueseattack on Senegalwhich we are now
discussing
is by no meansnew. Resolutions178 (1963) and
204 (1965) of the Security Council attest to the stand the
Council took on earlier occasionswhen it rebuked the
PortugueseGovernmentand forbade it to makeincursions
into that country.
2.5. Wehave alsorecently heard,in the last two days, that
Portugal has attacked another neighbouringcountry, the
Republic of Guinea,thus doublingits act of aggression
[see
S/9525/. The restraint of thesetwo African countrieshas
been great, since together they could easily crush the
Portuguesein Guinea (Bissau).Theseacts of provocation
and aggression
without any doubt constitute a gravethreat

31. The oppressionof millions of Africans constitutesthe
hallmark of Portuguesecolonialism. The vicious backward3

39. In this connexion, I should like to refer to an article
which appearedin the 27 October 1969 issueof iVewsiw&
magazinewhich describesPortugal as the poorestand.mosr
backwardnation in Europe. Despitethis fact, that countr)
is able to maintain an army of morethan 150,000troopsin
the African territories under its domination, It is also;I
matter of common knowledgethat Portugal, in return for
renewingthe leasefor United States’ military installatlorrs
in the Azores, is requesting a weapons modernizatiini
programmecosting more than $200 million over the next
five years.

ness of their outlook in the twentieth century is a reflection
of the backwardness of the metropolitan, country of
Portugal and the bankruptcy of its colonial and domestic
policies.
32. The specific complaints before us are an overflow of
the internal suppression of Africans in Portuguese-dominated territories and must be dealt with firmly.
33. It is clear to my delegation that the time has arrived
for radical steps to be taken in this deteriorating situation.
34. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is t!le
representative of Liberia, I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and make his statement.

40. Portuguesecolonial hegemonyin Africa is an affr,mt
to the entire’ world community and those countriesherd
which are not willing to condemnand take positivestepst$*
bring to an end thesesavagePortugueseacts of terrorism,
are also making an unenviablerecord and reputation for
themselves.The peoplesof Africa are awakeand awarer$
the deliberations here. The Portuguesemilitary actlou,
which has brought death and destruction to the frlendl~
Republic of Senegal,will do nothing except to increasethe
will of the oppressedpeople of Guinea (Bissau)to free
themselvesfrom Portuguesedomination,,together with all
the aid that we, asmembersof the Organizationof African
Unity, can give to them in their just struggle.

35. Mr. DIGGS (Liberia): Mr. President and members of
the Security Council, it is with a great amount of justifiable
pride’ and identification that I congratulate you on your
accession to the Presidency of this august body for this
month. My delegationand the Governmentof Liberia are
grateful to you for granting our request to be allowedto
take part in this debate on the seriousand grave issueof
Portugueseaggression
now before the Council.
36. This is not the first time that the Liberian delegation
has come before this Council on the matter of Portuguese
aggression
in Africa. As a matter of fact, it wasonly a few
months ago that my delegationmade a statement before
this Council requesting action against Portugal for the
systematicmannerin which the Lisbon-based
Government
of Portugal has brought terror and destruction to the
African continent, The complaint by Senegalconcerning
the shellingof the Senegalese
villageby Portugueseforces,
as outlined in the Security Council document S/5913, is
too detailed an account for me to make any further
elaboration. The representativeof Senegal,Mr. Ibrahima
Boye, has given us a true picture in his account only
yesterday of the continued Portugueseaggressionagainst
his country and it is my duty to state, here and now, that
the representativeof the Lisbon-based
PortugueseGovernment has askedsomecompletely extraneousquestionsand
tried to evoke dissimulation,which hasonly had the effect
of stretchingour imaginationsto the breakingpoint.
37. The horror of war has been brought to a peaceful
Senegalese
village with the killing and wounding of innocent people.It is, therefore, with a deepsenseof bitterness
and feeling that my delegationseeks,once more, to call
attention to theseacts of aggression
by a foreign European
Power on the African continent.
38. The Lisbon-basedGovernment of Portugalis a member of one of the strongestmilitary alliancesin the world
today. It is a matter of deepconcernto my delegationthat
Portugal receivesactive military aid from its NATO allies
which is being used to suppressthe rightful aspirationsof
the people of the African territories under Portuguese
domination for self-determinationandindependence.These
weapons are also a matter of deep concern to my
delegation, becauseevery memberof this Council is aware
that the limited resourcesof Portugal would preclude it
from this policy of aggression,
without the active support
and participation of its NATO allies.
4

41. The Foreign Minister of Liberia, Mr. J. Rudolfrh
Grimes,statedbefore the GeneralAssemblyin 1962:
“One can understandthe reluctanceof the non-African
communities. . . to give up the specialprivilegeswhich
they now enjoy. One cannot understandtheir failure &r
realize that, in their own interest, this reluctancemusth
overcome.Have they readnothing of recenthistory’! l[‘drl
they not realize that of the long succession
of coloniahds
warsfought since1945, not one hasendedwith a victc?Q
far the moribund colonial cause?, , . Thosenon-Afric;rrrs
who still dream of clinging to power in Africa can hop
for no more success.. . . All they can hope to do is ttr
prolong a battle which they are bound to loseandwhich
will grow more and more bitter, more andmore futile. x
the months and years are allowed to passand the last
opportunities for conciliation are frittered away. WeII~BB
pray that the leadersresponsiblefor this vain effort llts
keep the book of history openforever . . . will be blcs.&
with a changeof heart and a clearingof visionbeforeit 8%
too late.“3
We have stated time and time again that POrtulVc*
aggression
is not limited in its scopeand seeksto bringwar
to Africa, despite the manifest intention of the Africarl
peoplesto liberate themselvesby peacefulmeans.
42.

43, 111that connexion, I shouldlike to draw the atrent*@
of the Council to the Fifth Conferenceof EastandCerltrsl
African Statesheld in April of this year at Lusaka,Zamll;b-1,
From that Conferenceemergedone of the most fat’-si&~ri’l
and comprehensivedocumentsto come out of Africa- tf%
Manifesto on SouthernAfrica, which is universallYacc@ed
asthe African attitude towardsthe colonialracist pOliC\; +@
our continent and the white minority Governments.
2 Ibid.,
pm. 36.

Seventeenth

Session,

Plenary

Meetings,

1132nd

mWfk%

44. Portugal must attune its policy to present-day realities
by realizing that eventual independence of the African
territories
under its domination is an assured fact. Its
suppression of the people of those territories will certainly
become as ineffectual as the command of Ring Canute who
ordered the waves of the ocean to recede.

Tanzania. Today we have the complaint of Guinea. We
know the protests of the Governments of the Congo
(Kinshasa) and the Congo (Brazzaville). And we are
confronted by a new dimension since Portugal continues to
occupy African territories,
51. Yesterday afternoon, the Portuguese delegation as on
previous occasions endeavoured to express surprise that
Senegal, instead of appealing to the Security Council,
should not first have resorted to traditional methods of
bilateral or intermediary interventions. In incidents of this
kind, we give priority to direct contacts to express
apologies, to offer restitution, and to give assurancethat
there will be no repetition of such incidents. Portugal
would have been justified in having recourseto such a
procedure, had it not, since 1961, neglectedsuch related
practicesas mutual respectamongneighboursand respect
for international law. Senegalcannot, like other African
countries, be swayedby considerations
of conventionand
procedure when a country occupyingneighbouringterritory extends its activity with almostcompleteimpunity by
committing aggressionagainstthe air spaceor territory of
neighbouringcountries.

45. I should like to conclude by reiterating that we
consider the premeditated Portuguese military actions
against African countries as a matter of the gravest concern.
My delegation once more asks that a strong condemnation
be made of those acts and that the Security Council take
the necessary steps to put an end to those acts of war
against the African people by a foreign European Power,
46. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Liberia for the statement he has just made, and particularly
for the brotherly compliments addressed to the Chair, 1 call
now on the representative of Morocco.
47. Mr. BENHIMA (Morocco) (translated
from I;)enchj:
1
should like to take this opportunity to express to you,
Mr. President, and to the Council as a whole, our gratitude
for enabling us to participate in the debate.

52. I should like to emphasizePortugal’s notion of
neighbourlinessin Africa. Portugal is not a neighbourof
Senegalin Africa in the sameway asit is a neighbourof
Spain, Being a neighbourof a country doesnot merely
imply having a commonfrontier with it. It alsohasethical
implications-the existence of excellent relations and
mutual respect. Thisfundamentalelementin the statusof a
neighbour is not presentin the caseof Portugalin Africa,
which brings up the questionof geographicalproximity
only whenthere areincidentssuchashaveoccurredall over
Africa, aswe have seenin the Security Councilseveraltimes
in the last few years.

48. My delegation wishes to speak, first because we have a
moral obligation in the United Nations to express our
solidarity with a country which is the victim of an act of
aggression such as the one now being considered by the
Council. We are also speaking, and I wish to emphasize this,
because of our strong spirit of solidarity with the Government and people of Senegal due to our centuries-old ties of
special friendship with them and to the legal relationship
between us as recently defined in a treaty of friendship,
solidarity and co-operation concluded between us.
49. This question has already been brought before the
Council several times. My delegation, when it had the
privilege of being a member of the Council, made it a point
already at that time to describe the dangers inherent in such
aggression and the risk that such incidents might be
multiplied.
Together with the delegation of Ghana we
endeavoured, in resolution 178 (1963) of April 1963, to
render justice to Senegal and to express in the resolution, as
forcibly as possible, the concern of the Council to find
measures which would prevent the repetition of such
incidents in the future. That concern was two-fold: to
ensure that the interests of Senegal would be safeguarded in
the future, and to avoid a situation where Portugal, which
already has disputes with the peoples of the territory under
its administration,
would aggravate its case in the United
Nations through the multiplication of crises and ii -idents
in its relations with those that it still wants to ‘all its
African neighbours.

53. Senegalhas lodged a complaint in the Council in
which it has stated againthat, havinglost all patienceand
having taken all necessary
precautions,it couldnot shirkits
responsibilitiesasa neighbourto the true peopleof Guinea.
In that respect Senegalhas precise obligations. When
populations flee from an occupiedterritory the first duty
of a neighbour is to open its doorsand offer succourto
them.
54, Senegaldoesnot have a direct conflict with Portugal,
but its obligationsasa neighbourto the peopleof Guinea
and asa Member of the UnitedNations,which hasvoted on
relevant resolutions concerningPortugal, imposeon it a
moral duty to support the action andthe struggleof that
people. It cannot becomethe victim of a country which
rejectsthe principles of the Charterandwhich invokesthe
Charter only against African countries supporting the
struggle of the colonized peoples,though these African
countriesrespectthe Charter.

50. Unfortunately,
in the last six years, it has become
apparent that neither the resolution of the Council nor
statements that have sometimes been most friendly towards
Portugal have been able to prevent such incidents. The Year
1969 has been particularly painful and costly for the people
of Senegal. You yourself, Mr. President, as the Permanent
Representative
of Zambia, had occasion last summer to
lodge a complaint against Portugal. We remember also the
protests of the Government of the United Republic of

55. If we open the door to this concept of the right of
pursuit, we shall seethroughoutthe world a certainnumber
of countries which, being engagedin a conflict in a given
regon, might expandthat conflict andspreadit all overthe
world. Unfortunately, centresof armed conflict exist in
practically every continent, andwe see,hereandthere, that
the aggressoror occupier exercisesa “right of Pursuit”
5

right to vote. Accordingiy I shall invite them to take places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber, it
being understood that they will be invited to take a place at
the Council table when it comes their turn to take the
floor.

which he does not have, since no such right exists in law,
and extends the conflict to neighbouring countries. I am
referring to what is taking place in the Middle East and in
the Far East, where countries are daily becoming victims of
aggression merely because under the pressure of facts they
opened their borders to exiles, or to people fleeing before
the threat of overwhelming military power. Perhaps the
impunity which some Powers have enjoyed in this respect
in recent years has convinced Portugal that its case would
benefit from the same indulgence or the same indifference
here.

At the invitation of the President, Mr, B. KassC (Mali),
Mr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) and Mr. M. ,S.AI&tar
(Yemen) took the placesreservedfor them.
60. Mr, CSATORDAY (Hungary): Whenwe aretakingup
again in the Security Council the outrageousacts of
Portugueseaggression,J cannot help but recall that on 20
November 1969 Mr. Miranda, the representativeof Portugal, concluded his statement in the GeneralAssembly
with the following words:

56. Beyond the present conflict involving Senegal, we
believe that the Council must not lose sight of this practice
which is becoming established in areas where there are
conflicts whereby the occupier and aggressor is tacitly
allowed to spread the conflict with impunity under the
pretext of subduing resistance movements or controlling
populations that are trying to free themselves from the
regime that is being imposed on an oppressed people.

“ . . . Portugal hasalways beenready to co-operatewith
all African countries. Realism and political wisdom
indicate that co-operation is in al1 events the most
constructive attitude in international life. There is no
substituteof equalvalue.

57. Concerning Portugal, I should like to say that it seems
illogical to us to hope that its NATO allies, which bolster
up Portugal’s military potential, could support it within the
alliance and condemn it here. And we would appeal to
them to distinguish clearly between the defensive objectives
of their alliance and the obligations of the Charter, so that
their attitude reflects the essential difference between their
responsibilities within the alliance and those within the
United Nations. Politically this problem is of considerable
importance since many speakers have reminded the Council
of Portugal’s resources and have wondered whether it could
rely on them to wage a costly colonial war which must
impose all kinds of hardships upon its people. They have
pointed out that Portugal seems to be renewing its potential
regularly so as to pursue the war indefinitely. There is a
contradiction there on which the Council should one day
throw some light.

“We believein co-operation. Wewant to co-operate,We
hold out our hand in friendship to all the African
countriesand we sincerely hope that it will be grasped.“3
Thesewere the words of the Portugueserepresentativeon
20 November, and only five days later Portuguesearmy
units shelled the village of Samine. The “peaceful” and
“friendly” hands of Portugal killed again and seriously
wounded “dangerous” African children, women and aged
men in a smallvillagein Senegal.This is only one of thelast
in a long series of criminal operations committed by
Portugal.
61, Lessthan five months have passedsincethe Security
Council had to repeatedly condemn, in its resolution
268 (1969), the armedacts of aggression
of Portugalagainst
another sovereign country, yours, Mr. President,which
causedthe loss of life of the innocent civilian population.

58. I know that when a problem has been presented
several times before the Council, most of its aspects have
been dealt with and commented upon and for this reason I
should, at this point, merely wish to express our total
solidarity with Senegal which has asked the Council to
consider the present incident not in the light of the victims
and damage, which some might consider insignificant, but
from the point of view of the principle, which has nothing
to do with the number of victims or the amount of damage
caused, since aggression is aggression, no matter what its
consequences, and it should not be gauged solely by the
number of dead and wounded, and the number of villages
destroyed.

62. It is most tragic that ten years after the general
collapseof the colonial systemin Africa, one remnantof
that anachronismstill exists there, and every effort by the
United Nations directed towardsa peacefulsolutionof that
problem seemsto come to a dead end. In the statement
that I referred to earlier, the representativeof Portugal
ventured to say: “The Portuguesesystemis not andnew
has been a colonial system in the modern senseof the
term.“4 He deliberately and repeatedly establishedthe
twisted philosophy of a so-calledPortugal in Europeand
overseas,decorating this idea with expressionssuch as
“pluri-continental State’:, “protracted historical proces<’
and so on. But no referenceto 500 yearsof history Or to
the early purpose of the expansion of Christianity can
camouflage the pure and classical colonial nature of
Portugal’spresencein Africa, Not even anarmy of invented
philosophicalaxioms can justify the imprisonment,torture

59. The PRESIDENT: At this stage I should like to inform
the Council that letters have just been received from the
chairman of the delegation of Mali [S/9533/ to the
twenty-fourth
session of the General Assembly and from
the Permanent Representatives of Saudi Arabia, Yemen and
Syria [S/9534, S/9533, S/9536] requesting that they be
allowed to participate in the discussion of the question
before the Council. In accordance with the usual practice
and with the provisional rules of procedure, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
those countries to participate in our discussion, without the

3 Ibid., Twenty-fourth Session, Plenary Meetings, 1814th meeting,

paras.108-109.
4 Ibid., para.11.
6

and execution of African freedom fighters in Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau), or the cruel attacks by
the Portuguese army and air force against Zambia or the
killing and wounding of innocent civilians in Senegal and
Guinea,

been found guilty on several count&: violating the most
basic of human rights; maintaining the colonial system-in
spite of basic provisions of modern international law-in
Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau); preventing the
exercise of the right to national self-determination; suppressing by military force, and in the most brutal manner,
the lawful popular resistance to illegal domination; violating
the borders of Senegal and other sovereign African countries, thus cornmit.ting acts of aggression; murdering civilians in the area, and destroying their homes and belongings.

63. These recent acts of aggression which we are facing
now is only another example of that classical colonialist
behaviour. We also know well that in pursuing that
colonialist behaviour, Portugal enjoys the uninterrupted
political, economic and military assistance of her former or
present colonialist’ partners in Europe, as well as overseas.
They share the responsibility for the atrocities and criminal
acts committed by their allies. Without this moral and
material assistance by its NATO partners, many of whom
are its long-time comrades-in-arms in colonial domination,
Portugal would be unable to maintain huge military forces
in Africa, armed to the teeth, in order to preserve the
so-called harmony in the so-called overseas provinces.
Portugal claims that self-defence prompts such a huge
military presence. This argument is well known; it is used
by Israel when practising bloody repressive me,asures against
the Arab civilian populations, and it is used hypocritically
in Viet-Nam by the aggressors who are crossing the Pacific
for this end.

66. All those acts run counter to the Charter of the United
Nations, violate the elementary rules of modern internationaP law, contradict the basic principles of political
conduct for civilized nations, and last, but not least, do
considerable harm to the real interests of the Portuguese
people itself.
67. In these circumstances, what is to be done? In the
view of the Hungarian delegation, the Security Council
cannot but condemn the wanton and premeditated act of
aggression against Senegal;condemn Portugal for occupying
territories and brutally oppressing peoples far from its own
legal boundaries; and call upon all States which are giving
such aid to withdraw from Portugal all their military and
economic support, whether on a multilateral or bilateral
basis. The Security Council should undertake the most
resolute action against Portugal that is in keeping with the
Charter of the United Nations. Finally, all States should
render to the peoples suffering under Portuguese domination every assistance towards helping them to achieve their
independence.

64. We dare agree, however, with the representative of
Portugal on one point, Indeed, there exists already in the
United Nations an ocean of papers about the situation in
Portuguese colonies on many different aspects. There exists
a sea of resolutions also condemning Portugal for violations
of various human rights, for maintaining colonial domination in foreign territories, for committing acts of aggression
against other nations, for attacking, killing and wounding
innocent civilians in foreign territories, and so on. All those
resolutions were adopted in various United Nations bodies
by an overwhelming majority, if not unanimously, and in
most cases with only the single opposition of Portugal
itself. This conduct by almost the whole membership of the
United Nations, by almost every nation of the world states
clearly that the colonial system, even in its Portuguese
variation, if a variation may exist, has become outmoded,
uncivilized, cruel and inhuman, and its maintenance is in
the sharpest contradiction to contemporary human norms.
Colonialism in itself constitutes a continuous aggression
against the African people, This system is doomed to
elimination, either by agreement or by force. Portuguese
colonies are the remnants and a shame of the twentieth
Century, a crime against humanity. The Hungarian People’s
Republic has never hesitated and will never fail to condemn
the colonialist policy and practice of Portugal, including its
aggressive and bloody actions against sovereign African
countries. We shall never fail to express our deep concern
over the stubborn and impertinent refusal of Portugal with
regard to the implementation of all the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly, as well
as to emphasize the responsibility of those States, members
or not of the United Nations, which render continuous
support to Portugal in its colonialist policy. We will also
continue our assistance to the liberation movements by our
modest means.

68. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Saudi Arabia, our esteemed colleague,
Ambassador Jamil Baroody, and I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and make his statement.
69. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, it is an
honour for me to participate in the debate on the current
item under your Presidency for the simple reason that you
symbolize the best in modern Africa that has emerged on
the world scene. But for a few enclaves that remain under
the colonial yoke, the free sons of Africa have proved
themselves as most worthy of our respect and admiration.
70. Regretfully, two colonial Powers are still entrenched
on the African continent, none other than South Africa and
Portugal. Today we are seized with Portuguese aggression
against our sister State of Senegal.Our Portuguese colleague
seems to rationalize the aggression of the Portuguese armed
forces against Senegal on the grounds that Portugal has
been provoked time and again, and had no alternative but
to take punitive action. That is the thesis of our Portuguese
brother-I call him brother, and you will know later why I
call him brother.
71. I shall not address myself to specific cases of aggress
sion, because were I to do that, as many of us sometimes
do I doubt if we should find the cause of the continued
trduble in Africa. This course of action is like a child
saying: He hit me and I hit him; then when I had another
opportunity to hit him, I hit him and,he hit me. Presenting
the case strictly on what is happening will not solve our
problem.

65. To sum up, Portugal appears before this world body as
a recurrent criminal of the international community, having
7

72. Suffice it for me to say that colonies are an anachronism in the era of the United Nations. Big Powers sawthe
light only after World War II, and were compelled to grant
freedom to the people who lived under their yoke.
Unfortunately, it took a second world war for them to see
the light, and if Hitler and Mussolini had no virtue
whatsoever, unwi,ttingly they were instrumental in liberating many peoples in Africa and Asia. Of course, I still
remember the aggression of Mussolini in Ethiopia, and I
don’t have to recall what aggression was perpetrated by
Hitler on the European continent, However, had it not been
for World War II, there would not have been an acceleration
in the movements of liberation in Africa and Asia.
73. But why did the great Powers-the metropolitan
Powers-liberate the peoples over whom they ruled? It was
strictly because of economic factors. They still had armies,
even after the war. They saw that they would become
totally insolvent; were they to remain in their colonies,
they would be bankrupt. And at a time when we shall soon
celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations, our friends here, the Portuguese, a small Power, do
not seem to heed the lessonsof history.
74, After the war, it took leadership amongst the British,
the French and the Dutch to grant freedom, sometimes not
always by compulsion but becauseof economic factors, and
I believe Portugal, which, in my opinion, had a better
background than the big Powers, does not seem to see the
light as to what should be done. Even more so, it pains me
to say, they do not see the light because even their
neighbour, Spain, willingly granted freedom to certain parts
of Africa, and we salute Spain for its political sagacity and
wisdom that characterized their action.
75. Africa is not dormant; it is seething with unrest
because of the ulcer in its stomach-its belly. If you look at
the map you find the Portuguese possessions inside the
African continent, I did not wish to use a figure of speech
by saying “cancer” because,I must say, the Portuguese are
different from some of the Nordic people who ruled certain
parts of Africa. I should not say “Nordic”, because that
might given an impression about Sweden, but rather
“northern” people; Sweden, Denmark and Finland are
composed of Nordic people.
76. Portugal is a Mediterranean country although most of
it lies on the Atlantic. But it has been influenced a great
deal by Spain which is a Mediterranean country and belongs
to the Mediterranean culture. I would not put Portugal in
the same boat as those countries that possessed great
empires, starting from the British Isles across the Channel,
from the Netherlands, or, for that matter, from France. The
Mediterranean culture is humanistic, whether it be the
eastern Mediterranean or the western Mediterranean. If we
look at the countries surrounding it, we see how much
humanity has benefited from the Mediterranean culture. We
cannot forget Magellan, the great explorer; I am not going
to enumerate the cartographers and others whom Portugal
produced.
77. But, above all this, Portugal wasnever racial. We know
that in their colonies-and I checked with those who came
from those colonies and are against Portugal-there exists a

multiracial society. They identify themselves with the
people like the Arabs do. You say, “Are you extolling the
Arabs? ” The Arabs have the gamut of aI colours and
ethnological orgins, Our Sudanese brothers are Negroes, but
they are Arabs. We occupied Spain for 800 years, and 1 am
sure Spain and Portugal owe much to Arab culture and
civilization. But the majority in the Iberian Peninsula, at a
given date, did not want the Arabs to rule them, and the
Arabs were chased out of Spain. Why? Becausethe people
opted otherwise when Isabel and Ferdinand occupied
Spain. If the people had opted for Arab rule, we would still
be in the Iberian Peninsula. But we are not because the
people did not want the Arabs to rule Spain any more. In
contrast, we find now that the peoples of the Portuguese
colonies do not want the rule of Portugal. Are you better
than we were in Spain? We cleared out of the Iberian
Peninsula. We have sympathy for you, but do not go too
far, because I would feel sorry for you since you cannot
afford the struggle that is being carried on by the peoples-I
say “peoples” because tiny Portugal has several colonies in
Africa.
78. I cannot improve on the statement that my brother,
Mohamed Yazid, the representative of Algeria, made the
other day about the liberation movements. He was not
speaking from books, Mohamed Yazid is among those who
struggled in order to liberate his homeland from a metropolitan Power which, at one time, considered-like my good
friend from Portugal does now-Algeria a department of
France, as if it were located across the Seine. It is on the
continent of Africa. And I recall that, when I first met him
in Paris, this gentleman, Mohamed Yazid, was 22 yearsold
and a member of the Algerian delegation, who waspleading
the cause of his own country without any rancour or hatred
for the French. But he and others had no alternative but to
fight. They tried to reason with the French, and the French
are noted for their liberal ideas. After all, the French
Revolution gave the European world freedom; before that,
people were feudal. He and his colleagues argued the
question.
79. Why do I talk about Algeria? Because in 1954 it fell
to me to submit the item for consideration by the United
Nations. It took a man of the stature of de Gaulle-may
God prolong his life and may the French gain more wisdom
from his action-to liberate and grant freedom to Algeria.
He saw that in the end France would become bankrupt.
How do I know this? Do not think I have dealt with the
question of Algeria only here in the United Nations. I was
making trips and talking with the French, even though we
had cut off relations with the French. None other than my
good friend George+Picot had several meetings with me-in
his club because he did not want to be seen talking with me
about this question; they would have asked him what he
was doing with Baroody, when his country had cut off
relations. Once I asked him this simple question: “Do YOU
think you can win the war with your 450,000? ” He wasa
United Nations man; he served as Assistant Secretary for
Social Affairs. We were talking shop, as they say. He said,
“To be frank with you, we may not be able to win but we
will not lose the war militarily.” Then I said to him, “Will
you lose it economically? ” He said, “Sure; we will.“’ “%%O
can solve this problem? ” I asked him, and he answered,
“Either Monsieur Pinay . , .I’, and I said, “Why Monsieur

Pinay? ” “Because he is an economist,” he replied, ‘“and he
LOWS
we will become bankrupt.”
“And who is the other
of the two who may be able to help solve this problem? ” I
asked him. He said, “General de Gaulle.” Here was a
Frenchman who was honest, who was at war with the
Algerians-a wise man; he was older than I am now; he was
about 70 years old. And yet he admitted that it was a futile
struggle.

unlessof course it usedthe atom bomb. And then the
Chinesewould join the war. Godhelpusthen, because
you
would seeatom bombsexploding to the right and to the
left andwe shouldall be donefor-you and I also,because
of the fall-out. The Russiansare clever enoughnot to be
involved, but they might becomeinvolved, who knows? Of
course,our friend Ambassador
Malik is a humanitarianwho
would not want to seeanybody die, but he is not a free
agent. We should all be there. And why shouldit happen
becauseof Portugal, a sympathetic country, a country
whosepeople love songsand peace?It is thosecliquesin
your country-there arecliquesin the smallercountriestoo,
to be fair to the big countries-andthe industrialistsin the
big countries who are interestedin war. They want to fill
their pockets; their patriotismis in their pockets.It is so
not just in your country but in every country that seems
to
pursuewar. Thosewho sellarmsarethe oneswho profit.

80. That is why I want to tell you to heed the lessons of
history, my brothers; nothing else. You are a good people.
It is your Government that has been misguided enough to
continue this struggle against the wishes of the people who
live in the dipartements of Portugal-colonialist dipartemerits. There are a thousand miles between Portugal and its
possessions.
81. Why is Baroody addressing himself to this question in
general and not to the specific item submitted by our
brother from Senegal? There could be many incidents
before you are finally beaten, as many others, stronger and
richer, have been beaten. We do not want to see innocent
Portuguese and innocent Africans sacrificed in war.
82. It is a matter of time before not only the people inside
your colonies rise against you but alsothe African peoples,
and not only those who are contiguouswith your colonies,
but African peoplesto the north and the south, except, of
course, South Africa-and the east and the west.They are
galvanized and will seeto it that sooner or later you are
expelled from the continent, just as other metropolitan
Powershave beenexpelled from the African continent.

86. But why look asfar asViet-Nam? In my region, for
20 years thy Palestinianrefugeeshavehad to live on four
centsa day. The usurpingState wascreateddeceitfully by
the United Nations, becauseof pressure,so that after 20
years those refugeeswould haveforgotten their homeland
and die. But the newgenerationof thoseself-same
refugees
thought otherwise. They are called terrorists by the
usurpingState, but we call them freedomfighters. It does
not matter what we call them; a roseby any other name
would smellassweet.It is not the namethat matters;it is
the action, The Arab countriesthemselvesdo not dareto
stop thosePalestiniancommandos,asthey are sometimes
called.
87. Doesnot Portugalhave somelessonsto draw from
history? I have spokenabout pasthistory; now I speakof
modern history. I mentionedthe Arab and Viet-Cong
guerrillas,or terroristsas they call them. Welike Portugal
and we do not want it to suffer.I hopethat my wordswill
not be taken in the wrong spirit becausePortugal has
proved itself to be a non-discriminating
Europeancountry,
it hasno racial discrimination;we know that and that is to
its honour, I can go on and speakat greaterlength but I
guesseveryone hasthe gist of my intervention, Is there a
solution? We comeand talk on thesemattersday in and
day out, there areinterminableincidents.TodayPortugalis
rebutting what our brothers from Senegalhave said;
tomorrow it will rebut what another African State that
lodges a complaint againstPortugal will say. There is a
solution.

83. What shall we do? Shall we cometo the Councilagain
with another specific case of aggression?You say they
provoked you, and you retaliated. Well, it is your privilege
to say that on behalf of your Government. But the fact
remainsthat this is a movementof liberation.
84. Now I shall give you another thought to ponder.It is
not a .thought; it actually happened.Again, I turn to our
brother Mohamed Yazid, the representativeof Algeria. He
may have forgotten a question I posedfor him becauseI
was handling this Algerian questionhere, in Europeandin
the Middle East-quietly, with no oratory; we talk too
much here in this Council, I saidto him, “Mohamed,how
many armed troops do you have in Algeria? What is the
number of your armed forces?” He replied, “Every
Algerian is a soldier. We do not have a regulararmy.” He
has forgotten that, but I am remindinghim. I said,“What is
the number? How many are participating in the conflict? ”
And he told me at that time-1 have forgotten whenit was;
it was 1957 or 1958-“It could be 15,000 or 18,000”. I
said, “Good Lord; what can you do against45O,OOO?
” He
replied, “We hit and run, and we chooseour locale.Wedo
not fight pitched battlesagainstthosearmedforces”-today
that is what we call guerrilla warfare, or liberation
movements. Call it by whatever nameyou want. They hit
and run. They do things that a regulararmy cannothandle.

88. My colleaguesand I know many of those who are
fighting Portugal. They come here and some of them
petition the GeneralAssembly,I speakto them and they
are reasonablemenlike the representativeof Portugalhere
today is personally reasonable,but they have to take
instructions from their Governments.There are many
responsiblepeople in Portugal.Why doesPortugalnot set
the ‘stagefor a Commonwealthuntil oneday whenit could
ask thosepeople “Do you wallt usto stay? You canhavea
plebiscite”, I can assurethe representativeof Portugalthat
his country will not becomebankrupt but it will enrich
itself morefrom thoseerstwhilepossessions.
Shouldwetalk
here in the strait jacketsof instructions,that getnowhere?
Here I have spoken to many of my colleaguesin the
Council. They agreewith me sometimeson variousissues

85. We have seenwhat is happeningin the Far East. The
Viet-Cong, those malignedViet-Cong, what are they’? Do
they come from Europe, or from the American continent’?
The might of the United States could not suppress
them,
9

question and how lucky are the South Africans that they
do not have a complaint against them today. Oh, what I
would not say! I content myself with what I have said,and
thank you, Mr. President, for your graciousness and for the
patience of my colleagues who have been kind enough to
listen to me.

but they tell me they have instructions. Why are we here?
We should enlighten our own Governments ,as Member
States wha are working for peace and there can be no peace
when peoples are suppressed whether in Africa or elsewhere, in the Middle East or the Far East. Time is of the
essence, because the longer you wait, the worse the
situation will be and the more blood will be shed. I have a
right at my age to say that I am really apprehensive that if,
as Member States, we do not. go by the rules of the
Charter-it should be rules, not principles only-we will be
lost and accomplish nothing.

91. The PRESIDENT: I express to the representative of
Saudi Arabia my gratitude for the complimentary words
that he addressed to the Chair. May I also thank him from
the bottom of my heart for having given us what he himself
has described in the past as humorous relief to our
deliberations.

89. The hour is late and I reserve my right to speak again
should there be any resolution or should I see the need for
taking the floor again, hoping in all sincerity-I am not a
Minister like other Ministers and there are a few Ministers
here in the United Nations;1 am not preaching a sermon. I
am speaking from my humble experience because in my
early days I was a nationalist. I know what nationalism
involves, No one can crush a people clamouring for their
independence, and Portugal no doubt has illustrious men
and it has a glorious history. It should see the light and not
grope in the darkness for ways and means to keep the
Africans under its rule suppressed. I apologize to you,
Mr. President, and to my colleagues for having spoken in an
unorthodox way but we cannot go on with stereotyped
phraies all the time.

92. I have just received frqm the Permanent Representative of the United Arab Republic a letter [S/9538/
expressing a desire to be invited to participate in the
Council’s discussion on the question before us. If I hear no
objection, I shall invite the representative of the United
Arab Republic to participate in our debates at an appropriate time without the right to vote.
It was so decided.
93. There are no further speakers on my list. Is there any
representative who wishes to take the floor at this time?
Since I have received no such request I shall adjourn the
meeting. In accordance with the views expressed in informal consultations, the next meeting of the Security
Council on this item will be held on Monday, 8 December
1969, at 10.30 a.m.

90. We have to approach problems in a novel way. As we
say, attack the serpent of colonialism not by cutting off its
tail but by scotching the head of the serpent of colonialism.
You may cut the tail in debate but you cannot kill the
serpent by cutting off the tail, This is a purely colonial

The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

10
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 0.5’0 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

82270-December

1972-2,050
