S/PV.8441

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8441st meeting

Wednesday, 9 January 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Singer Weisinger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Dominican Republic)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Edjang Nnaga
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on status of implementation of Security
Council resolution 2451 (2018) (S/2018/1173)
Report of the Secretary-General on status of implementation of Security
Council resolution 2451 (2018) (S/2019/11)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-00432 (E)
*1900432*

S/PV.8441

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on status of
implementation of Security Council resolution
2451 (2018) (S/2018/1173)
Report of the Secretary-General on status of
implementation of Security Council resolution
2451 (2018) (S/2019/11)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
Mr. Griffiths is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Amman.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2018/1173 and S/2019/11, which
contain reports of the Secretary-General on status of
implementation of Security Council resolution 2451
(2018).
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: The eyes of the world are focused on
the momentum generated at the end of last year for the
peace process by the consultations in Stockholm and
the hope of the tangible improvement in the situation
of the Yemeni people. As I stated to the Security
Council immediately after those consultations, the
success in Stockholm was its success. I must therefore
start by thanking the members of the Security Council
for adopting the resolution to which the President has
referred (resolution 2451 (2018)), which endorsed the
Stockholm Agreement, authorized the deployment
of the advance team to support and facilitate
2/20

09/01/2019

implementation, and expressed support for the
continuation of consultations early this year, including
on the framework for negotiations. I believe that the
resolution adopted last month (see S/PV.8439) sends
a very clear signal of the international community’s
support for the achievements that we were able to
bring together in Stockholm and our plans to build
subsequently on the momentum gained.
Today I will take all this opportunity to brief the
Council on the implementation of the commitments
made by the parties in Stockholm, namely, the
agreement reached on the city and governorate of
Al-Hudaydah and the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa; secondly, the executive mechanism on
activating the prisoner-exchange agreement; and
thirdly, the statement of understanding on Taiz. I also
hope to provide an update on our preparations for the
next round of consultations.
Since the Stockholm consultations and in very
recent days in this past week, I have had the privilege
of meeting with President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour, and also, indeed, with the Ansar Allah leader,
Abdulmalik al-Houthi. President Hadi Mansour, with
whom I met yesterday in Riyadh, warmly welcomed
the progress made in Stockholm and the Agreement
made there to which he was the key decider, and he
confirmed to me in very real and constructive terms
his hopes, as we all have, that this is an important first
step towards a comprehensive solution to the conflict.
I was interested to hear a reflection of exactly those
sentiments, when I was in Sana’a on Sunday, in my
meetings with Abdulmalik Al-Houthi, who firmly
told me in no uncertain terms of the decision and
commitment of his movement to implementing all the
provisions that were agreed in Stockholm. So they both
expressed determination to find a way forward and
to build further on the progress made in subsequent
rounds. I would like us all to bear that in mind, as I do,
when we look at the progress — some of it somewhat
difficult — on the implementation of those agreements.
But I am grateful to President Hadi Mansour and, of
course I am also grateful to Abdulmalik Al-Houthi.
This enthusiasm for actually making Stockholm
work and provide tangible differences on the ground
for the people of Yemen was also echoed by other
concerned parties and key Member States I have had
the privilege to meet since Stockholm and, in particular
in recent days, and I am grateful for their support and
they know who they are.
19-00432

09/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East

I am pleased to report that both sides have largely
adhered to the ceasefire we agreed in Stockholm in
Al-Hudaydah governorate that entered into force on
18 December and that there has been a significant
decrease in hostilities since then. Unfortunately,
and perhaps unsurprisingly, there has been some
violence, including in Al-Hudaydah city and in the
southern districts of the governorate. However, this is
remarkably limited compared to what we saw in the
weeks before the Stockholm consultations, and this
relative calm, I believe, indicates the tangible benefit
of the Stockholm Agreement for the people of Yemen,
and it also illustrates the commitment of both parties to
making their agreements work.
Thanks to the swift authorization provided by the
Council through resolution 2451 (2018), the United
Nations has deployed an advance monitoring team to
Al-Hudaydah, under the leadership of my esteemed
colleague Major General Patrick Cammaert of the
Netherlands, who arrived in Yemen on 22 December. In
this context, I should say that I think it is a remarkable
achievement that retired Major General Cammaert tore
himself away from other commitments and launched
himself with his team into the region at very short
notice to establish the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, the committee that will monitor the
agreements in Al-Hudaydah. We are very grateful to
General Cammaert.
That rapid deployment has given a clear signal to
the parties and the Yemeni people of the international
community’s desire to turn the Agreement into
facts on the ground. General Cammaert has chaired
several meetings of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, with the participation of representatives
from both parties, to oversee the implementation of the
redeployments and the ceasefire, as agreed to in Sweden
on Al-Hudaydah. He is working with the parties on the
details of the redeployments of forces, again as foreseen
in Sweden, the provision of security in the city and the
opening of humanitarian access routes, as agreed to
in Stockholm.
The activation of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, which has happened since the arrival of
General Cammaert in late December, is very welcome.
I urge both parties to continue to engage regularly and
in good faith with General Cammaert and his team
so that the security arrangements — and, crucially,
the improvements in humanitarian access — can be
implemented swiftly, in line with what was agreed

S/PV. 8441

to in Stockholm. That will build the confidence of
the parties, the Yemeni people and the international
community that what was talked about in Stockholm
can be a reality.
Regarding Taiz, as Council members will recall,
the parties agreed in Stockholm to the creation of
mechanisms to reach consensus on how to address
the situation in that city and governorate. Taiz is of
enormous historic significance for Yemen as a whole,
and the city and its people have been a driving force in
Yemen’s economic and cultural life for many years. To
give it a sense of proportion, the governorate of Taiz has
a population of 2.5million people, and the city of Taiz
has been divided, by virtue of the conflict, for some
considerable time. The civilians in Taiz have suffered
far too much for far too long, and the destruction in the
city has been dreadful. The flow of humanitarian aid,
of course, needs to increase and cross the line between
the parties, and the people need the chance to rebuild.
Those are the issues that we believe that the joint
committee, which I will refer to, is there to resolve.
Since Stockholm, I have talked with the parties and
many prominent people from Taiz — my office also met
the Governor yesterday — and they all want the city to
return to calm and for the people to have hope that the
city will flourish once again. I am glad that Stockholm
provides a potential platform for that.
With the agreement of the parties, we therefore
plan to hold the first meeting of that committee as soon
as possible, ideally this month. We are also working
on a civil society mechanism, including the significant
participation of women, to support that joint committee
in its endeavours. I am hopeful that what we might
plan to see in Taiz is something that we might also see
achieved in Al-Hudaydah, which should not be the only
beneficiary of the agreements that we made in Sweden.
On the agreement for the exchange of prisoners, we
are working with both parties to finalize the lists of
prisoners submitted by each in Stockholm. I particularly
want to record our appreciation for the invaluable
support provided by the International Committee of the
Red Cross in that regard. As agreed to in Stockholm, we
plan to hold a meeting of the supervisory committee,
which includes both parties. I am hopeful that it will
take place in Amman, from where I will be speaking
on Monday. That will be a step towards the day that we
hope to see of an airlift of many thousands of prisoners
exchanged and released to return to their families.

19-004323/20

S/PV.8441

The situation in the Middle East

I am grateful for the commitment and patience that
both parties have shown since Stockholm. Progress
on some of the issues has been gradual and, indeed,
somewhat tentative, but there is a tangible contribution
to peace. There are no doubt many hurdles to be
overcome in the days, weeks and months ahead, but I
would say here that the parties must not be diverted
from their commitments through issues of delays or
difficulties, which are unexpected. I ask for the support
of the Council in encouraging the parties to stay the
course and overcome together any challenges that may
be encountered along the way, and reminding them that
we are here to help them.
I am under no illusion that these are very sensitive
and challenging days for both parties and Yemen as a
whole. The war continues in other parts of the country,
which is why we need to make progress quickly. I call
on the parties to recognize that these first steps need
to be protected so that we can reach those other parts
of the country in due course. The conflict continues to
have a terrible impact on the economy and the overall
humanitarian situation, as I know Mr. Lowcock will
describe in a minute.
It was unfortunate that we were unable to reach
consensus on our way forward on the Central Bank of
Yemen while we were together in Sweden, and on the
opening of Sana’a airport during those consultations in
December. Both of those issues, if resolved, would make
a significant contribution to relieving humanitarian
suffering. Of course, as we discussed in the Security
Council meeting in December (see S/PV.8424), we
are continuing to work on finding solutions before the
resumption of the next round of consultations.
I should mention that, as ever, the demands of
southern groups are also a key part of the solution to the
Yemeni equation. I am grateful for the effort exerted
by key Yemeni stakeholders and the international
community to improve stability in the southern
governorates in recent months, which has been a
remarkable achievement. As I have always said, I am
committed to ensuring the participation of southern
groups in the peace process. I am continuing to work
with that goal in mind with a range of those groups.
Their contribution will be of vital importance in
fulfilling the hope of peace.
In conclusion, the message that I have been
receiving, particularly from the parties but also from
key Member States and those with an interest in peace
4/20

09/01/2019

in Yemen, has been consistent in these past days. It is
that we must implement what was agreed to in Sweden
and show substantial progress in those commitments if
we are to build the confidence that we have hoped to
create from them. There is a sense of tangible hope.
There is a sense of optimism, as well as concern. It is my
view, and it is shared by the leadership of both parties
but also others, that substantial progress, particularly
on Al-Hudaydah, is something that we would like to see
before we reconvene the next consultations.
Members of the Council will remember that in the
Stockholm Agreement there was an agreement to open
those consultations without conditions. It is not a matter
of conditioning that decision. It is a matter of making
progress so that in the next round we will not be dealing
with the issues that were experienced in the first. I am
therefore still hopeful that we can proceed to a next
round of consultations in the near future. I am working
with both parties to make sure that it will happen at the
earliest possible date, and that in those consultations
we will begin both to monitor the progress made out of
Sweden and discuss the fundamental issues that need to
be addressed to resolve the conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: The Stockholm Agreement and
resolution 2451 (2018) are already having an impact.
Reports from humanitarian agencies in Al-Hudaydah
indicate that civilians are a little more confident and a
little less afraid that they will be victims of air strikes
or caught in crossfire as they go about their lives. But,
as Mr. Griffiths just said, it is very early days, and we
must do everything we can to support the Stockholm
Agreement. We must keep reminding the parties that
international humanitarian law must be respected in all
locations and at all times.
I cannot yet report to the Council that the wider
humanitarian situation in Yemen is any better. It
remains catastrophic. More than 24 million people
now need humanitarian assistance — 80 per cent of
the population. They include nearly 10 million people
just a step away from famine. More than 3.3 million
people have been displaced, over 600,000 of them in
the past 12 months. Only half of health facilities are
fully functioning. Hundreds of thousands of people
got sick last year because of poor sanitation and
water-borne diseases, including cholera. Needs have
19-00432

09/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East

intensified across all sectors. Millions of Yemenis are
hungrier, sicker and more vulnerable now than they
were a year ago.
Humanitarian agencies, though, are scaling up
to meet these needs. In December, the World Food
Programme (WFP) reached 9.5 million people with
emergency food assistance; that is a record number. In
the next few months, the WFP will expand operations
to reach 12 million people a month, including the
10 million most at risk of famine and 2 million acutely
vulnerable internally displaced persons. Humanitarian
agencies continue to roll back cholera, to improve
living conditions for displaced families in collective
centres and informal camps, and to do everything
possible to mitigate hunger and malnutrition for the
240,000 people facing catastrophic levels of food
insecurity — at the phase 5 level of the Integrated
Phase Classification. Agencies are also preparing
for large-scale returns to Al-Hudaydah as and when
conditions allow. Altogether, operations in Yemen
this year will, if funding is available, reach 15 million
people — about half the population.
None of this is problem-free. On 31 December, the
WFP issued a statement seeking action from the de
facto authorities over diversion of food aid from seven
distribution sites in Sana’a. We know that aid diversion
and attempted diversion are risks in all conflict
settings. We take this extremely seriously; parties to
conflict must not misappropriate relief items destined
for civilians in need.
Because we are committed to an effective response,
we had already contracted independent third-party
monitors last autumn. In their first report, they found
that 95 per cent of intended food-aid beneficiaries
contacted across the country confirmed that they were
indeed receiving food aid. In some cases, rations were
not always complete. These gaps could potentially
be due to funding or access constraints, or other
problems. More detailed independent monitoring of
this sort is currently under way. It would not surprise
me if problems were to emerge in other parts of the
country. But we will always act to find solutions when
that happens.
It is also important to note that the Sana’a problem
itself was identified through existing monitoring
mechanisms and that the WFP, with support from
the Humanitarian Coordinator, has acted decisively.
They and the de facto authorities are having intensive,

S/PV. 8441

constructive discussions on the way forward, and we
are optimistic that the right measures will be in place
before the next round of distributions is slated to begin.
Steps to improve targeting and delivery mechanisms
are being taken as we speak.
Resolution 2451 (2018) sets out three main points
related to humanitarian issues. I would like to update
the Council on where we stand on those today.
The first point is access. The humanitarian scale-up
that Yemenis need will not be possible if aid workers
and supplies cannot travel safely and freely to where
they are needed. Following the Stockholm agreement,
an immediate objective was to regain access to the
Red Sea Mills and several humanitarian warehouses
in Al-Hudaydah. This has not yet happened, but needs
to happen quickly. Enough grain for 3.5 million people
has now been sitting unused, possibly spoiling, for
nearly four months in the Red Sea Mills.
Unfortunately, over the last six weeks, the de
facto authorities have blocked humanitarian supplies
travelling from areas under their control to Governmentheld areas. They have also recently informed
humanitarian agencies that 72 hours’ notice is required
ahead of any movements, instead of the usual 48 hours.
We are also concerned by administrative restrictions
being imposed on international non-governmental
organizations as they renew their operating agreements,
as well as ongoing challenges with monitoring.
Restrictions are also being tightened on specific
types of programming, including protection and
support for victims of sexual and gender-based violence.
Protection work is urgently needed in Yemen, where, to
cite one example, verified reports of grave violations
of children’s rights, including killings, maiming and
recruitment to military service, increased by nearly
25 per cent in the last year.
Continuing delays and unacceptable preconditions
for the planned medical air bridge from Sana’a airport
also mean that thousands of people with medical
conditions for which treatment is unavailable in
northern Yemen are condemned to suffer.
Taken together, these developments are delaying
and interrupting critical humanitarian programmes.
But solutions can be agreed. Just today we received
confirmation that 56 new visas would be granted to
United Nations staff; that is an important step in the
right direction.

19-004325/20

S/PV.8441

The situation in the Middle East

The resolution also calls for impediments to
commercial imports to be lifted. In December,
commercial fuel imports through Al-Hudaydah and
Saleef were higher than at any time since August 2017,
although they remain below estimated requirements.
This is a significant improvement, and we hope that fuel
imports will continue to increase in the coming months.
The number of clearance requests to enter Al-Hudaydah
and Saleef ports also more than doubled in December
compared with the previous month. We hope that this
is a sign of rising commercial confidence following
the Stockholm agreement, but, of course, it makes a
difference only if those requests are then agreed.
While the situation on fuel imports improved and
more ships sought to reach the ports, commercial food
imports in December plummeted to just 163,000 metric
tons, which in fact is the lowest figure recorded since the
United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism
for Yemen began monitoring, in July 2016. This is
deeply concerning in an environment where a serious
threat of famine persists. Overall, average monthly
commercial food imports are now 25 per cent lower
than they were a year ago. Ongoing import restrictions
also mean that no commercial containerized cargo has
entered Al-Hudaydah port for more than a year.
Severe congestion at Aden port also remains a
problem. Despite some recent progress, the WFP still has
nearly 500 containers stuck in Aden port. In some cases,
they have had to reroute cargo via Salalah, in Oman,
and then overland into Yemen, at considerably greater
cost and risk. I hope that the Government of Yemen,
the de facto authorities and other stakeholders will take
all steps necessary to ensure the smooth, unimpeded
flow of commercial and humanitarian imports through
all Yemeni ports, as required by resolution 2451 (2018).
This should include the reopening of Ras Isa port,
which has been closed since June 2017.
As I told the Council last month (see S/PV.8424),
I raised all these access issues with those I met in
Sana’a and in Aden in November. I also sent a followup letter to the president of the Ansar Allah Supreme
Political Council last month. A constructive dialogue
is continuing through the Humanitarian Coordinator,
and I remain hopeful that the de facto authorities and
the Government of Yemen will act quickly to fulfil
the strong commitments to humanitarian action that
I received.
6/20

09/01/2019

The second humanitarian point in resolution 2451
(2018) relates to the economy. The resolution calls on
the parties to strengthen the economy and the Central
Bank, and to pay pensions and civil-servant salaries.
The Yemeni rial is again losing value, with the exchange
rate now hovering around 520 rial to the dollar. That
is, of course, better than the 800-plus rial rate we
saw several months ago, but significantly worse than
last month’s 450-rial rate. It is also more than twice
pre-conflict levels.
Without intervention, the International Monetary
Fund estimates that the exchange rate is likely to slide
to more than 700 rial to the dollar this year. As the
Council is aware, because Yemen imports nearly all its
food, fuel and medicines, this would be devastating for
millions of people.
Foreign currency injections from the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates have
been extremely helpful in strengthening the rial since
October. But as I discussed with the Prime Minister in
Aden, we need regular, predictable injections such as
this that will sustainably keep the exchange rate at an
affordable level.
The resolution also points out that paying pensions
and civil-servant salaries across the country is
another key element of strengthening the economy. In
November, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates announced $70 million in funding to
UNICEF to cover teachers’ allowances. Arrangements
have now been agreed to deliver these payments, and
they are expected to begin shortly. That should benefit
millions of Yemeni children. Martin’s team, with
the support of the Resident Coordinator, expects to
convene discussions on the economy and strengthening
the Central Bank soon. I hope that will quickly lead to
practical and sustained improvements.
The third humanitarian point is your call,
Mr. President, on the international community to
consider additional funding for the 2019 United
Nations-coordinated humanitarian response plan. We
raised $2.4 billion last year, or 83 per cent of what we
required. As humanitarian operations expand this year
in response to the deterioration in the situation we have
seen, especially over the past six months, humanitarian
agencies will obviously need even more money. The
2019 humanitarian response plan will be finalized
in the next few weeks, and I expect it will require
19-00432

09/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East

approximately $4 billion — half of which will be just
for emergency food assistance.
On 26 February, the Secretary-General will convene
a high-level pledging conference in Geneva, co-hosted
by the Governments of Sweden and Switzerland. In late
November, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates announced that they would contribute
an additional $500 million to combat hunger in Yemen
in 2019. Given that we expect that the funds generously
provided by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates in 2018 to be fully spent by the
end of March, that new pledge is extremely important.
We are counting on all our donors to announce more
generous funding at the February event.
The important progress we have seen on the political
track, which Martin has just briefed the Council on,
deserves our full and continuing support, but it does
not of itself feed a single starving child. Millions of
Yemenis are looking to us for assistance and protection,
and we need to see more and faster progress on all the
humanitarian elements of the Council’s resolution to
make any practical difference to their lives.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you very
much, Mr. President, for scheduling this meeting. I also
thank Martin Griffiths and his team, Mark Lowcock
and all the humanitarians. I think it is very good that
the Security Council has been able to be united on this
very important issue. It is very good that we can have a
timely update on the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement, but also on wider implementation of
resolution 2451 (2018). I am grateful for that.
I think it is very important that the parties accelerate
efforts to implement the important steps that they agreed
to in Stockholm. Martin set out what those were. I want
to reiterate our full support for Martin’s efforts. We
look to the parties to continue constructive engagement
with him, including a commitment to attend the next
round of talks once Martin has finished his preparatory
work. We look to the parties to facilitate the United
Nations work to stand up a team in Al-Hudaydah to
support their efforts.
For our part, as penholder, we will take forward work
on a short technical draft resolution to mandate the new

S/PV. 8441

United Nations team to support the implementation of
the Al-Hudaydah agreement. We will hear bit more on
that in consultations from Mr. Griffiths, Mr. Lowcock
and retired Major General Cammaert. Of course, the
Council will need to continue to follow progress on the
ground very closely.
On the humanitarian side, I think we all need at
to have that at the forefront of our minds Mark’s last
words: although all this progress on the political track
is absolutely vital, it does not help us feed starving
children. That 80 per cent of Yemenis need assistance
is quite a shocking figure. We must not let up any of the
pressure up to try to help Mark and the humanitarians
deliver aid and commercial supplies.
I want to specify very clearly today how important
the access issue is — access to the Red Sea Mills, as
Mark set out, but also access through the ports and into
all the areas of Yemen where people need assistance. The
numbers involved are vast, and therefore there is not a
day to lose in terms of access. We call on all the parties
to address the issues Mark mentioned, in particular in
terms of things like notice periods, which should go
back down to 48 hours. Access should be unhindered.
Commercial supplies should be got through. We have
had some good news on visas and fuel imports, but that
good news needs to be extended across the commercial
and humanitarian supplies needed.
I have kept my remarks short because if I know many
people will want to speak and we have consultations
following this meeting. But I want to repeat that it is
very good news that the Council has been united so far.
We hope that the Council can stay united as we follow
progress on both the humanitarian and political tracts.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for
their very precise and enlightening briefings, as well as
for their exemplary commitment and that of their teams.
First, I would like to talk about the progress made
since the adoption of resolution 2451 (2018), which led
to the rapid deployment of the advance team of the
United Nations monitoring and oversight mission. On
that basis, the Redeployment Coordination Committee
held its first meetings in late December and early
January, which enabled discussions between the parties
on the implementation of the truce and the planned

19-004327/20

S/PV.8441

The situation in the Middle East

withdrawals. That is a first concrete step towards
de-escalation, which we welcome. Discussions must
continue to build on what has been achieved and make
progress, in particular on the redeployment of forces
from the city and port of Al-Hudaydah in order to
strengthen trust between the parties and generate a
virtuous cycle. To use a sports metaphor, we must now
score a goal.
Secondly, despite that positive momentum, we
must not forget that, as Mr. Lowcock rightly said, the
humanitarian situation is still very worrisome and there
is an urgent need to help the Yemeni population. Yemen
is currently facing the most serious humanitarian crisis
of our time. More than 24 million people depend upon
humanitarian assistance and there are very high risks
of famine and epidemics. It is therefore crucial that the
positive momentum in action following the Stockholm
talks now be translated into action on the ground. That
is necessary in itself, but it is also a precondition for
success so that the people concerned take ownership
of the process that has begun. We recall that all
parties must respect international humanitarian law, in
particular as it pertains to the protection of civilians, as
well as international human rights law.
We welcome Saudi Arabia’s deposit of $200 million
in the Central Bank of Yemen. However, the riyal has
once again plummeted, as Mark also reminded us. We
must therefore continue our efforts on the economic
front. That is essential.
Humanitarian and commercial access, as my
colleague from the United Kingdom recalled, must
also be guaranteed, including the lifeline between
Al-Hudaydah and Sana’a. We call on the parties
to demonstrate responsibility in the discussions
on the reopening of that axis, which have not yet
borne fruit.
Finally, access to the Red Sea Mills for the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
the World Food Programme is also crucial, as is the
unhindered and undiverted flow of foodstuffs to
populations in need. By reducing the level of hostilities
and strengthening the functioning of the ports of
Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Issa, the agreement on
Al-Hudaydah should facilitate humanitarian aid and
access. It is therefore quite literally vital that it be fully
implemented for the benefit of the people concerned.
In that context, and this will be my last point, with
regard to the Security Council our immediate priority is
8/20

09/01/2019

to ensure that the observation mission has the mandate it
needs to function. In that respect, we echo the sentiments
just shared by my British colleague. We support the
efforts of the United Kingdom’s efforts in that regard,
along with the prospect of the Council’s speedy adoption
of a draft resolution that will enable the mission to
fully achieve its deployment. In that context, it is more
important than ever that the Council demonstrate its
unity and responsiveness in support of the efforts of
Martin Griffiths and the effective implementation of
the Stockholm Agreement on Al-Hudaydah. Confident
in its unity, the Security Council must bring all of
its weight to bear. At the same time, we also call on
the parties to do their part to facilitate the work of
the United Nations mission, including by issuing the
necessary visas and authorizations and ensuring the
safety of United Nations personnel on the ground.
The considerable progress made in Stockholm and
endorsed by resolution 2451 (2018) is a breakthrough.
For it to be a genuine turning point in ending the conflict
in Yemen, we call for further political discussions
to be held as soon as possible under the auspices of
Mr. Griffiths, in order to build on the momentum
generated in Stockholm and resume discussions on a
comprehensive political framework, because we know
that that is the only possible lasting solution to the
conflict in Yemen. France will continue to extend its
full support to that effort, including within the Council.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their briefings.
We are pleased to note that the parties in Yemen
have generally observed the ceasefire agreement, which
has led to a lessening of hostilities in the past few days.
The Redeployment Coordination Committee, which
is led by the United Nations and includes all Yemeni
parties, is working in an orderly fashion, with ongoing
discussions on issues related to redeployment, such as
the timetable, location and modalities of verification and
supervision. Work has also begun on implementing the
agreement on the exchange of prisoners and settling the
situation in Taiz. However, while the overall situation
in Yemen is heading in a positive direction, challenges
remain. Persistent crossfire continues in Al-Hudaydah
governorate and the overall humanitarian situation
across the country is still severe. The Yemeni parties
agreed to reopen the Al-Hudaydah-Sana’a road, but the
19-00432

09/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East

agreement has not yet been honoured. Impediments to
humanitarian access remain. The parties concerned
must implement the Stockholm Agreement and
resolution 2451 (2018) in earnest and continue to work
on the following three areas.
First, the parties should strictly implement the
Al-Hudaydah ceasefire agreement and complete
the redeployment of their armed forces within the
established time frame. We have noted the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal to establish a mission in Yemen
to facilitate and monitor the implementation of the
agreement, and China is ready to engage with all
parties on the matter. We hope that the Secretariat
will strengthen consultations with Council members
on specific arrangements pertaining to the proposed
mission while giving the views of the host country
and the countries of the region full consideration and
respect.
Secondly, it is imperative to push for a sustained
and effective process of dialogue and negotiation,
while preserving the gains achieved so far. The
Yemeni parties should meet each other halfway and
demonstrate greater goodwill towards one another.
Under the auspices of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee they should agree on confidence-building
measures without delay, including by making progress
on the prisoner-exchange agreement and other issues.
We look forward to seeing the next round of peace talks
convened without incident so that consensus can be
reached on the framework document for the political
negotiations and an inclusive solution arrived at as soon
as possible.
Thirdly, it is essential that the United Nations
continue to play its role as the primary mediator. We
would like to see the Yemeni parties working more
closely with Mr. Griffiths and remaining engaged in
the negotiating progress. The international community
must step up humanitarian assistance to Yemen, help
the country improve the humanitarian situation in a
sustained manner, meet the basic needs of the Yemeni
people and continue to create conditions that are
conducive to negotiations. The Yemeni parties must
work more closely with the United Nations to effectively
guarantee the safety and security of international
personnel in Yemen.
Political means are the only way to resolve
the Yemeni issue. All parties must safeguard the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial

S/PV. 8441

integrity of Yemen and — based on resolution 2216
(2015) and other resolutions, the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and its implementation mechanism,
as well as the outcome document of the National
Dialogue Conference — support efforts to reach a broad
and inclusive political solution through dialogue and
consultation. Together with all the parties concerned,
China is ready to continue to play a constructive role in
promoting the settlement of the Yemen issue.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Since this is the first time I have taken the floor
in the Council this year, I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on the Dominican Republic’s presidency for
this month. We are sure you will carry out your duties
with distinction.
We are grateful to Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, for his
briefing on the changes in the military and political
situation in Yemen in the light of the Stockholm
Agreement. We also thank Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for his assessment of the humanitarian
situation, which makes it clear that Yemen and its people
are experiencing a terrible humanitarian disaster. It is
obvious that it is impossible to end a conflict of many
years’ standing in the few weeks that have passed
since the start of the implementation of the Agreement,
which many of us helped the Special Envoy to conclude
in Sweden. We are not expecting instant results, and we
will continue to work with Mr. Griffiths and the parties
to the conflict in Yemen with a view to implementing it
as soon as possible.
The groundwork has been laid. The Redeployment
Coordination Committee, headed by retired Major
General Cammaert, has been established. The
Committee’s meetings are not going very smoothly,
but they are taking place and the results can be seen in
the lower level of violence around the city and port of
Al-Hudaydah. Further discussions are being held on the
methodology for implementing mutual understanding
on the prisoner exchange and on de-escalation in Taiz.
We endorse the mobilization of the United Nations
presence in Yemen and the efforts to expand it. We
support the Secretary-General’s initiative on setting
up a new mission to support the implementation of
the Al-Hudaydah agreement. We believe it will help
Mr. Griffiths with his mediation efforts, including in
terms of organizing a new round of consultations.

19-004329/20

S/PV.8441

The situation in the Middle East

In our view it will be important to ensure the
Government of the Republic of Yemen and the
Ansar Allah movement maintain their resolve to
reach compromises on their existing disagreements,
including on the political issues that the parties have
barely begun to consider. Needless to say, much
depends on sticking to the agreements already reached.
It is essential that we all continue our collective and
bilateral efforts to support Mr. Griffiths’ work on the
political front. However, we must also maintain our
parallel efforts to improve the humanitarian situation
in Yemen, which continues to deteriorate daily, as
Mr. Lowcock reminded us today. Millions of Yemenis
are starving, with no way to get essential medicines or
services, and are in need of assistance in one form or
another. The cost of rebuilding the country’s devastated
infrastructure continues to rise incrementally.
Russia, like many other States Members of the
United Nations, including Yemen’s nearest neighbours,
continues to make its contribution to assisting the
people of Yemen. However, we are doing it on a
non-discriminatory basis. Humanitarian assistance
must be provided to everyone in Yemen who needs
it, regardless of who controls the territory where they
live. We assume that this principle is guiding other
humanitarian partners in Yemen as well.
In conclusion, we want to once again draw attention
to the potential benefit that improving the overall
atmosphere in the region could bring to settling the
situation in Yemen and the other crises in the Middle
East and northern Africa. Policies of confrontation and
aggressive competition must give way to dialogue and
mutual understanding, including through the creation
of a unified security architecture. It is our shared duty
to help the stakeholders in the region get that process
under way. In our opinion, Russia’s concept for security
and confidence in the Persian Gulf continues to
represent a sound basis for joint efforts in that regard.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and the
important briefings by Mr. Martin Griffiths and
Mr. Mark Lowcock, who have both described a scenario
that requires the urgent support of the international
community and, in particular, of a united Security
Council. We would like to express our gratitude and
full support for the efforts they are making in their
fields to put an end to the worst humanitarian crisis
in the world today and bring the parties closer to an
inclusive political solution.
10/20

09/01/2019

We also salute the Yemeni parties for their
willingness to negotiate and hold a dialogue, which has
made it possible for the Redeployment Coordination
Committee to meet three times and for some progress
to be made in the operational implementation of the
agreements reached in Sweden. We stress that this
progress is still preliminary and must necessarily
be complemented by urgent new measures, such as
defining the parameters for what constitutes a ceasefire
violation for the parties and determining the modalities
of the process. We should emphasize that the agreements
reached in Sweden constitute a turning point in the
bloody and prolonged conflict in Yemen, and that in no
circumstances should possible delays or breaches serve
as justification for abandoning commitments under the
Stockholm Agreement.
We therefore urge the Yemeni parties to reaffirm
their commitment to the inclusive political solution that
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General has launched
and to tackle the difficulties that this complex process
may bring carefully and in good faith, while avoiding
unilateral action that runs counter to the positive spirit
that should accompany it. We also encourage them to
continue to work on confidence-building measures that
contribute to a better climate of understanding. We
therefore welcome President Hadi’s decision to pay the
salaries of the civil servants in Al-Hudaydah and look
forward to further developments in the area of prisoner
exchanges and the opening of land and sea routes. We
also look forward to a new round of consultations this
month and emphasize the importance of increasing the
participation of women and young people.
All of those efforts are all the more important, as
Mr. Lowcock reminded us, when many of the needs of
the people are still unmet and the risk of famine and
the spread of diseases such as cholera persists. We must
remain steadfast in honouring our responsibility to
support and protect them. That includes removing all
bureaucratic obstacles that restrict access to essential
goods. Humanitarian aid and access to it cannot and
must not be made conditional on any military objective.
We would like to conclude by highlighting the
professionalism and sense of duty of the humanitarian
personnel of the United Nations and other agencies
deployed in Yemen, and by underlining the importance
of ensuring that the parties guarantee their security and
provide the facilities they need for their work, including
the timely issuance of the appropriate visas. Peru
remains committed to achieving a political solution
19-00432

09/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East

to the conflict that brings the ongoing humanitarian
disaster to an end, ensures accountability for the
atrocious crimes that have been committed, improves
regional stability and makes it possible to achieve
sustainable peace in Yemen.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
for their briefings today.
The Stockholm Agreement has given the
international community and the Yemeni people a
glimmer of hope for a peaceful settlement of the conflict
in Yemen. The Security Council should therefore
consolidate those gains and work on implementing
the Agreement. All Yemeni parties must honour their
obligations under it and cooperate with the United
Nations, especially the Special Envoy and his team,
retired Major General Patrick Cammaert and United
Nations humanitarian agencies, to reach a sustainable
solution in Al-Hudaydah port and governorate and
thereby ensure the supply of humanitarian assistance
to those in need.
I would also like to commend the efforts of the
Special Envoy since he and his team took office to move
the peace process forward in Yemen, as well as Major
General Cammaert’s positive steps to implement the
Stockholm Agreement. In addition, I want to express
our deep gratitude and appreciation to those working
in the humanitarian field for their efforts to improve
the humanitarian situation in Yemen. We stress the
importance of all parties working to ensure the safety
of United Nations personnel in order to enable them to
carry out their work effectively.
We will unquestionably face many obstacles on
our path to achieving a comprehensive and permanent
peace in Yemen if we continue to fail to push decisively
for the implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2216 (2015). It is
therefore crucial to ensure their implementation. The
Stockholm Agreement and resolution 2451 (2018) are
important steps on the path to peace, and we must focus
on confidence-building measures to promote them.
We must begin with gradual steps to build
and enhance trust between the Yemeni parties. An
important concrete measure that would alleviate the
suffering of many Yemeni families is the exchange
of prisoners and detainees. We encourage the Yemeni
parties to continue their efforts to achieve that goal

S/PV. 8441

and to prioritize the national interests and the security
and safety of the Yemeni people above all other
considerations. All parties must work diligently to
implement the Stockholm Agreement, starting with
respecting the ceasefire, refraining from hindering the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in need,
removing all obstacles to the work of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee and issuing the necessary
visas and permits to United Nations personnel. All of
those steps are essential to ensuring the Agreement’s
successful implementation. In that regard, I commend
the announcement by the coalition to restore legitimacy
in Yemen that it remains committed to the ceasefire in
Al-Hudaydah governorate, which entered into force on
18 December. The coalition also remains committed
to implementing the Stockholm Agreement and is
continuing to coordinate with Major General Cammaert.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s proposal
on the ways in which the United Nations should support
the Stockholm Agreement, pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 2451 (2018), so that the Council can discuss
the matter and reach agreement on it.
On the humanitarian front, last year the international
community came together to alleviate the suffering
in Yemen. This year we must redouble our efforts by
funding the projected 2019 United Nations humanitarian
response plan. The countries of the coalition, notably
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait,
were among the largest supporters of the Yemen
humanitarian response plan in 2018, alongside the
United States and the United Kingdom. The support of
those five countries basically covered 83 per cent of the
Yemen humanitarian response plan in 2018.
We once again welcome the Secretary-General’s
determination to hold an international pledging
conference in Geneva on 26 February to support the
humanitarian response plan. The State of Kuwait looks
forward to participating in that conference, in keeping
with its humanitarian policy and in support of efforts to
alleviate the suffering of the brotherly Yemeni people.
In conclusion, Yemen is passing through a complex
and decisive stage in its contemporary history. Our
brotherly people in Yemen now have an historic
opportunity to take important steps towards achieving
peace. It is in no one’s interest for the conflict to
linger, especially in the light of the fact that those most
affected by the conflict are the Yemeni people. We call
once again on the Yemeni parties to implement the
Stockholm Agreement on Al-Hudaydah and its ports,

19-0043211/20

S/PV.8441

The situation in the Middle East

the prisoner exchange agreement and the declaration
of understanding on Taiz. We hope that the parties
will be committed to the full implementation of the
agreements in order to complement the efforts of
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, so that he can hold the upcoming round of
negotiations and reach a political solution based on
the three agreed terms of references, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and its implementation
mechanism, the outcome of the National Dialogue
Conference and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, especially resolution 2216 (2015). That
would end the crisis in brotherly Yemen, maintain its
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, and
ensure non-interference in its internal affairs.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): At the outset, I too would
like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths for his work and
what he achieved in Stockholm. In addition, I would
like to thank not only Mr. Mark Lowcock for his
briefing on what he has done, but also, through him, all
the humanitarian aid workers on the ground, as we must
not forget that this is the greatest humanitarian crisis in
the world today. All of their efforts are very important.
I listened very carefully to Martin Griffith’s
briefing. He said that the Stockholm Agreement has
been largely adhered to. I believe that that is very
encouraging. I agree with his statement that progress can
be only gradual, and of course we support everything
that he is trying to do there. At the same time, I would
like to endorse the statement made by the representative
of the United Kingdom to the effect that we have to take
accelerated steps, not content ourselves with where we
stand and continue our work in that regard. I very much
welcome the fact that she is proposing a technical draft
resolution so that the people on the ground can be safe.
I would also encourage acting in accordance with
what Martin Griffiths and others around the table have
said, namely, that, starting from the local ceasefire
situation in Al-Hudaydah, we have to go further,
address the fundamental issues and come to an overall
agreement. In that regard, as Ambassador Delattre said
earlier, I believe that it is important that the Security
Council remain united as it was in its adoption of the
earlier resolution regarding Yemen and that we stick to
that path in order to move forward.
In the process, I would highlight something that
is very dear to our heart, as echoed by Ambassador
Meza-Cuadra. In the peace process, I would ask
12/20

09/01/2019

Martin Griffiths to involve women and young people in
negotiations. They are the most effective in that regard,
and they should have a seat at the negotiating table on
the way forward. In that regard, I would like to highlight
the fact that Germany and Peru are co-chairing the
Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security,
in close coordination with the United Kingdom. We
have decided to focus the first meeting of this year on
the situation of women in Yemen.
Concerning the humanitarian situation, Mark
Lowcock mentioned some of the progress that has
been made, but he also said that the situation is still
catastrophic. In a German newspaper, the UNICEF
regional director was quoted as saying that Yemen
for children is hell on Earth and that approximately
100,000 children are close to starvation in Yemen. We
therefore have to do everything possible to improve the
situation. In that connection, Mark Lowcock mentioned
the obstruction of the mills and harbours and cases
of diversion. I believe that that is unacceptable and a
scandal. We must spare no effort to stop it. Concerning
what Mark Lowcock said with regard to the water
situation, which is a nightmare in Yemen, where we
are up against cases of cholera. We once again see the
effect of climate change on security. It is necessary to
drill 1,500 metres deep to reach water in Yemen, which
accounts for yet another dreadful situation.
Germany stands ready to support the political
process. We are one of the major donors in terms of
humanitarian aid. We also look beyond immediate
humanitarian aid towards stabilization to increase our
chances of success in negotiations and the stabilization
dimension of Yemen.
Mr. Edjang Nnaga (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths
and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their very detailed briefings
and congratulate them on the tremendous work that
they are doing in Yemen.
At the last Security Council meeting on Yemen
held in 2018 (see S/PV.8439), we were convinced that
we had turned a new page in the conflict and that the
constant years-long hard work of the Council and the
international community had paid off. My delegation
is grateful to Mr. Griffiths for his leadership and to
all those who enabled the parties to meet and reach
initial agreements, which have facilitated the opening
of a political process to find a sustainable solution to
the conflict.
19-00432

09/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East

We commend the timely reaction of the Council,
which, in keeping with the spirit of ensuring compliance
with the Stockholm agreements, unanimously adopted
resolution 2451 (2018) on 21 December 2018, which
authorizes, inter alia, sending a team to monitor,
support and facilitate the immediate implementation of
the commitments undertaken in of Stockholm, which
include a ceasefire in the strategic city of Al-Hudaydah
and other parts of the country. In that regard, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea calls on the warring and
all other parties concerned in Yemen to strictly observe
the terms of the truce. We nevertheless welcome the
fact that, to a certain extent, the parties have begun
to fulfil their commitments, as demonstrated by the
gradual reopening of the city of Al-Hudaydah.
We warmly welcome the historic meeting of the
representatives of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, the Government of Yemen and the Houthis,
and encourage the national parties to pool their efforts
to carry out the Committee’s mandates and thereby
foster the trust necessary to better facilitate the
implementation of the agreement on Al-Hudaydah. My
delegation shares all the concerns of those who have
reported on the real need to move the Yemen process
forward, especially those contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the status of implementation of
resolution 2451 (2018) (S/2019/11). There are crucial
aspects that require immediate responses from the
warring parties, such as the opening of specific highways
to ensure the mobilization of humanitarian teams
and the expedited issuance of visas to humanitarian
personnel so that they can enter the country, as well
as addressing other regulations hindering access. I call
on the Yemeni Government and the Houthis to prevent
the diversion of food and other basic supplies from the
country’s most vulnerable people, who are in dire need
of them.
Lastly, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea expresses
its full support for the efforts of the United Nations in
Yemen, in the hope that the achievements of Stockholm
will be increasingly productive and serve as a reference
for future meetings. In that regard, we encourage the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen and
all other intermediaries in that country to continue
working to find a political solution to the conflict.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would first like to thank the United Kingdom
for requesting this briefing on the implementation of
the Stockholm Agreement. I would also like to thank

S/PV. 8441

the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for their briefings
and their efforts.
As this is the first time my delegation is taking the
floor in the Security Council on the subject of Yemen,
we would first like to welcome the agreement reached
in Stockholm. It is a remarkable achievement, and I
congratulate Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and assure
him of our full support. It is essential that the agreement
now be respected and implemented within realistic
deadlines. In view of the humanitarian emergency, the
agreement on the port of Al-Hudaydah is of particular
importance. That port is the lifeline for the rest of the
country in terms of access to humanitarian aid and the
import of commercial goods. It is essential that the
operation of the port be ensured.
The situation is fragile and mistrust between the
parties remains strong. There have been incidents,
but we call on all parties to exercise restraint, to
abstain from heated rhetoric in the media and mutual
accusations of ceasefire violations, and to focus on
the implementation of the agreement in good faith.
In addition, the parties should try to reach a common
understanding on the implementation of the agreement
on Al-Hudaydah, including modalities. They must also
agree on a monitoring mechanism within the framework
of the Redeployment Coordination Committee.
In order to enable the United Nations to monitor
the implementation of the agreement, it is important
that the parties issue visas to United Nations personnel
in a timely manner and allow the Redeployment
Coordination Committee access to the entire territory
of Al-Hudaydah governorate. In addition, the security
of United Nations personnel must be ensured.
Belgium supports the adoption of a resolution as
soon as possible in order to provide a legal basis for
a United Nations mission, and we will contribute
constructively to the adoption of such a resolution.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, as we
have heard from Mark Lowcock, efforts are still needed
to improve it. It is essential that all parties facilitate
access to humanitarian aid throughout the country,
and the bureaucratic obstacles to such access must
be removed.

19-0043213/20

S/PV.8441

The situation in the Middle East

Finally, we hope that the Stockholm Agreement
can serve as a basis for building an agreement on
a negotiating framework for future talks and for
launching an inclusive political process.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
the briefers for their valuable inputs in today’s discussion.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
full support for the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths; the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock;
and retired Major General Patrick Cammaert. We
express our appreciation for the work of United Nations
personnel in Yemen.
The year 2018 ended with the prospect of
relaunching a formal political process thanks to the
agreement reached by the parties in Stockholm and the
adoption of resolution 2451 (2018), which establishes a
mechanism to oversee its implementation. We welcome
the swift instalment of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, the assumption of the role of its Chairman
by Major General Cammaert, and the progress made by
the parties in relation to establishing the organizational
structure of the Committee. We are also encouraged
by the decision of President Hadi to instruct that
the salaries for all civil servants in Al-Hudaydah
governorate be paid.
The compliance of the parties with the provisions
of the Stockholm Agreement is now crucial and will
determine the future of the peace process in Yemen.
The ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah governorate must be
upheld. We are concerned about reports of breaches of
ceasefire on both sides, and we urge the parties to show
restraint. We also encourage them to show goodwill,
to continue to advance confidence-building measures,
especially those directly related to the humanitarian
situation, and to carry on their engagement with the
Special Envoy. We look forward to the next round of
consultations. In that vein, we would like to underscore
the need to include all relevant stakeholders and
underrepresented groups, including women and youth,
in the political process.
We also call upon the parties to continue to
cooperate closely with the Redeployment Coordination
Committee and to extend all support for United Nations
personnel in Yemen, including through bureaucratic
assistance in advancing the additional deployment of
United Nations staff and equipment. The safety and
14/20

09/01/2019

security of United Nations personnel must be ensured
at all times.
Despite the progress made on the political
track, much remains to be done with relation to the
humanitarian situation in Yemen. Urgent actions are still
required in order to improve the living conditions of the
Yemeni population, ensure their protection and avert
the prospect of famine. We therefore urge the parties
to do their utmost to advance confidence-building
measures so that the humanitarian operations can be
carried out unimpeded and without delay. To that end,
the Al-Hudaydah-Sana’a highway must be urgently
reopened in order to allow the functioning of the
humanitarian corridor. We underscore the urgent need
to lift all bureaucratic restrictions on humanitarian
access into and across Yemen.
We are pleased that the Security Council is united,
and we hope that it will stay united in order to help our
Yemeni friends to implement the agreement. We are also
very supportive of the efforts of the Permanent Mission
of the United Kingdom to prepare a technical resolution.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock,
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, for their briefings and
for their excellent work to achieve and implement the
agreements reached in Stockholm. We also deeply
appreciate retired Major General Cammaert’s work
in establishing the Redeployment Coordination
Committee in Al-Hudaydah, which is an essential
element in implementing the Stockholm Agreement,
and the work of the Resident Coordinator in Yemen,
Ms. Lise Grande, to amplify the message of the
enormous and critical humanitarian needs of Yemenis
on the ground.
The Secretary-General’s 7 January report
(S/2019/11) on the status of implementation of
resolution 2451 (2018) notes the important progress
made to date, particularly the swift establishment of the
Redeployment Coordination Committee, demonstrating
the parties’ desire to turn the page. It is significant
that the Republic of Yemen Government and Houthi
representatives have shown a willingness to forge a
political settlement, and we stand by the SecretaryGeneral’s assertion that we should not take for granted
that progress in trying to bring to a conclusion years of
war, suffering and hunger.
19-00432

09/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East

But if we share the Secretary-General’s measured
optimism, we also share his concerns regarding the
complexity of the task ahead. In particular, despite
those promising efforts, the situation on the ground
for millions of Yemenis remains dire. According
to a report from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs issued just Monday, prices of
basic commodities, including food and petrol, are up
137 per cent and 261 per cent, respectively. There has
been only one containerized shipment to Al-Hudaydah
since 2017, as we heard this morning, and all parties
need to lift the wide range of bureaucratic obstacles
that stand in the way of delivering assistance.
We are concerned by the World Food Programme’s
reports of Houthi food aid diversion and call for a
thorough investigation to identify and hold accountable
those responsible for this shameful theft. Interference
with United Nations relief efforts can only prolong
the misery of Yemeni citizens. We call on all sides to
ensure that food aid reaches those who need it most.
We also call on all parties to fully honour the ceasefire
in Al-Hudaydah and to ensure that the redeployments
agreed to in Sweden proceed in due course. Credible
redeployments are critical to sustaining peace in
Al-Hudaydah and to restoring a functioning port to
the country.
We, and indeed the Council, have long held that
only a political solution will lead to the sustained and
stable peace that the people of Yemen deserve. In that
regard, the United States will continue to strongly
support the efforts of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths.
Finally, we express our appreciation to the United
Kingdom for its leadership in crafting the resolutions
needed to affirm the Council’s support for the agreement
reached in Sweden and, now, to establish a United
Nations mission in Al-Hudaydah. The United States
will do its utmost to ensure that all United Nations
efforts, including those to oversee the ceasefire, are
successful and contribute to a peaceful solution, which
is long overdue.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this briefing on
the implementation of the provisions of the Stockholm
Agreement, concluded on 13 December 2018 between
the Yemeni parties. We would like to thank Mr. Martin
Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen and Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief

S/PV. 8441

Coordinator, respectively, whose briefings update the
Security Council on the status of implementation of the
Agreement, which it endorsed through resolution 2451
(2018).
Côte d’Ivoire would once again like to congratulate
the Secretary-General on his tireless efforts that led
to the conclusion of a ceasefire — a prerequisite to
the establishment of an inclusive dialogue towards
a lasting solution to the crisis in Yemen. My country
also welcomes the spirit of compromise of the parties
to the conflict and urges them to work harder so that the
hope for peace generated by the Agreement becomes a
reality. In that way, the Yemeni people, devastated by
several years of war, will at last be able to find peace,
stability and prosperity.
Côte d’Ivoire strongly hopes that the unity of
the Council, embodied in the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2451 (2018), will be further strengthened
at this crucial stage in the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement. To achieve that, each actor will
have to demonstrate his goodwill and commitment to
building on that significant gain in terms of resolving
the Yemeni crisis. In that regard, my country calls on
all parties to fully cooperate with the United Nations
in the diligent implementation of the Agreement, the
three main points of which, it should be recalled,
concern the ceasefire in the city of Al-Hudaydah,
which came into force on 18 December 2018, followed
by the mutual redeployment of the belligerent forces
outside the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Issa;
the mechanism for implementing the agreement on the
exchange of nearly 15,000 prisoners; and the statement
of understanding on the city of Taiz, with a view to the
opening of humanitarian corridors.
Given the serious humanitarian crisis affecting
more than 20 million Yemenis, 4 million of whom face
the risk of famine, the international community must
provide urgent and appropriate responses that meet
the needs. Côte d’Ivoire believes that the removal of
administrative obstacles and the adoption of measures
to relaunch port activities will facilitate the transport
and delivery of humanitarian assistance and the
resumption of economic and commercial activities.
We also recall that any impediment of the provision of
humanitarian assistance is a violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights. My country
therefore urges the Yemeni parties to work with the
United Nations specialized agencies to protect and
deliver humanitarian assistance to the affected areas

19-0043215/20

S/PV.8441

The situation in the Middle East

and populations. To that end, we welcome the statement
made by the Houthi leader following the request of the
World Food Programme to investigate the diversion of
nearly 12,000 tons of humanitarian aid in the Yemeni
capital in August and September 2018.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the positive momentum
generated by the Stockholm Agreement and the
operationalization of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee. We therefore call on Yemeni stakeholders
to refrain from any action likely to lead to a resumption
of hostilities and to continue their cooperation with
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in order to
consolidate the gains made in Stockholm.
My country notes with satisfaction that, in
accordance with resolution 2451 (2018), the United
Nations monitoring team, headed by retired Major
General Patrick Cammaert and responsible for
consolidating the ceasefire, is operational. We welcome
the holding in Al-Hudaydah of the first joint meeting of
the Redeployment Coordination Committee, which is
responsible for overseeing the ceasefire. The meeting
led to constructive discussions on the mandate of the
Committee and on the main priorities in terms of
maintaining the ceasefire, humanitarian access and the
redeployment of military forces. Côte d’Ivoire therefore
notes with satisfaction the commitment of the warring
parties to implementing the Stockholm Agreement.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its support
to Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock, as well
as Major General Patrick Cammaert and his monitoring
team, whose rapid deployment, particularly in the
cities of Aden, Sana’a and Al-Hudaydah, illustrates the
international community’s commitment to resolving
the crisis. We reiterate our appeal to the parties to
the conflict to exercise restraint and calls on them to
respect their commitment to the implementation of
the Stockholm Agreement in order to give peace and
stability in Yemen a chance.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Allow me first to thank
the briefers — Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator Mark Lowcock — for
their briefings. South Africa would like to make the
following points with regard to the situation in Yemen.
South Africa remains concerned about the impact
of the conflict in Yemen, which has resulted in a
deteriorating humanitarian crisis. We support the need
to address the political and security concerns as part
16/20

09/01/2019

of dealing with that humanitarian crisis. The conflict
in Yemen has already led to unspeakable tragedy for
millions of people. Innocent civilians, in particular
women and children, have been most affected by the
effects of that devastating war, which has become one
of the world’s largest humanitarian crises.
We welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General
and his Special Envoy, Mr. Martin Griffiths, to convene
the meeting in Sweden last month. We are pleased that
the Yemeni Government and the Houthis participated
in the discussions that led to the Stockholm Agreement.
We are also pleased that the Security Council was
able to rapidly show unity of purpose following the
Stockholm meeting and adopt resolution 2451 (2018).
We note the proposal by the Secretary-General
regarding the modalities for the monitoring mechanism.
We also note the report of the Secretary-General on the
status of implementation of the resolution (S/2019/11).
We are pleased that the Redeployment Coordination
Committee has met, bringing together representatives
of the Government and the Houthis. It is important that
the parties agree on confidence-building measures to
overcome the trust deficit that exists.
However, we are concerned that, during the
reporting period, there were mutual allegations of
ceasefire violations by both sides. It is imperative
that the resolution and the Stockholm Agreement be
implemented by all parties and that there be a cessation
of hostilities. We wish to reiterate that the only
sustainable solution lies in negotiations and a Yemeniled political settlement that is inclusive and fair and that
puts the interests and well-being of all the citizens of
Yemen first.
We wish to remind the parties to the conflict that
they have an obligation to fully facilitate sustained
and unimpeded humanitarian access, as required by
international humanitarian law. We further call on the
parties to ensure the safety of humanitarian workers
and of United Nations personnel, and we call for the
speedy facilitation of visas and other logistical support.
We welcome the granting of 56 visas as a positive step.
However, that should not be a one-off event. We look
forward to the meeting scheduled in Amman next week,
as Mr. Griffiths indicated, to discuss the long-awaited
exchange of prisoners by both sides.
In conclusion, we appeal to both sides to spare the
lives of women and children in Yemen.
19-00432

09/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8441

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): As the last speaker before
you take the floor, Mr. President, I can safely assume
that all of us share the same views, namely, that, first of
all, the situation is grave — it is dire — and that Yemen
is in crisis and needs urgent action. In connection with
that, there is a need for the Security Council to keep
track of progress and monitor the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement.

role in monitoring the redeployment of forces from
both parties to implement the ceasefire in the city of
Al-Hudaydah and the ports. With this mission, we
hope that humanitarian assistance can be delivered
in a timely manner to the people of Yemen, which is
in dire need of such assistance. The mission will also
contribute to sustaining the political process launched
by the Special Envoy last year.

I appreciate the briefings that were given by
Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock, which
give us a clear understanding of what is happening
on the ground. I also appreciate the fact that the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2451 (2018).
As many have stated, the unanimous adoption of the
resolution underlines the Council’s unity on this issue.
I think we should capitalize on this unity and move
the ball forward. We should ensure that the Stockholm
Agreement is followed up with further concrete action
from the Council. What is most important is that the
Council took immediate action to address the plight of
the Yemeni people.

This is the heart of the Stockholm Agreement, and
Indonesia stands ready to support any efforts aimed
at alleviating Yemen’s grave humanitarian crisis. We
believe that a medical air bridge should be opened
and that deliveries made unabated. We think that any
efforts aimed at meeting the humanitarian needs of
the people should be ensured. We would also like to
emphasize that the safety and security of United Nations
personnel is of paramount importance. Accordingly, it
is very important to put in place safety measures and
infrastructure prior to the establishment of the mission.
It is crucial to have a full assessment of the situation on
the ground.

As many have said, the people of Yemen have
suffered for far too long from famine, disease and
economic recession exacerbated by the armed conflict,
as we heard from Mr. Lowcock just now. In this context,
my delegation wishes to support whatever action the
Secretary-General would like to take to ensure that we
address the situation appropriately.

Thirdly, my delegation also regrets that the
humanitarian situation in Yemen remains grave. We are
hopeful that the current political solution under way will
bring immediate relief and gradual improvement to the
humanitarian situation. We hope that it will be possible
for commercial activities and economic development
to proceed unhindered, which would help to alleviate
the suffering of the people. Concerted efforts by United
Nations entities must continue to be geared towards
humanitarian relief for the people of Yemen.

I would like to highlight several other points.
First, we welcome the appointment of Major General
Patrick Cammaert as the Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee. We are happy to learn
that Major General Cammaert and the advance team
are already playing an active role in meeting and
engaging with both parties to implement the Stockholm
Agreement. It is important that the Committee finalize
the modalities for the redeployment of forces, including
time frames, and identify a suitable and secure
location and units for deployment. Consequently,
the two-phased redeployment of forces envisioned
in the Stockholm Agreement could be implemented
immediately, thus providing critical access for the
delivery of humanitarian necessities.
Secondly, Indonesia welcomes the proposal
to establish a United Nations mission to support
the implementation of the agreement on the city
of Al-Hudaydah and ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa. The mission will play an important

In conclusion, it is our fervent hope that the positive
momentum will be maintained and continued through
the engagement of all parties in inclusive dialogue
involving all relevant stakeholders, in particular to
implement measures that build confidence for all. All
parties need confidence, and we should ensure that the
Stockholm Agreement is duly implemented and that
progress is achieved in Al-Hudaydah. The peace that
is attained needs to be replicated and multiplied across
all of Yemen.
I would reiterate what Mr. Griffiths mentioned in
his briefing. Al-Hudaydah should not be the last stop:
we should ensure that there is success there so that it
can be reproduced in other parts of the country. Like
others, Indonesia naturally stands ready to support the
Secretary-General’s proposal to provide United Nations
support and any efforts aimed at ensuring peace and

19-0043217/20

S/PV.8441

The situation in the Middle East

09/01/2019

stability for the sake of the people of Yemen. That
should be the top priority of the Security Council.

and humanitarian assistance accessible to the millions
of people who would otherwise not be able to survive.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Dominican Republic.

In this regard, with everyone’s permission, I would
like to emphasize the following. Mr. Lowcock noted
that the number of people with acute humanitarian
needs in Yemen is estimated to reach 24 million by
2019, far more than in any other country in the world
today. It is really a challenge from many points of view,
including that of financing, and one that forces us to
keep on the table and not lose sight of the most pressing
needs of the affected population in Yemen, but also one
with a view to creating the necessary foundations for
the re-establishment of the economy, livelihoods and
development in Yemen, by and for Yemenis. Therefore,
with a complementary and inclusive approach, we must
at all costs avoid an intensification of needs, which
would prolong the emergency situation longer than
necessary, and give way to a process of rehabilitation
and sustainable development in the country.

I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock
for their comprehensive briefings on the humanitarian
and political situation in Yemen in the light of the most
recent developments in the country’s peace process.
For the Dominican Republic, it is of the utmost
importance to recognize the invaluable and fruitful
political consultations held in early December under
the auspices of the United Nations and with the
assistance of several Member States in the search for
a rapprochement between the parties. The Stockholm
agreements are a step forward in ending one of the most
terrible conflicts in our recent history, which has left
millions of people, mainly children, in a situation of
hunger and malnutrition with truly regrettable longterm effects.
I acknowledge Mr. Griffiths for his brilliant
diplomatic and mediation work with the parties. The
Dominican Republic will do everything in its power
to contribute to the realization and strengthening of
the Stockholm agreements and, through the Council,
to support the work of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee in implementing those agreements as well as
the work of the Special Envoy. However, we regret that
during the visit to Sana’a, it was not possible to reach
agreement on future rounds of consultations that could
pave the way for the resumption of formal negotiations
towards a political solution. I take this opportunity to
pay tribute to and recognize the agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations, which, in the most
unimaginable of circumstances, have assisted the
Yemeni people and continue to attend to their needs
with a view to alleviating their suffering.
A tribute needs to be extended to United Nations
partners, including international non-governmental
organizations and Yemenis who, day after day,
contribute to the arduous task of providing much-needed
humanitarian assistance. However, for my country, it is
crucial that, in the light of progress being made towards
peace in Yemen, all efforts towards seeking a political
solution should be sustained, including through the
meaningful participation of women and young people
in conflict resolution processes, and to keep protection
18/20

We are concerned that, despite the reduction
in hostilities, there are still serious limitations on
humanitarian access in several regions of the country
due to bureaucratic procedures. We emphasize the
need to expedite provisions that allow the entry and
distribution of humanitarian assistance to affected
populations without further delay. We have received a
very clear message from the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and other actors on the ground
about the sense of anguish of many Yemeni families,
particularly internally displaced persons, which must
be avoided. People’s sense of hope must be restored.
Only then will the country be able to stand up and move
towards a new future.
In a reality as overwhelming as the one before us,
the Dominican Republic urges all actors on the ground
to adhere to the principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence in order to achieve
effective and transparent humanitarian assistance that
can access the affected populations and bring so many
people out of despair and hunger.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to greet you, Mr. President, and
all the elected members of the Security Council for
the period 2019-2020, as well as to wish them and
19-00432

09/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East

their delegations success. I also congratulate His
Excellency Ambassador Singer Weisinger on presiding
over the work of the Council this month. I wish you
and the friendly delegation of the Dominican Republic
every success.
I would furthermore like to thank Mr. Martin
Griffiths for his efforts to find a political solution to
put an end to the conflict and bring lasting peace to
Yemen, based upon the agreed terms of reference. I also
thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his briefing and efforts
and those of his team in the field. They seek to mitigate
the suffering of the Yemeni people, caused by the
coup d’état of the Houthi militias. I also thank retired
Major General Patrick Cammaert for his important and
effective role in enhancing the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement and strengthening the role of the
Redeployment Coordination Committee (RCC) in the
city of Al-Hudaydah.
The Yemeni Government welcomed resolution
2451 (2018), on the Stockholm Agreement. We have
undertaken to implement the Agreement in line with
the timelines set out, including the withdrawal of the
Houthi militias from the city and ports of Al-Hudaydah,
Saleef and Ras Isa, as well as the implementation of the
mechanism under the prisoner exchange agreement and
the declaration of understanding on Taiz.
Since the ceasefire was announced on 18 December,
the Houthi militias have continued to carry out
ongoing violations of the ceasefire agreement and the
redeployment agreement in the city of Al-Hudaydah.
Up until 7 January, there were 434 such violations,
leading to major losses, the killing of 33 martyrs and
injuries to 263 persons. Snipers have been used, as
have mortar fire and medium-range ballistic missiles.
Those violations can no longer be considered individual
acts. They were surely systematic provocations by the
Houthi leaders who want to undermine the Stockholm
Agreement. The Houthi militias are not satisfied with
just hampering the withdrawal from the ports and city
of Al-Hudaydah, but over the past three weeks have
set up 109 new earthen barriers and dug 51 additional
trenches, which have made the movement of the
citizens in the city more difficult while also impeding
relief assistance.
The Yemeni Government reiterates its support
for the Chair of the RCC to fully carry out his role,
namely, to implement the Stockholm Agreement on
Al-Hudaydah, in line with the agreed upon provisions.

S/PV. 8441

The redeployment concept is clear pursuant to the
Stockholm Agreement and resolution 2451 (2018). The
Yemeni Government stresses that any delays or any
extension of the timeline stipulated in the Agreement
should not be permitted as a tactic of the Houthi
militias that want to hinder the implementation of
the Agreement.
In that regard, the Yemeni Government underscores
the important and effective role of the Security Council
and the international community in implementing the
Agreement, while also monitoring the situation in the
city of Al-Hudaydah. We urge the Council to shoulder its
responsibilities and condemn the violations committed
by the Houthi militias and take the necessary measures
to punish the perpetrators of those violations.
The implementation of the Stockholm Agreement
and respect for the withdrawal and redeployment,
according to the agreed upon time frame, are absolutely
crucial. That needs to take place before a new round of
consultations is started.
His Excellency the President of the Republic of
Yemen has reiterated on numerous occasions the clear
position of Yemen regarding its support for the Special
Envoy to Yemen, the last of which was stated during
their meeting recently. He said that our country is ready
to provide all the facilities to ensure that the Special
Envoy can fully carry out his work. My country’s
Government once again confirms its full commitment
to actively participate in any political consultations
convened by the United Nations, as long as the objective,
mechanism and framework are clear and in line with
the agreed upon terms of reference, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism, the outcome of the Yemeni National
Dialogue Conference and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, in particular resolution 2216 (2015).
We would like to reiterate in that regard that Yemen’s
President is keen to mitigate the suffering of our Yemeni
people as a result of the coup carried out by the Houthi
militias. He has ordered the Government to pay the
salaries of employees in Al-Hudaydah governorate so
as to alleviate the humanitarian suffering of the people
in that province.
The Stockholm Agreement is clear and
straightforward. It cannot be reinterpreted, especially
concerning the confirmation that the responsibility
to maintain security in the ports and the city of
Al-Hudaydah rests on local security forces, in

19-0043219/20

S/PV.8441

The situation in the Middle East

accordance with Yemeni law. The appropriate judicial
processes therefore need to be respected. International
law, the Charter of the United Nations and Yemeni law
all recognize just one Yemeni Government, which is
the legitimate Government headed by President Hadi.
That Government is responsible for local forces, local
authority and the institutions of the Yemeni State.
However, the Houthi militias are not satisfied with
just carrying out violations, but rather they are seeking to
impede humanitarian action. On 5 January, the militias
seized 72 relief trucks of the World Food Programme
(WFP) headed for Ibb governorate. The Yemeni
Government called on the United Nations to intervene
urgently and exert pressure on the Houthi militias to
immediately release the trucks and to condemn those
barbaric acts, which have aggravated the situation in
militia-controlled areas and contributed to the suffering
of the Yemeni people. The militias also seized more
than 88 rescue and commercial ships as well as oil
tankers, preventing them from entering Al-Hudaydah
and Saleef ports in Al-Hudaydah governorate between
May 2015 and December 2018, from which 34 ships
were seized for more than six months, to the point where
their cargo had spoiled. During that same period, the
militias plundered and seized 697 relief trucks on the
road that connects the governorates of Al-Hudaydah,
Sana’a, Ibb, Taiz, Hajjah and Dhamar and in other
militia-controlled governorates.
The most recent incident involved the seizing on
29 December 2018 of a 32 ton-truck in Al-Hudaydah
port that had been headed for Sana’a governorate.
The militias contravened the agreement in relation
to permitting that truck to pass through which was
made in the presence of the Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee. In October 2018, Houthi
militias seized 51 tons of wheat provided by the WFP,
which would have fed more than 3.7 million people for
over four months.
The seizure of the last four rescue ships and oil
tankers by the Houthi militias in Al-Hudaydah and
Saleef ports occurred in September 2018. Their overall
cargo was 25,050 tons of food supplies, 25,980 tons
of diesel oil and 9,025 tons of oil. Houthi militias
also bombed a garage containing four aid trucks
transporting assistance provided by the King Salman

20/20

09/01/2019

Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre, which had been
headed for Al-Bayda governorate. Those militias also
set fire to WFP depots, burned more than 4,000 tons of
wheat in Al-Hudaydah and attacked WFP warehouses
four times in several areas of the governorate. They
used neighbouring buildings as military barracks, as
made clear in the letter from the Executive Director of
the WFP dated 28 December 2018.
Those militias also detained an assistance convoy
sent by the Yemeni Government, in agreement with
the Houthi militias and overseen and organized by
General Cammaert, Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee, as well as in accordance
with confidence-building measures and Stockholm
Agreement. At the last minute, those militias aborted
the agreement, in total disregard for the lives of the
Yemeni people who are suffering because of the war
imposed on them by those militias.
My Government hopes that the United Nations
and the international community will play a more
decisive role in deterring those uncontrolled militias
so as to prevent them from defying the international
resolutions and the agreements they have signed. The
suffering of the Yemeni people must stop. International
efforts to reweave the fabric of Yemeni society must not
be undermined.
Lasting peace in Yemen requires an end to the illegal
coup d’état against legality, national consensus and the
political process as a whole, during which national
institutions were taken hostage. Achieving lasting
peace depends on the agreed terms of reference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015). That resolution stipulates, inter
alia, the withdrawal of Houthi militias from all cities
and State institutions, the laying down of their arms
and preventing the Houthi militias backed by Iran from
ignoring the Council’s resolutions and blackmailing the
international community with the aim of prolonging the
war and increasing the suffering of the Yemeni people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

19-00432
