Re10lutiona adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

(d) Proceed with the preparation of draft articles on
treaties concluded between States and international
organizations or between international organizations;
(e) Continue its study of -the law of the non-navigational uses of international watercourses;
S. Expresses confidence that the International Law
Commission will review the progress of its work and
adopt 1 in the light of such a review, the methods of
work best suited to the speedy realization of the tasks
entrusted to it;
6. Expresses the wish that, in conjunction with future sessions of the International Law Commission, further seminars might be organized, which should continue to ensure the participation of an increasing
number of jurists of developing countries;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission the records of the discussion on the report of the Commission at the thirtieth
session of the General Assembly.
2440th plenary meeting
15 December 1975
3496 (XXX). Succession of States
in respect of treaties
The General Assembly,
Having conside~ed the item entitled "Succession of
States in respect of treaties",
Recalling that, in its resolution 3315 (XXIX) of
14 December 1974, the General Assembly invited
Member States to submit to the Secretary-Gen~ral their
written comments and observations on the draft articles
on succession of States in respect of treaties contained
in the report of the International Law Commission on
. the work of its twenty-sixth session,11
Taking note of the report of ·the Secretacy-General6
containing the comments and observations submitted by
a number of Member States in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3315 (XXIX),
Taking note also of the views expressed by Member
States during the debates in the General Assembly at
its twenty-ninth and thirtieth sessions,
1. Urges Member States which have not yet been
able to do so to submit to the Secretary-General as
soon as possible their written comments and observations on the draft articles;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate, before the thirty-first session of the General Assembly,
the comments and observations submitted by Member
States;
3. Decides to convene a conference of plenipotentiaries in 1977 to consider the draft articles on succession of States in respect of treaties and to embody the
results of its work in an international convention and
such other instruments as it may deem appropriate;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session an item entitled "Conference of
plenipotentiaries on succession of States in respect of
treaties".
2440th plenary meeting
15 December 1975
r; Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/9610/Rev.1).
SA/10198 and Add.1-6.

151

3497 (XXX). Question of diplomatic asylum
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3321 (XXIX) of 14 Decemher 1974,

Noting the report of the Secretary-General on the
question of diplomatic asylum and the views on that
question expressed in writing by twenty-five Member
States, 7
Believing that it is desirable to give Member States
more time in which to consider the report of the Secretary-General on the question of diplomatic asylum and
a further opportunity to express their views on this
question, including in particular any action that might
be taken by the General Assembly,
1. Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General for
his report on the question of diplomatic asylum;
2. Invites Member States wishing to express their
views or to supplement views already expressed on the
question of diplomatic asylum to communicate those
views to the Secretary-General by 31 December 1976;
3. Decides to give further consideration to this question at a future session of the General Assembly.
2440th plenary meeting
15 December 1975
3498 (XXX). Report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country, 8
Drawing attention to its resolutions 2747 (XXV) of
17 December 1970, 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December
1971, 3033 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3107
(XXVIII) of 12 December 1973 and 3320 (XXIX)
of 14 December 1974, in which it urged the Government of the host country to make certain that the measures taken to ensure the protection and security of permanent missions to the United Nations and their
personnel were adequate to enable those missions to
perform properly the functions entrusted to them by
their Governments,
Recalling the responsibilities of the Government of
the host country with respect to the United Nations
and the missions accredited to it, their personnel and
their correspondence under the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations, 9 the
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
United Nations 10 and general international law,
Noting with deep concern the illegal acts of individuals or groups against the inviolability of various missions accredited to the United Nations involving the
commission and the repetition of violent and other
criminal acts, including in some cases the use of bombs
or firearms, against their premises and the residences
of their personnel and also the assaults, the uttering of
threats and insults against such personnel, and picketing accompanied by violence,
7 A/10139 (Part I) and (Part I)/Add.I and A/10139
(Part II).
8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 26 (Al 10026).
9 Resolution 169 (II).
10 Resolution 22 A (I).

General AHembly-Thirtieth Sell!lion

Expressing its deep sympathy with the missions and
their personnel that have become the victims of such
acts,
Considering that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of the United Nations and to the
status of the missions accredited to it are of mutual
concern to Member States, includting the host country,
as well as to the Secretary-General,
Recalling the duty of missions accredited to the
United Nations and their personnel to respect the laws
and regulations of the host country, without prejudice
to their privileges and immunities under international
law,
Noting the recommendations of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country, contained in paragraph 66 of its report,
Taking note of the report of the Committee on Relations wi:th the Host Country,
1. Expresses its deep concern at any acts of violence
against some missions and other criminal acts committed against missions accredited to the United Nations,
their personnel and property, incliuding acts of vandalism against motor vehicles, demonstrations and picketing accompanied by violence, threats and insults against
personnel of those missions;
2. Strongly condemns any acts of violence and other
criminal acts against the premises of missions and their
personnel as fundamentally incompatible with the status
of such missions and personnel under international law;
3. Urges the host country to exert all-round efforts
in order to take all necessary measures and ensure their
effective implementation for the purpose of guaranteeing adequate security for missions and their personnel
and creating normal conditions for the functioning of
missions to the United Nations;
4. Urges the host country to take all necessary measures to apprehend, prosecute and 1punish those guilty of
criminal acts against missions ana their personnel;
5. Urges the host country to continue to implement
fully and effectively its Act for the Protection of Foreign
Officials and Official Guests of the United States 11 and,
in particular, to take all appropriate enforcement and
preventive measures to make certain that demonstrations and picketing, especially where there is reason to
believe that they may be accompanied by violence or
may prevent the conduct of normal business of missions
to the United Nations, are held in conformity with this
law and closely monitored by the police to prevent any
acts of violence against the miss~ons accredited to the
United Nations and their personnel;
6. Notes the difficulties which diplomatic missions
and their personnel encounter from time to time when
parking their automobiles, and the need to maintain
public safety;
1. Appeals to the host country to review the measures with regard to the parking of diplomatic vehicles
with a view to facilitating the desires and needs of the
diplomatic community and to consider terminating the
practice of serving summonses to diplomats;
8. Welcomes the diplomatic community's readiness
to co-operate fully with the local authorities in solving
traffic problems;
9. Requests all members of the diplomatic community to respect the laws and regulations of the host
country;
11 United States Public Law 92-539 (see A/8871/Rev.1).

10. Urges the host country, the Secretariat, the diplomatic community and the organizations concerned to
seek in every way the improvement of relations and the
promotion of mutual understanding between the diplomatic community and the local population in order to
ensure conditions conducive to the effective functioning
of the United ~ations and the missions accredited to it;
11. Notes with appreciation the efforts of the host
country, the New York City community and the New
York City Commission for the United Nations and for
the Consular Corps to accommodate the needs, interests
and requirements of the diplomatic community and to
provide hospitality;
12. Decides to continue the work of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country in 1976, in conformity with General Assembly resolution 2819
(XXVI), with the purpose of examining all matters
falling within its terms of reference;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
necessary assistance to the Committee on Relations with
the Host Country and to call its attention to issues of
mutual concern relating to the implementation of the
Agreement between the United Nations and the United
States of America regarding the Headquarters of the
United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges
and Immunities of the United Nations;
14. Requests the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country to submit to the General Assembly, at its
thirty-first session, a report on the progress of its work
and to make, if it deems it necessary, appropriate
recommendations;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session the item entitled "Report of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country,..
2440th plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3499 (XXX). Special Committee on the Charter
of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 992 (X) of 21 November
1955, 2285 (XXII) of 5 December 1967, 2552
(XXIV) of 12 December 1969, 2697 (XXV) of
11 December 1970 and 2968 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972 and especially resolution 3349 (XXIX) of
17 December 1974, which established the Ad Hoe Committee on the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling also its resolutions 2925 (XXVII) of
27 November 1972, 3073 (XXVIII) of 30 November
1973 and 3282 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 on the
strengthening of the role of the United Nations,
Having considered the report of the Ad Hoe Committee12 and the item on the strengthening of the role
of the United Nations with regard to the maintenance
and consolidation of international peace and security,
the development of co-operation among all nations
and the promotion of the rules of international law in
relations between States,
Considering that the observations, proposals and suggestions submitted to the Ad Hoe Committee call for
more thorough study,
Reaffirming its support for the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations,
12 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Se-.
sion, Supplement No. 33 (A/10033).
