United Nations

A/RES/60/141

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 January 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 67

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 2005
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/60/505)]

60/141. The girl child
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 58/156 of 22 December 2003 and all relevant
resolutions, including the agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of
Women, in particular those relevant to the girl child,
Reaffirming the equal rights of women and men as enshrined, inter alia, in the
Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women 1 and the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, 2
Recalling all human rights and other instruments relevant to the rights of the
child, in particular the girl child, including the Optional Protocols to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict 3 and on
the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, 4 and the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, 5
Reaffirming the United Nations Millennium Declaration adopted on
8 September 2000, 6 and the commitments relevant to the girl child as contained in
the 2005 World Summit Outcome adopted on 16 September 2005, 7
Reaffirming also the outcome document of the twenty-seventh special session
of the General Assembly on children, entitled “A world fit for children”, 8 and the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS adopted at the twenty-sixth special

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
3
Ibid., vol. 2173, No. 27531.
4
Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531
5
Resolution 55/25, annex II.
6
See resolution 55/2.
7
See resolution 60/1.
8
Resolution S-27/2, annex.
2

05-49606

A/RES/60/141

session of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS, entitled “Global Crisis – Global
Action”, 9
Reaffirming further all other relevant outcomes of major United Nations
summits and conferences relevant to the girl child, as well as their five- and ten-year
reviews, including the Beijing Declaration 10 and Platform for Action 11 adopted at
the Fourth World Conference on Women, the outcome of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly entitled “Women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century”, 12 the Programme of Action of
the International Conference on Population and Development 13 and the Programme
of Action of the World Summit for Social Development, 14 and welcoming the
declaration adopted on 4 March 2005 by the Commission on the Status of Women at
its forty-ninth session, 15
Reaffirming the Dakar Framework for Action adopted at the World Education
Forum, 16
Recognizing the efforts of the international community to strengthen the
standards for combating sexual abuse and exploitation, and in this regard taking
note of the Secretary-General’s bulletin on special measures for protection from
sexual exploitation and sexual abuse 17 and other policies and codes of conduct
developed by the United Nations system to prevent and address such incidents,
Recognizing also the need to achieve gender equality to ensure a just and
equitable world for girls,
Deeply concerned about discrimination against the girl child and the violation
of the rights of the girl child, which often result in less access for girls to education,
nutrition and physical and mental health care and in girls enjoying fewer of the
rights, opportunities and benefits of childhood and adolescence than boys and often
being subjected to various forms of cultural, social, sexual and economic
exploitation and to violence and harmful practices, such as female infanticide, rape,
incest, early marriage, forced marriage, prenatal sex selection and female genital
mutilation,
Deeply concerned also that, in situations of poverty, war and armed conflict,
girl children are among those most affected and that their potential for full
development is thus limited,
Concerned that the girl child has furthermore become the victim of rape,
sexually transmitted diseases and, increasingly, of HIV, which have a serious impact
_______________
9

Resolution S-26/2, annex.
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
11
Ibid., annex II.
12
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
13
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
14
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
15
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum
(E/2005/27 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. A.
16
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World
Education Forum, Dakar, Senegal, 26–28 April 2000 (Paris, 2000).
17
ST/SGB/2003/13.
10

2

A/RES/60/141

on the quality of her life and leave her open to further discrimination, violence and
neglect,
Emphasizing that increased access to education, including in the areas of
sexual and reproductive health, for young people, especially girls, dramatically
lowers their vulnerability to preventable diseases, in particular HIV/AIDS infection
and sexually transmitted diseases,
Concerned by the increasing number of child-headed households, in particular
those headed by orphan girls, including those orphaned by the HIV/AIDS pandemic,
Deeply concerned that early childbearing and limited access to sexual and
reproductive health care, including in the area of emergency obstetric care, causes
high levels of fistula and maternal mortality and morbidity,
Convinced that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance reveal themselves in a differentiated manner for women and girls and
can be among the factors leading to a deterioration in their living conditions,
poverty, violence, multiple forms of discrimination and limitation or denial of their
human rights,
Stresses the need for full and urgent implementation of the rights of the
1.
girl child as guaranteed to her under all human rights instruments, including the
Convention on the Rights of the Child2 and the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women,1 as well as the need for universal
ratification of those instruments;
2.
Urges States to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women 18 and the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child;3, 4
3.
Urges all States to take all necessary measures and to institute legal
reforms to ensure the full and equal enjoyment by the girl child of all human rights
and fundamental freedoms and to take effective action against violations of those
rights and freedoms;
Urges all Governments and the United Nations system to strengthen
4.
efforts bilaterally and with international organizations and private-sector donors in
order to achieve the goals of the World Education Forum,16 in particular that of
eliminating gender disparities in primary and secondary education by 2005, and to
implement the United Nations Girls’ Education Initiative as a means of reaching this
goal, and reaffirms the commitment contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration6 in this regard;
5.
Calls upon all States to take measures to address the obstacles that
continue to affect the achievement of the goals set forth in the Beijing Platform for
Action,11 as contained in paragraph 33 of the further actions and initiatives to
implement the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, 19 where appropriate,
including the strengthening of national mechanisms to implement policies and
programmes for the girl child and, in some cases, to enhance coordination among
responsible institutions for the realization of the human rights of girls, as indicated
in the further actions and initiatives;
_______________
18
19

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2131, No. 20378.
Resolution S-23/3, annex.

3

A/RES/60/141

6.
Urges States to enact and strictly enforce laws to ensure that marriage is
entered into only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses, to enact
and strictly enforce laws concerning the minimum legal age of consent and the
minimum age for marriage and to raise the minimum age for marriage where
necessary;
Also urges States to fulfil their obligations under the Convention on the
7.
Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, as well as the commitment to implement the Beijing
Platform for Action and the outcomes of the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace
for the twenty-first century”12 and of the twenty-seventh special session on
children;8
8.
Urges all States to promote gender equality and equal access to basic
social services, such as education, nutrition, health care, including sexual and
reproductive health care, vaccinations and protection from diseases representing the
major causes of mortality, and to mainstream a gender perspective in all
development policies and programmes;
Also urges all States to enact and enforce legislation to protect girls from
9.
all forms of violence and exploitation, including female infanticide and prenatal sex
selection, female genital mutilation, rape, domestic violence, incest, sexual abuse,
sexual exploitation, child prostitution and child pornography, trafficking and forced
labour, and to develop age-appropriate safe and confidential programmes and
medical, social and psychological support services to assist girls who are subjected
to violence;
10. Urges States to formulate comprehensive, multidisciplinary and
coordinated national plans, programmes or strategies to eliminate all forms of
violence against women and girls, which should be widely disseminated and should
provide targets and timetables for implementation, as well as effective domestic
enforcement procedures through the establishment of monitoring mechanisms
involving all parties concerned, including consultations with women’s
organizations, giving attention to the recommendations relating to the girl child of
the Special Rapporteurs of the Commission on Human Rights on violence against
women, its causes and consequences, and on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children;
11. Calls upon all States and international and non-governmental
organizations, individually and collectively, to implement further the Beijing
Platform for Action, in particular the strategic objectives relating to the girl child,
and the further actions and initiatives to implement the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action;
12. Urges States to ensure that the right of children to express themselves
and participate in all matters affecting them, in accordance with their age and
maturity, is fully and equally enjoyed by girls;
13. Recognizes that a considerable number of children, including orphans,
children living on the street, internally displaced and refugee children, children
affected by trafficking and sexual and economic exploitation and children who are
incarcerated, live without parental support, and in this regard urges States to take
special measures to support such children and the institutions, facilities and services
that care for them, and to build and strengthen children’s abilities to protect
themselves;
4

A/RES/60/141

14. Urges States to take appropriate measures to address the needs of orphan
girls by implementing national policies and strategies to build and strengthen
governmental, family and community capacities to provide a supportive
environment for orphans and girls and boys infected with and affected by
HIV/AIDS, including by providing appropriate counselling and psychosocial
support, and ensuring their enrolment in school and access to shelter, good nutrition
and health and social services on an equal basis with other children; and to protect
orphans and vulnerable children from all forms of abuse, violence, exploitation,
discrimination, trafficking and loss of inheritance;
15. Also urges States to take special measures for the protection of girls
affected by armed conflicts and by post-conflict situations and in particular to
protect them from sexually transmitted diseases, such as HIV/AIDS, gender-based
violence, including rape and sexual abuse, and sexual exploitation, torture,
abduction and forced labour, paying special attention to refugee and displaced girls,
and to take into account the special needs of girls affected by armed conflicts in the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation
assistance and reintegration processes;
16. Deplores all the cases of sexual exploitation and abuse of women and
children, especially girls, in humanitarian crises, including those cases involving
humanitarian workers and peacekeepers;
17. Urges all States and the international community to respect, protect and
promote the rights of the child, taking into account the particular vulnerabilities of
the girl child in pre-conflict, conflict and post-conflict situations, and calls for
special initiatives designed to address all of the rights and needs of girls affected by
armed conflicts;
18. Calls upon Governments, civil society, including the media, and nongovernmental organizations to promote human rights education and the full respect
for and enjoyment of the human rights of the girl child, inter alia, through the
translation, production and dissemination of age-appropriate and gender-sensitive
information material on those rights to all sectors of society, in particular to
children;
19. Calls upon States and international and non-governmental organizations
to mobilize all necessary resources, support and efforts to realize the goals, strategic
objectives and actions set out in the Beijing Platform for Action and the further
actions and initiatives to implement the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action;
20. Requests the Secretary-General, as Chairman of the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to ensure that all organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system, individually and collectively, in particular
the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Population
Fund, the United Nations Development Fund for Women, the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Development Programme, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Labour
Organization, take into account the rights and the particular needs of the girl child in
country programmes of cooperation in accordance with national priorities, including
through the United Nations Development Assistance Framework;
21. Requests all human rights treaty bodies, special procedures and other
human rights mechanisms of the Commission on Human Rights and its
5

A/RES/60/141

Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights to adopt
regularly and systematically a gender perspective in the implementation of their
mandates and to include in their reports information on the qualitative analysis of
violations of the human rights of women and girls, and encourages the strengthening
of cooperation and coordination in that regard;
22. Stresses the importance of a substantive assessment of the
implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action with a life-cycle perspective so
as to identify gaps and obstacles in the implementation process and to develop
further actions for the achievement of the goals of the Platform for Action;
23. Requests Member States to ensure that, in preventing and addressing
HIV/AIDS, particular attention and support is given to the girl child infected with
and affected by HIV/AIDS, including adolescent mothers;
24. Urges Member States to dramatically increase resources at all levels,
particularly in the education and health sectors, to enable young people, especially
girls, to gain the knowledge, attitudes and skills that they need to prevent HIV/AIDS
and to enjoy the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health, including
sexual and reproductive health;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its sixty-second session on the implementation of the present
resolution, including an emphasis on fistula, using information provided by Member
States, the organizations and bodies of the United Nations system and nongovernmental organizations, with a view to assessing the impact of the present
resolution on the well-being of the girl child.
64th plenary meeting
16 December 2005

6
