V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committet>

2. Calls upon developing countries to promote their
own regional multinational enterprises for the implementation of industrial projects of common interest;
3. Urges developed countries to pursue appropriate
positive adjustment policies and measures that facilitate
world industrial restructuring with minimal disruptions,
which policies should seek to avoid negative effects on the
industrial development of developing countries;
4. Invites the developed countries to fulfil their commitments to halt protectionism by fully implementing and
strictly adhering to the stand-still provisions they have
accepted, in particular concerning imports from developing countries, and to work systematically towards reducing
and eliminating quantitative restrictions and measures
having similar effect and to support efforts by developing
countries to attain full utilization of industrial capacity,
with importance being attached by interested countries to
the promotion of foreign and domestic investment
through an adequate and mutually beneficial framework
for investment;
5. Requests the United Nations Industrial Development Organization:
(a) To strengthen its activities in the fields of technical
assistance, feasibility studies, advisory services, analysis of
opportunities, assistance in the formulation of national
development programmes and investment promotion in
sectors in which industrial restructuring is taking place, in
order to facilitate industrial restructuring and redeployment;
(b) To improve its ability to respond adequately and
promptly to requests from Member States for information
relating to industrial restructuring and related policies and,
for this purpose, to maintain close collaboration with the
relevant United Nations bodies and organizations working
in this field, as well as with relevant economic research
institutes;
(c) To continue, in accordance with its mandate, to
work in close co-operation and collaboration with the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
and relevant international organizations in industrial
restructuring and redeployment;
(d) To continue to prepare case studies on social and
economic implications of industrial restructuring and
redeployment in developing countries;
6. Recommends that the System of Consultations
should:
(a) Cover industrial sectors of particular interest to
developing countries;
(b) Hold more regional consultation meetings, in particular in relation to the Industrial Development Decade
for Africa, within the agreed framework for the System;
(c) Seek to identify specific areas and forms of cooperation;
(d) Explore means and practical measures for the promotion of industrial co-operation at subregional, regional
and international levels;
7. Recommends strengthening the Investment Promotion Services of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization by continuing, where appropriate, to
build a network of national promotion centres in developed and developing countries; that these services should
actively mobilize outside resources for identified investment projects, especially those related to the implementation of the Industrial Development Decade for Africa,
maintain close co-ordination with developing countries'
industrial development programmes and promote projects

179

falling within the national objectives and priorities of
developing countries.
104th plenary meeting
I 8 Deqmber 1984

39/248. Consumer protection
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1981/
62 of 23 July 1981, in which the Council requested the
Secretary-General to continue consultations on consumer
protection with a view to elaborating a set of general
guidelines for consumer protection, taking particularly
into account the needs of the developing countries,
Recalling further General Assembly resolution 38/147
of 19 December 1983,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1984/63 of 26 July 1984.
I . Decides to adopt the guidelines for consumer protection annexed to the present resolution;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to disseminate the
guidelines to Governments and other interested parties;
3. Requests all organizations of the United Nations
system that elaborate guidelines and related documents on
specific areas relevant to consumer protection to distribute
them to the appropriate bodies of individual States.
106th plenary meeting
9 April 1985

ANNEX

Guidelines for consumer protection
I. OBJECTIVES
1. Taking into account the interests and needs of consumers in all
countries, particularly those in developing countries; recognizing that consumers often face imbalances in economic terms, educational levels, and
bargaining power; and bearing in mind that consumers should have the
right of access to non-hazardous products, as well as the importance of promoting just, equitable and sustainable economic and social development,
these guidelines for consumer protection have the following objectives:
(a) To assist countries in achieving or maintaining adequate protection
for their population as consumers;
(b) To facilitate production and distribution patterns responsive to the
needs and desires of consumers;
(c) To encourage high levels of ethical conduct for those engaged in the
production and distribution of goods and services to consumers;
(d) To assist countries in curbing abusive business practices by all
enterprises at the national and international levels which adversely affect
consumers;
(e) To facilitate the development of independent consumer groups;
(/J To further international co-operation in the field of consumer protection;
(g) To encourage the development of market conditions which provide
consumers with greater choice at lower prices.
II. GENERAL PRINCIPLES
2. Governments should develop, strengthen or maintain a strong consumer protection policy, taking into account the guidelines set out below.
In so doing, each Government must set its own priorities for the protection
of consumers in accordance with the economic and social circumstances of
the country. and the needs of its population. and bearing in mind the costs
and benefits of proposed measures.
3. The legitimate needs which the guidelines are intended to meet are
the following:
(a) The protection of consumers from hazards to their health and safety;
(b) The promotion and protection of the economic interests of
consumers;
(c) Access of consumers to adequate information to enable them to
make informed choices according to indivi4ual wishes and needs;

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

180

(d) Consumer education;
(e) Availability of effective consumer redress;
(I) Freedom to form consumer and other relevant groups or organizations and the opportunity of such organizations to present their views in
decision-making processes affecting them.
4. Governments should provide or maintain adequate infrastructure to
develop, implement and monitor consumer protection policies. Special
care should be taken to ensure that measures for consumer protection are
implemented for the benefit of all sectors of the population, particularly the
rural population.
5. All enterprises should obey the relevant laws and regulations of the
countries in which they do business. They should also conform to the
appropriate provisions of international standards for consumer protection
to which the competent authorities of the country in question have agreed.
(Hereinafter references to international standards in the guidelines should
be viewed in the context of this paragraph.)
6. The potential positive role of universities and public and private
enterprises in research should be considered when developing consumer
protection policies.

III. GUIDELINES
7. The following guidelines should apply both to home-produced goods
and services and to imports.
8. In applying any procedures or regulations for consumer protection,
due regard should be given to ensuring that they do not become barriers to
international trade and that they are consistent with international trade
obligations.
A. Physical Safety
9. Governments should adopt or encourage the adoption of appropriate measures, including legal systems, safety regulations, national or international standards, voluntary standards and the maintenance of safety
records to ensure that products are safe for either intended or normally
foreseeable use.
I0. Appropriate policies should ensure that goods produced by manufacturers are safe for either intended or normally foreseeable use. Those
responsible for bringing goods to the market, in particular suppliers,
exporters, importers, retailers and the like (hereinafter referred to as "distributors"), should ensure that while in their care these goods are not rendered unsafe through improper handling or storage and that while in their
care they do not become hazardous through improper handling or storage.
Consumers should be instructed in the proper use of goods and should be
informed of the risks involved in intended or normally foreseeable use.
Vital safety information should be conveyed to consumers by internationally understandable symbols wherever possible.
11. Appropriate policies should ensure that if manufacturers or distributors become aware of unforeseen hazards after products are placed on the
market, they should notify the relevant authorities and, as appropriate, the
public without delay. Governments should also consider ways of ensuring
that consumers are properly informed of such hazards.
12. Governments should, where appropriate, adopt policies under
which, if a product is found to be seriously defective and/or to constitute a
substantial and severe hazard even when properly used, manufacturers
and/or distributors should recall it and replace or modify it, or substitute
another product for it; if it is not possible to do this within a reasonable
period of time, the consumer should be adequately compensated.
B.

Promotion and protection of consumers'
economic interests

13. Government policies should seek to enable consumers to obtain
optimum benefit from their economic resources. They should also seek to
achieve the goals of satisfactory production and performance standards,
adequate distribution methods, fair business practices, informative marketing and effective protection against practices which could adversely
affect the economic interests of consumers and the exercise of choice in the
market-place.
14. Governments should intensify their efforts to prevent practices
which are damaging to the economic interests of consumers through
ensuring that manufacturers, distributors and others involved in the provision of goods and services adhere to established laws and mandatory standards. Consumer organizations should be encouraged to monitor adverse
practices, such as the adulteration of foods, false or misleading claims in
marketing and service frauds.
15. Governments should develop, strengthen or maintain, as the case
may be, measures relating to the control of restrictive and other abusive
business practices which may be harmful to consumers, including means
for the enforcement of such measures. In this connection, Governments

should be guided by their commitment to the Set of Multilaterally Agreed
Equitable Principles and Rules for the Control of Restrictive Business
Practices adopted by the General Assembly in resolution 35/63 of 5
December 1980.
16. Governments should adopt or maintain policies that make clear
the responsibility of the producer to ensure that goods meet reasonable
demands of durability, utility and reliability, and are suited to the purpose
for which they are intended, and that the seller should see that these
requirements are met. Similar policies should apply to the provision of
services.
I 7. Governments should encourage fair and effective competition in
order to provide consumers with the greatest range of choice among products and services at the lowest cost.
18. Governments should, where appropriate, see to it that manufacturers and/or retailers ensure adequate availability of reliable after-sales service and spare parts.
I 9. Consumers should be protected from such contractual abuses as
one-sided standard contracts, exclusion of essential rights in contracts, and
unconscionable conditions of credit by sellers.
20. Promotional marketing and sales practices should be guided by the
principle of fair treatment of consumers and should meet legal requirements. This requires the provision of the information necessary to enable
consumers to take informed and independent decisions, as well as measures to ensure that the information provided is accurate.
21. Governments should encourage all concerned to participate in the
free flow of accurate information on all aspects of consumer products.
22. Governments should, within their own national context, encourage
the formulation and implementation by business, in co-operation with
consumer organizations, of codes of marketing and other business practices
to ensure adequate consumer protection. Voluntary agreements may also
be established jointly by business, consumer organizations and other interested parties. These codes should receive adequate publicity.
23. Governments should regularly review legislation pertaining to
weights and measures and assess the adequacy of the machinery for its
enforcement.
C. Standards for the safety and quality
of consumer goods and services

24. Governments should, as appropriate, formulate or promote the
elaboration and implementation of standards, voluntary and other, at the
national and international levels for the safety and quality of goods and
services and give them appropriate publicity. National standards and regulations for product safety and quality should be reviewed from time to
time, in order to ensure that they conform, where possible, to generally
accepted international standards.
25. Where a standard lower than the generally accepted international
standard is being applied because of local economic conditions, every effort
should be made to raise that standard as soon as possible.
26. Governments should encourage and ensure the availability of facilities to test and certify the safety, quality and performance of essential consumer goods and services.
D.

Distribution facilities for essential
consumer goods and services

27. Governments should, where appropriate, consider:
(a) Adopting or maintaining policies to ensure the efficient distribution
of goods and services to consumers; where appropriate, specific policies
should be considered to ensure the distribution of essential goods and services where this distribution is endangered, as could be the case particularly
in rural areas. Such policies could include assistance for the creation ofadequate storage and retail facilities in rural centres, incentives for consumer
self-help and better control of the conditions under which essential goods
and services are provided in rural areas;
(b) Encouraging the establishment of consumer co-operatives and
related trading activities, as well as information about them, especially in
rural areas.
E. Measures enabling consumers to obtain redress
28. Governments should establish or maintain legal and/or administrative measures to enable consumers or, as appropriate, relevant organizations to obtain redress through formal or informal procedures that are
expeditious, fair, inexpensive and accessible. Such procedures should take
particular account of the needs of low-income consumers.
29. Governments should encourage all enterprises to resolve consumer
disputes in a fair, expeditious and informal manner, and to establish voluntary mechanisms, including advisory services and informal complaints
procedures, which can provide assistance to consumers.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

30. Information on available redress and other dispute-resolving procedures should be made available to consumers.

F. Education and information programmes
31. Governments should develop or encourage the development of
general consumer education and information programmes, bearing in
miild the cultural traditions of the people concerned. The aim of such programmes should be to enable people to act as discriminating consumers,
capable of making an informed choice of goods and services, and conscious
of their rights and responsibilities. In developing such programmes, special
attention should be given to the needs of disadvantaged consumers, in both
rural and urban areas, including low-income consumers and those with low
or non-existent literacy levels.
32. Consumer education should, where appropriate, become an integral part of the basic curriculum of the educational system, preferably as a
component of existing subjects.
33. Consumer education and information programmes should cover
such important aspects of consumer protection as the following:
(a) Health, nutrition, prevention of food-borne diseases and food adulteration;

(b) Product hazards;
(c) Product labelling;
(d) Relevant legislation, how to obtain redress, and agencies and organizations for consumer protection;
(e) Information on weights and measures, prices, quality, credit conditions and availability of basic necessities; and
(I) As appropriate, pollution and environment.
34. Governments should encourage consumer organizations and other
interested groups, including the media, to undertake education and information programmes, particularly for the benefit of low-income consumer
groups in rural and urban areas.
35. Business should, where appropriate, undertake or participate in factual and relevant consumer education and information programmes.
36. Bearing in mind the need to reach rural consumers and illiterate
consumers, Governments should, as appropriate, develop or encourage the
development of consumer information programmes in the mass media.
37. Governments should organize or encourage training programmes
for educators, mass media professionals and consumer advisers, to enable
them to participate in carrying out consumer information and education
programmes.

G. Measures relating to specific areas
38. In advancing consumer interests, particularly in developing
countries, Governments should, where appropriate, give priority to areas
of essential concern for the health of the consumer, such as food, water and
pharmaceuticals. Policies should be adopted or maintained for product
quality control, adequate and secure distribution facilities, standardized
international labelling and information, as well as education and research
programmes in these areas. Government guidelines in regard to specific
areas should be developed in the context of the provisions of this document.
39. Food. When formulating national policies and plans with regard to
food, Governments should take into account the need of all consumers for
food security and should. support and, as far as possible, adopt standards
from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
World Health Organization Codex Alimentarius or, in their absence, other
generally accepted international food standards. Governments should
maintain, develop or improve food safety measures, including, inter alia.

181

----------------

safety cnteria. food standards and dietary requirements and effective monitoring, inspection and evaluation mechanisms.
40. Water. Governments should, within the goals and targets set for the
International Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade, formulate.
maintain or strengthen national policies to improve the supply, distribution and quality of water for drinking. Due regard should be paid to the
choice of appropriate levels of service, quality and technology, the need for
education programmes and the importance of community participation.
41. Pharmaceuticals. Governments should develop or maintain adequate standards, provisions and appropriate regulatory systems for
ensunng the quality and appropriate use of pharmaceuticals through integrated national drug policies which could address, inter alia, procurement.
distribution, production, licensing arrangements, registration systems and
the availability of reliable information on pharmaceuticals. In so doing,
Governments should take special account of the work and recommendations of the World Health Organization on pharmaceuticals. For relevant
products, the use of that organization's Certification Scheme on the Quality
of Pharmaceutical Products Moving in International Commerce and other
international information systems on pharmaceuticals should be encouraged. Measures should also be taken, as appropriate, to promote the use of
international non-proprietary names (INNs) for drugs, drawing on the
work done by the World Health Organization.
42. In addition to the priority areas indicated above, Governments
should adopt appropriate measures in other areas, such as pesticides and
chemicals, in regard, where relevant, to their use, production and storage,
taking into account such relevant health and environmental information as
Governments may require producers to provide and include in the labelling of products.
IV.

43.
text:

INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION

Governments should, especially in a regional or subregional con-

(a) Develop, review. maintain or strengthen, as appropriate, mechanisms for the exchange of information on national policies and measures in
the field of consumer protection.
(b) Co-operate or encourage co-operation in the implementation of
consumer protection policies to achieve greater results within existing
resources. Examples of such co-operation could be collaboration in the setting up or Joint use of testing facilities, common testing procedures,
exchange of consumer information and education programmes, joint training programmes and joint elaboration of regulations;
(c) Co-operate to improve the conditions under which essential goods
are offered to consumers, giving due regard to both price and quality. Such
co-operation could include joint procurement of essential goods, exchange
of information on different procurement possibilities and agreements on
regional product specifications.
44. Governments should develop or strengthen information links
regarding products which have been banned, withdrawn or severely
restricted in order to enable other importing countries to protect themselves adequately against the harmful effects of such products.
45. Governments should work to ensure that the quality of products,
and information relating to such products, does not vary from country to
country in a way that would have detrimental effects on consumers.
46. Governments should work to ensure that policies and measures for
consumer protection are implemented with due regard to their not becoming barriers to international trade. and that they are consistent with international trade obligations.
