A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/229
8 July 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 144
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/51/L.72 and Add.1)]
51/229.

Convention on the law of the nonnavigational uses of international
watercourses

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind Article 13, paragraph 1 a of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling its resolution 2669 (XXV) of 8 December 1970, in which it
recommended that the International Law Commission should take up the study of
the law of the non-navigational uses of international watercourses with a view
to its progressive development and codification,
Recalling also that the International Law Commission submitted a final
set of draft articles on the law of the non-navigational uses of international
watercourses in chapter III of its report on the work of its forty-sixth
session,1
Recalling further its resolutions 49/52 of 9 December 1994 and 51/206 of
17 December 1996, by which it decided that the Sixth Committee should convene
as a working group of the whole, open to States Members of the United Nations
or members of the specialized agencies, to elaborate a framework convention on
the law of the non-navigational uses of international watercourses, and that
on completion of its mandate the Working Group of the Whole should report
directly to the General Assembly,

1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session, Supplement
No. 10 (A/49/10).
97-77293

/...

A/RES/51/229
Page 2

Having considered the report of the Sixth Committee convening as the
Working Group of the Whole,2 and expressing its gratitude for the work done,
1.
Expresses its deep appreciation to the International Law
Commission for its valuable work on the law of the non-navigational uses of
international watercourses and to the successive special rapporteurs for their
contribution to that work;
2.
Adopts the Convention on the Law of the Non-navigational Uses of
International Watercourses, contained in the annex to the present resolution,
and requests the Secretary-General as depositary to open it for signature;
3.
Invites States and regional economic integration organizations to
become parties to the Convention.
99th plenary meeting
21 May 1997
ANNEX
Convention on the Law of the Non-navigational Uses
of International Watercourses
The Parties to the present Convention,
Conscious of the importance of international watercourses and the
non-navigational uses thereof in many regions of the world,
Having in mind Article 13, paragraph 1 a, of the Charter of the United
Nations, which provides that the General Assembly shall initiate studies and
make recommendations for the purpose of encouraging the progressive
development of international law and its codification,
Considering that successful codification and progressive development of
rules of international law regarding non-navigational uses of international
watercourses would assist in promoting and implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Taking into account the problems affecting many international
watercourses resulting from, among other things, increasing demands and
pollution,
Expressing the conviction that a framework convention will ensure the
utilization, development, conservation, management and protection of
international watercourses and the promotion of the optimal and sustainable
utilization thereof for present and future generations,
Affirming the importance of international cooperation and goodneighbourliness in this field,
Aware of the special situation and needs of developing countries,

2

A/51/869.

A/RES/51/229
Page 3

Recalling the principles and recommendations adopted by the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development of 1992 in the Rio
Declaration on Environment and Development3 and Agenda 21,4
Recalling also the existing bilateral and multilateral agreements
regarding the non-navigational uses of international watercourses,
Mindful of the valuable contribution of international organizations,
both governmental and non-governmental, to the codification and progressive
development of international law in this field,
Appreciative of the work carried out by the International Law Commission
on the law of the non-navigational uses of international watercourses,
Bearing in mind United Nations General Assembly resolution 49/52 of
9 December 1994,
Have agreed as follows:
PART I.

INTRODUCTION

Article 1
Scope of the present Convention
1.
The present Convention applies to uses of international watercourses and
of their waters for purposes other than navigation and to measures of
protection, preservation and management related to the uses of those
watercourses and their waters.
2.
The uses of international watercourses for navigation is not within the
scope of the present Convention except insofar as other uses affect navigation
or are affected by navigation.
Article 2
Use of terms
For the purposes of the present Convention:
(a)
"Watercourse" means a system of surface waters and groundwaters
constituting by virtue of their physical relationship a unitary whole and
normally flowing into a common terminus;
(b)
"International watercourse" means a watercourse, parts of which
are situated in different States;

3

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio
de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and Vol. I/Corr.1,
Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions Adopted by the Conference,
resolution 1, annex I.
4

Ibid., annex II.

A/RES/51/229
Page 4

(c)
"Watercourse State" means a State Party to the present Convention
in whose territory part of an international watercourse is situated, or a
Party that is a regional economic integration organization, in the territory
of one or more of whose Member States part of an international watercourse is
situated;
(d)
"Regional economic integration organization" means an organization
constituted by sovereign States of a given region, to which its member States
have transferred competence in respect of matters governed by the present
Convention and which has been duly authorized in accordance with its internal
procedures, to sign, ratify, accept, approve or accede to it.
Article 3
Watercourse agreements
1.
In the absence of an agreement to the contrary, nothing in the present
Convention shall affect the rights or obligations of a watercourse State
arising from agreements in force for it on the date on which it became a party
to the present Convention.
2.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, parties to agreements
referred to in paragraph 1 may, where necessary, consider harmonizing such
agreements with the basic principles of the present Convention.
3.
Watercourse States may enter into one or more agreements, hereinafter
referred to as "watercourse agreements", which apply and adjust the provisions
of the present Convention to the characteristics and uses of a particular
international watercourse or part thereof.
4.
Where a watercourse agreement is concluded between two or more
watercourse States, it shall define the waters to which it applies. Such an
agreement may be entered into with respect to an entire international
watercourse or any part thereof or a particular project, programme or use
except insofar as the agreement adversely affects, to a significant extent,
the use by one or more other watercourse States of the waters of the
watercourse, without their express consent.
5.
Where a watercourse State considers that adjustment and application of
the provisions of the present Convention is required because of the
characteristics and uses of a particular international watercourse,
watercourse States shall consult with a view to negotiating in good faith for
the purpose of concluding a watercourse agreement or agreements.
6.
Where some but not all watercourse States to a particular international
watercourse are parties to an agreement, nothing in such agreement shall
affect the rights or obligations under the present Convention of watercourse
States that are not parties to such an agreement.
Article 4
Parties to watercourse agreements
1.
Every watercourse State is entitled to participate in the negotiation of
and to become a party to any watercourse agreement that applies to the entire

A/RES/51/229
Page 5

international watercourse, as well as to participate in any relevant
consultations.
2.
A watercourse State whose use of an international watercourse may be
affected to a significant extent by the implementation of a proposed
watercourse agreement that applies only to a part of the watercourse or to a
particular project, programme or use is entitled to participate in
consultations on such an agreement and, where appropriate, in the negotiation
thereof in good faith with a view to becoming a party thereto, to the extent
that its use is thereby affected.
PART II.

GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Article 5

Equitable and reasonable utilization and participation
1.
Watercourse States shall in their respective territories utilize an
international watercourse in an equitable and reasonable manner. In
particular, an international watercourse shall be used and developed by
watercourse States with a view to attaining optimal and sustainable
utilization thereof and benefits therefrom, taking into account the interests
of the watercourse States concerned, consistent with adequate protection of
the watercourse.
2.
Watercourse States shall participate in the use, development and
protection of an international watercourse in an equitable and reasonable
manner. Such participation includes both the right to utilize the watercourse
and the duty to cooperate in the protection and development thereof, as
provided in the present Convention.
Article 6
Factors relevant to equitable and reasonable utilization
1.
Utilization of an international watercourse in an equitable and
reasonable manner within the meaning of article 5 requires taking into account
all relevant factors and circumstances, including:
(a)
Geographic, hydrographic, hydrological, climatic, ecological and
other factors of a natural character;
(b)
(c)
State;

The social and economic needs of the watercourse States concerned;
The population dependent on the watercourse in each watercourse

(d)
The effects of the use or uses of the watercourses in one
watercourse State on other watercourse States;
(e)

Existing and potential uses of the watercourse;

(f)
Conservation, protection, development and economy of use of the
water resources of the watercourse and the costs of measures taken to that
effect;

A/RES/51/229
Page 6

(g)
The availability of alternatives, of comparable value, to a
particular planned or existing use.
2.
In the application of article 5 or paragraph 1 of this article,
watercourse States concerned shall, when the need arises, enter into
consultations in a spirit of cooperation.
3.
The weight to be given to each factor is to be determined by its
importance in comparison with that of other relevant factors. In determining
what is a reasonable and equitable use, all relevant factors are to be
considered together and a conclusion reached on the basis of the whole.
Article 7
Obligation not to cause significant harm
1.
Watercourse States shall, in utilizing an international watercourse in
their territories, take all appropriate measures to prevent the causing of
significant harm to other watercourse States.
2.
Where significant harm nevertheless is caused to another watercourse
State, the States whose use causes such harm shall, in the absence of
agreement to such use, take all appropriate measures, having due regard for
the provisions of articles 5 and 6, in consultation with the affected State,
to eliminate or mitigate such harm and, where appropriate, to discuss the
question of compensation.
Article 8
General obligation to cooperate
1.
Watercourse States shall cooperate on the basis of sovereign equality,
territorial integrity, mutual benefit and good faith in order to attain
optimal utilization and adequate protection of an international watercourse.
2.
In determining the manner of such cooperation, watercourse States may
consider the establishment of joint mechanisms or commissions, as deemed
necessary by them, to facilitate cooperation on relevant measures and
procedures in the light of experience gained through cooperation in existing
joint mechanisms and commissions in various regions.
Article 9
Regular exchange of data and information
1.
Pursuant to article 8, watercourse States shall on a regular basis
exchange readily available data and information on the condition of the
watercourse, in particular that of a hydrological, meteorological,
hydrogeological and ecological nature and related to the water quality as well
as related forecasts.
2.
If a watercourse State is requested by another watercourse State to
provide data or information that is not readily available, it shall employ its
best efforts to comply with the request but may condition its compliance upon

A/RES/51/229
Page 7

payment by the requesting State of the reasonable costs of collecting and,
where appropriate, processing such data or information.
3.
Watercourse States shall employ their best efforts to collect and, where
appropriate, to process data and information in a manner which facilitates its
utilization by the other watercourse States to which it is communicated.
Article 10
Relationship between different kinds of uses
1.
In the absence of agreement or custom to the contrary, no use of an
international watercourse enjoys inherent priority over other uses.
2.
In the event of a conflict between uses of an international watercourse,
it shall be resolved with reference to articles 5 to 7, with special regard
being given to the requirements of vital human needs.
PART III.

PLANNED MEASURES

Article 11
Information concerning planned measures
Watercourse States shall exchange information and consult each other
and, if necessary, negotiate on the possible effects of planned measures on
the condition of an international watercourse.
Article 12
Notification concerning planned measures with possible
adverse effects
Before a watercourse State implements or permits the implementation of
planned measures which may have a significant adverse effect upon other
watercourse States, it shall provide those States with timely notification
thereof. Such notification shall be accompanied by available technical data
and information, including the results of any environmental impact assessment,
in order to enable the notified States to evaluate the possible effects of the
planned measures.
Article 13
Period for reply to notification
Unless otherwise agreed:
(a)
A watercourse State providing a notification under article 12
shall allow the notified States a period of six months within which to study
and evaluate the possible effects of the planned measures and to communicate
the findings to it;

A/RES/51/229
Page 8

(b)
This period shall, at the request of a notified State for which
the evaluation of the planned measures poses special difficulty, be extended
for a period of six months.
Article 14
Obligations of the notifying State during the period for reply
During the period referred to in article 13, the notifying State:
(a)
Shall cooperate with the notified States by providing them, on
request, with any additional data and information that is available and
necessary for an accurate evaluation; and
(b)
Shall not implement or permit the implementation of the planned
measures without the consent of the notified States.
Article 15
Reply to notification
The notified States shall communicate their findings to the notifying
State as early as possible within the period applicable pursuant to
article 13. If a notified State finds that implementation of the planned
measures would be inconsistent with the provisions of articles 5 or 7, it
shall attach to its finding a documented explanation setting forth the reasons
for the finding.
Article 16
Absence of reply to notification
1.
If, within the period applicable pursuant to article 13, the notifying
State receives no communication under article 15, it may, subject to its
obligations under articles 5 and 7, proceed with the implementation of the
planned measures, in accordance with the notification and any other data and
information provided to the notified States.
2.
Any claim to compensation by a notified State which has failed to reply
within the period applicable pursuant to article 13 may be offset by the costs
incurred by the notifying State for action undertaken after the expiration of
the time for a reply which would not have been undertaken if the notified
State had objected within that period.
Article 17
Consultations and negotiations concerning planned measures
1.
If a communication is made under article 15 that implementation of the
planned measures would be inconsistent with the provisions of articles 5 or 7,
the notifying State and the State making the communication shall enter into
consultations and, if necessary, negotiations with a view to arriving at an
equitable resolution of the situation.

A/RES/51/229
Page 9

2.
The consultations and negotiations shall be conducted on the basis that
each State must in good faith pay reasonable regard to the rights and
legitimate interests of the other State.
3.
During the course of the consultations and negotiations, the notifying
State shall, if so requested by the notified State at the time it makes the
communication, refrain from implementing or permitting the implementation of
the planned measures for a period of six months unless otherwise agreed.
Article 18
Procedures in the absence of notification
1.
If a watercourse State has reasonable grounds to believe that another
watercourse State is planning measures that may have a significant adverse
effect upon it, the former State may request the latter to apply the
provisions of article 12. The request shall be accompanied by a documented
explanation setting forth its grounds.
2.
In the event that the State planning the measures nevertheless finds
that it is not under an obligation to provide a notification under article 12,
it shall so inform the other State, providing a documented explanation setting
forth the reasons for such finding. If this finding does not satisfy the
other State, the two States shall, at the request of that other State,
promptly enter into consultations and negotiations in the manner indicated in
paragraphs 1 and 2 of article 17.
3.
During the course of the consultations and negotiations, the State
planning the measures shall, if so requested by the other State at the time it
requests the initiation of consultations and negotiations, refrain from
implementing or permitting the implementation of those measures for a period
of six months unless otherwise agreed.
Article 19
Urgent implementation of planned measures
1.
In the event that the implementation of planned measures is of the
utmost urgency in order to protect public health, public safety or other
equally important interests, the State planning the measures may, subject to
articles 5 and 7, immediately proceed to implementation, notwithstanding the
provisions of article 14 and paragraph 3 of article 17.
2.
In such case, a formal declaration of the urgency of the measures shall
be communicated without delay to the other watercourse States referred to in
article 12 together with the relevant data and information.
3.
The State planning the measures shall, at the request of any of the
States referred to in paragraph 2, promptly enter into consultations and
negotiations with it in the manner indicated in paragraphs 1 and 2 of
article 17.
PART IV.

PROTECTION, PRESERVATION AND MANAGEMENT
Article 20

A/RES/51/229
Page 10

Protection and preservation of ecosystems
Watercourse States shall, individually and, where appropriate, jointly,
protect and preserve the ecosystems of international watercourses.
Article 21
Prevention, reduction and control of pollution
1.
For the purpose of this article, "pollution of an international
watercourse" means any detrimental alteration in the composition or quality of
the waters of an international watercourse which results directly or
indirectly from human conduct.
2.
Watercourse States shall, individually and, where appropriate, jointly,
prevent, reduce and control the pollution of an international watercourse that
may cause significant harm to other watercourse States or to their
environment, including harm to human health or safety, to the use of the
waters for any beneficial purpose or to the living resources of the
watercourse. Watercourse States shall take steps to harmonize their policies
in this connection.
3.
Watercourse States shall, at the request of any of them, consult with a
view to arriving at mutually agreeable measures and methods to prevent, reduce
and control pollution of an international watercourse, such as:
(a)

Setting joint water quality objectives and criteria;

(b)
Establishing techniques and practices to address pollution from
point and non-point sources;
(c)
Establishing lists of substances the introduction of which into
the waters of an international watercourse is to be prohibited, limited,
investigated or monitored.
Article 22
Introduction of alien or new species
Watercourse States shall take all measures necessary to prevent the
introduction of species, alien or new, into an international watercourse which
may have effects detrimental to the ecosystem of the watercourse resulting in
significant harm to other watercourse States.
Article 23
Protection and preservation of the marine environment
Watercourse States shall, individually and, where appropriate, in
cooperation with other States, take all measures with respect to an
international watercourse that are necessary to protect and preserve the
marine environment, including estuaries, taking into account generally
accepted international rules and standards.

A/RES/51/229
Page 11

Article 24
Management
1.
Watercourse States shall, at the request of any of them, enter into
consultations concerning the management of an international watercourse, which
may include the establishment of a joint management mechanism.
2.
to:

For the purposes of this article, "management" refers, in particular,

(a)
Planning the sustainable development of an international
watercourse and providing for the implementation of any plans adopted; and
(b)
Otherwise promoting the rational and optimal utilization,
protection and control of the watercourse.
Article 25
Regulation
1.
Watercourse States shall cooperate, where appropriate, to respond to
needs or opportunities for regulation of the flow of the waters of an
international watercourse.
2.
Unless otherwise agreed, watercourse States shall participate on an
equitable basis in the construction and maintenance or defrayal of the costs
of such regulation works as they may have agreed to undertake.
3.
For the purposes of this article, "regulation" means the use of
hydraulic works or any other continuing measure to alter, vary or otherwise
control the flow of the waters of an international watercourse.
Article 26
Installations
1.
Watercourse States shall, within their respective territories, employ
their best efforts to maintain and protect installations, facilities and other
works related to an international watercourse.
2.
Watercourse States shall, at the request of any of them which has
reasonable grounds to believe that it may suffer significant adverse effects,
enter into consultations with regard to:
(a)
The safe operation and maintenance of installations, facilities or
other works related to an international watercourse; and
(b)
The protection of installations, facilities or other works from
wilful or negligent acts or the forces of nature.
PART V.

HARMFUL CONDITIONS AND EMERGENCY SITUATIONS
Article 27

A/RES/51/229
Page 12

Prevention and mitigation of harmful conditions
Watercourse States shall, individually and, where appropriate, jointly,
take all appropriate measures to prevent or mitigate conditions related to an
international watercourse that may be harmful to other watercourse States,
whether resulting from natural causes or human conduct, such as flood or ice
conditions, water-borne diseases, siltation, erosion, salt-water intrusion,
drought or desertification.
Article 28
Emergency situations
1.
For the purposes of this article, "emergency" means a situation that
causes, or poses an imminent threat of causing, serious harm to watercourse
States or other States and that results suddenly from natural causes, such as
floods, the breaking up of ice, landslides or earthquakes, or from human
conduct, such as industrial accidents.
2.
A watercourse State shall, without delay and by the most expeditious
means available, notify other potentially affected States and competent
international organizations of any emergency originating within its territory.
3.
A watercourse State within whose territory an emergency originates
shall, in cooperation with potentially affected States and, where appropriate,
competent international organizations, immediately take all practicable
measures necessitated by the circumstances to prevent, mitigate and eliminate
harmful effects of the emergency.
4.
When necessary, watercourse States shall jointly develop contingency
plans for responding to emergencies, in cooperation, where appropriate, with
other potentially affected States and competent international organizations.
PART VI.

MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Article 29

International watercourses and installations in time of
armed conflict
International watercourses and related installations, facilities and
other works shall enjoy the protection accorded by the principles and rules of
international law applicable in international and non-international armed
conflict and shall not be used in violation of those principles and rules.
Article 30
Indirect procedures
In cases where there are serious obstacles to direct contacts between
watercourse States, the States concerned shall fulfil their obligations of
cooperation provided for in the present Convention, including exchange of data
and information, notification, communication, consultations and negotiations,
through any indirect procedure accepted by them.

A/RES/51/229
Page 13

Article 31
Data and information vital to national defence or security
Nothing in the present Convention obliges a watercourse State to provide
data or information vital to its national defence or security. Nevertheless,
that State shall cooperate in good faith with the other watercourse States
with a view to providing as much information as possible under the
circumstances.
Article 32
Non-discrimination
Unless the watercourse States concerned have agreed otherwise for the
protection of the interests of persons, natural or juridical, who have
suffered or are under a serious threat of suffering significant transboundary
harm as a result of activities related to an international watercourse, a
watercourse State shall not discriminate on the basis of nationality or
residence or place where the injury occurred, in granting to such persons, in
accordance with its legal system, access to judicial or other procedures, or a
right to claim compensation or other relief in respect of significant harm
caused by such activities carried on in its territory.
Article 33
Settlement of disputes
1.
In the event of a dispute between two or more Parties concerning the
interpretation or application of the present Convention, the Parties concerned
shall, in the absence of an applicable agreement between them, seek a
settlement of the dispute by peaceful means in accordance with the following
provisions.
2.
If the Parties concerned cannot reach agreement by negotiation requested
by one of them, they may jointly seek the good offices of, or request
mediation or conciliation by, a third party, or make use, as appropriate, of
any joint watercourse institutions that may have been established by them or
agree to submit the dispute to arbitration or to the International Court of
Justice.
3.
Subject to the operation of paragraph 10 of the present article, if
after six months from the time of the request for negotiations referred to in
paragraph 2, the Parties concerned have not been able to settle their dispute
through negotiation or any other means referred to in paragraph 2, the dispute
shall be submitted, at the request of any of the parties to the dispute, to
impartial fact-finding in accordance with paragraphs 4 to 9, unless the
Parties otherwise agree.
4.
A Fact-finding Commission shall be established, composed of one member
nominated by each Party concerned and in addition a member not having the
nationality of any of the Parties concerned chosen by the nominated members
who shall serve as Chairman.
5.
If the members nominated by the Parties are unable to agree on a
Chairman within three months of the request for the establishment of the

A/RES/51/229
Page 14

Commission, any Party concerned may request the Secretary-General of the
United Nations to appoint the Chairman who shall not have the nationality of
any of the parties to the dispute or of any riparian State of the watercourse
concerned. If one of the Parties fails to nominate a member within three
months of the initial request pursuant to paragraph 3, any other Party
concerned may request the Secretary-General of the United Nations to appoint a
person who shall not have the nationality of any of the parties to the dispute
or of any riparian State of the watercourse concerned. The person so
appointed shall constitute a single-member Commission.
6.

The Commission shall determine its own procedure.

7.
The Parties concerned have the obligation to provide the Commission with
such information as it may require and, on request, to permit the Commission
to have access to their respective territory and to inspect any facilities,
plant, equipment, construction or natural feature relevant for the purpose of
its inquiry.
8.
The Commission shall adopt its report by a majority vote, unless it is a
single-member Commission, and shall submit that report to the Parties
concerned setting forth its findings and the reasons therefor and such
recommendations as it deems appropriate for an equitable solution of the
dispute, which the Parties concerned shall consider in good faith.
9.
The expenses of the Commission shall be borne equally by the Parties
concerned.
10.
When ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to the present
Convention, or at any time thereafter, a Party which is not a regional
economic integration organization may declare in a written instrument
submitted to the Depositary that, in respect of any dispute not resolved in
accordance with paragraph 2, it recognizes as compulsory ipso facto and
without special agreement in relation to any Party accepting the same
obligation:
(a)
and/or

Submission of the dispute to the International Court of Justice;

(b)
Arbitration by an arbitral tribunal established and operating,
unless the parties to the dispute otherwise agreed, in accordance with the
procedure laid down in the appendix to the present Convention.
A Party which is a regional economic integration organization may make a
declaration with like effect in relation to arbitration in accordance with
subparagraph (b).
PART VII.

FINAL CLAUSES

Article 34
Signature
The present Convention shall be open for signature by all States and by
regional economic integration organizations from 21 May 1997 until 20 May 2000
at United Nations Headquarters in New York.

A/RES/51/229
Page 15

Article 35
Ratification, acceptance, approval or accession
1.
The present Convention is subject to ratification, acceptance, approval
or accession by States and by regional economic integration organizations.
The instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession shall be
deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
2.
Any regional economic integration organization which becomes a Party to
the present Convention without any of its member States being a Party shall be
bound by all the obligations under the Convention. In the case of such
organizations, one or more of whose member States is a Party to the present
Convention, the organization and its member States shall decide on their
respective responsibilities for the performance of their obligations under the
present Convention. In such cases, the organization and the member States
shall not be entitled to exercise rights under the Convention concurrently.
3.
In their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession,
the regional economic integration organizations shall declare the extent of
their competence with respect to the matters governed by the Convention.
These organizations shall also inform the Secretary-General of the United
Nations of any substantial modification in the extent of their competence.
Article 36
Entry into force
1.
The present Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth day
following the date of deposit of the thirty-fifth instrument of ratification,
acceptance, approval or accession with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
2.
For each State or regional economic integration organization that
ratifies, accepts or approves the Convention or accedes thereto after the
deposit of the thirty-fifth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval
or accession, the Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth day after
the deposit by such State or regional economic integration organization of its
instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.
3.
For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2, any instrument deposited by a
regional economic integration organization shall not be counted as additional
to those deposited by States.
Article 37
Authentic texts
The original of the present Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese,
English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be
deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly
authorized thereto, have signed the present Convention.

A/RES/51/229
Page 16

DONE at New York, this _____ day of ________ one thousand nine hundred
and ninety-seven.
APPENDIX
Arbitration
Article 1
Unless the parties to the dispute otherwise agree, the arbitration
pursuant to article 33 of the Convention shall take place in accordance with
articles 2 to 14 of the present appendix.
Article 2
The claimant party shall notify the respondent party that it is
referring a dispute to arbitration pursuant to article 33 of the Convention.
The notification shall state the subject matter of arbitration and include, in
particular, the articles of the Convention, the interpretation or application
of which are at issue. If the parties do not agree on the subject matter of
the dispute, the arbitral tribunal shall determine the subject matter.
Article 3
1.
In disputes between two parties, the arbitral tribunal shall consist of
three members. Each of the parties to the dispute shall appoint an arbitrator
and the two arbitrators so appointed shall designate by common agreement the
third arbitrator, who shall be the Chairman of the tribunal. The latter shall
not be a national of one of the parties to the dispute or of any riparian
State of the watercourse concerned, nor have his or her usual place of
residence in the territory of one of these parties or such riparian State, nor
have dealt with the case in any other capacity.
2.
In disputes between more than two parties, parties in the same interest
shall appoint one arbitrator jointly by agreement.
3.
Any vacancy shall be filled in the manner prescribed for the initial
appointment.
Article 4
1.
If the Chairman of the arbitral tribunal has not been designated within
two months of the appointment of the second arbitrator, the President of the
International Court of Justice shall, at the request of a party, designate the
Chairman within a further two-month period.
2.
If one of the parties to the dispute does not appoint an arbitrator
within two months of receipt of the request, the other party may inform the
President of the International Court of Justice, who shall make the
designation within a further two-month period.
Article 5

A/RES/51/229
Page 17

The arbitral tribunal shall render its decisions in accordance with the
provisions of the Convention and international law.
Article 6
Unless the parties to the dispute otherwise agree, the arbitral tribunal
shall determine its own rules of procedure.
Article 7
The arbitral tribunal may, at the request of one of the Parties,
recommend essential interim measures of protection.
Article 8
1.
The parties to the dispute shall facilitate the work of the arbitral
tribunal and, in particular, using all means at their disposal, shall:
(a)
Provide it with all relevant documents, information and
facilities; and
(b)
Enable it, when necessary, to call witnesses or experts and
receive their evidence.
2.
The parties and the arbitrators are under an obligation to protect the
confidentiality of any information they receive in confidence during the
proceedings of the arbitral tribunal.
Article 9
Unless the arbitral tribunal determines otherwise because of the
particular circumstances of the case, the costs of the tribunal shall be borne
by the parties to the dispute in equal shares. The tribunal shall keep a
record of all its costs, and shall furnish a final statement thereof to the
parties.
Article 10
Any party that has an interest of a legal nature in the subject matter
of the dispute which may be affected by the decision in the case, may
intervene in the proceedings with the consent of the arbitral tribunal.
Article 11
The arbitral tribunal may hear and determine counterclaims arising
directly out of the subject matter of the dispute.
Article 12
Decisions both on procedure and substance of the arbitral tribunal shall
be taken by a majority vote of its members.

A/RES/51/229
Page 18

Article 13
If one of the parties to the dispute does not appear before the arbitral
tribunal or fails to defend its case, the other party may request the tribunal
to continue the proceedings and to make its award. Absence of a party or a
failure of a party to defend its case shall not constitute a bar to the
proceedings. Before rendering its final decision, the arbitral tribunal must
satisfy itself that the claim is well founded in fact and law.
Article 14
1.
The arbitral tribunal shall render its final decision within five months
of the date on which it is fully constituted unless it finds it necessary to
extend the time limit for a period which should not exceed five more months.
2.
The final decision of the arbitral tribunal shall be confined to the
subject matter of the dispute and shall state the reasons on which it is
based. It shall contain the names of the members who have participated and
the date of the final decision. Any member of the tribunal may attach a
separate or dissenting opinion to the final decision.
3.
The award shall be binding on the parties to the dispute. It shall be
without appeal unless the parties to the dispute have agreed in advance to an
appellate procedure.
4.
Any controversy which may arise between the parties to the dispute as
regards the interpretation or manner of implementation of the final decision
may be submitted by either party for decision to the arbitral tribunal which
rendered it.
