S/PV.7104

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7104th meeting

Tuesday, 28 January 2014, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Jordan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Ms. King
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Sherman
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Burundi
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office in Burundi
(S/2014/36)

14-21867 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1421867*

S/PV.7104

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.

They demonstrate, without doubt, the importance that
Burundi attaches to the United Nations.

Adoption of the agenda

(spoke in English)

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Office in Burundi (S/2014/36)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Burundi to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Laurent Kavakure, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Burundi.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Office in Burundi, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Paul Seger,
Permanent Representative of Switzerland and Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/36, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office in
Burundi.
I now give the floor to Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga.
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga: It is a great pleasure, Sir,
to see you as President of the Council and to see your
country as a Council member for the next two years.
Please allow me to congratulate you on your already
impressive contribution to the work of this body.
(spoke in French)
Let me also warmly welcome His Excellency
Mr. Laurent Kavakure, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Burundi, with whom
I have had the privilege of working closely since I
took office. I thank him profusely and convey once
again my gratitude to the Government of Burundi
for its warm welcome and our excellent relationship.

2/9

28/01/2014

The Council has before it the comprehensive report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi
(S/2014/36). The report was informed by the strategic
assessment mission that was conducted pursuant to
resolution 2090 (2013). The findings of the mission
and the final assessment by the Secretary-General
are compelling. I shall therefore limit myself to a few
comments.
(spoke in French)
I come to the Council today with my heart full
of hope and optimism for Burundi’s future. I come
to the Council emboldened by the echo of what we
may now call the spirit of Kigobe, where the National
Assembly of Burundi met from 19 to 20 December 2013
and the President brought together all political actors
and representatives of Burundian civil society for
national consultations on Burundi’s future constitution.
The Burundian nation and international observers
unanimously welcomed that great moment of harmony,
which entrenched the virtues of dialogue and the search
for consensus on major issues of national interest. For
those who know a bit about Burundi, what happened
at Kigobe was in line with the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi, which remains
to this day a strong expression of Burundians’ desire to
forge a common destiny.
Since then, Burundi has continued its progress
towards building a lasting peace and strengthening
its democratic institutions. In particular, the country
successfully held two elections in 2005 and 2010, and
established national armed forces that form the bedrock
of security throughout the country. Those forces are
now the pride of Burundi, and their role in maintaining
international peace and security and the sacrifices they
have made in doing so inspire respect and admiration.
However, I also come here in the awareness that, as
far as our wonderful peacebuilding work in Burundi has
come, it remains unfinished. That fact has been noted​​
by more people than just the Secretary-General. It is the
conviction first and foremost of the Government and
people of Burundi. It is indeed at the very heart of the
efforts to build a consensual society that are expressed
in several national policy documents, including
the Vision Burundi 2025 and the second version of

14-21867

28/01/2014

The situation in Burundi

Strategic Framework for Growth and the Fight against
Poverty, which Ambassador Paul Seger and all of
Burundi’s development partners tirelessly support. The
fragility and volatility of a number of key indicators
indeed justify such commitment. Giving Burundi every
chance to set its development process on a firm footing
and win the fight against poverty is indeed vital to
lasting peacebuilding and social cohesion.
More recently, the Burundian political class met
from 27 to 29 November 2013 in Bujumbura to evaluate
for the first time the road map adopted by consensus
at the workshop held from 11 to 13 March 2013. They
recognized, without skirting the issue, that the climate
of mistrust among the main political actors, the absence
of a consensual process for revising the Constitution,
intolerance and political violence involving, in
particular, young people affiliated with certain political
parties, and the limitations to the exercise of public
freedoms were among the pressing challenges that had
to be urgently addressed.
You yourself, Mr. President, have taken the
initiative to convene tomorrow, 29 January, an
important thematic debate on the lessons to be drawn
from war and the search for a permanent peace. I heed
your warning that a poor management of collective
memory can threaten the future peace and stability of
nations. That warning applies to Burundi, where the
process of taking ownership of the justice mechanisms
transition remains unfinished.
For all those reasons, the Secretary-General himself
has endeavoured to raise awareness among Burundian
authorities at the highest level of the need for sustained
political support by the United Nations. The SecretaryGeneral’s offer is aimed at supporting national efforts
in the delicate transition towards enhanced political
dialogue, respect for and the protection of the rights
of all, and the establishment of strong democratic
institutions, including through the upcoming 2015
elections. The Government is committed to ensuring
that those elections are transparent, fair and peaceful.
If they are well organized, the elections could mark
the end of the transition in Burundi’s peacebuilding
process. The peacebuilding priority plan that we jointly
drafted and signed in December 2013 should facilitate
the achievement of that important goal.
The Secretary-General’s recommendation fully
takes into account the desire for greater national
ownership expressed by the Government of Burundi.
However, it also relies on the assessment of the
14-21867

S/PV.7104

benchmarks that structure our peacebuilding efforts
in Burundi, in agreement with the Government and in
accordance with the relevant mandates of the Security
Council. Finally, this recommendation also takes into
account the fact that the United Nations country team,
which should bear most of the responsibilities assigned
to the United Nations Office in Burundi, may not be
equipped in the short term to effectively undertake
those important tasks. The same can be said of the role
that regional and subregional African organizations
could play.
I welcome the efforts of the Government and of
millions of Burundians who strive daily for a future
Burundi that is more united, peaceful and prosperous.
However, that task, as appreciated as it is, is not over
and requires the support of the Security Council and
the international community, in particular in a regional
context that is constantly changing.
I am pleased about the friendly dialogue that is
continuing on that issue with the Burundian authorities
so that the noble goals of peacebuilding and conflict
prevention can unite and strengthen in a timely way
the legitimate will for greater national ownership.
Minister Kavakure will certainly be able to give us
more information on the views of the Government of
Burundi in that regard.
(spoke in English)
The Secretary-General has called upon Burundians
to show visionary leadership going forward, particularly
in view of the major challenges still ahead. I have no
doubt that they will, and I know that the Council will
remain at their side. Let us not tire of doing what is
good for at the right time we will reap an abundant
harvest if we do not give up. Of course, we must and
can do that only with the full consent and support of the
Government of Burundi.
In closing, I would like to thank members of the
Council for their outstanding support to Burundians
and to me personally since I assumed my duties. I
would also like to thank the Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, my
dear friend Ambassador Paul Seger, for the excellent
collaboration that we have so effectively developed over
the past year. In him, Burundi has a strong advocate.
Please allow me to extend my thanks and
appreciation to the Government of Burundi for their
hospitality, cooperation and willingness to work with me
for the advancement of peace in Burundi. I will be ever
3/9

S/PV.7104

The situation in Burundi

indebted to the Secretary-General for the opportunity
to assist him in the pursuit of world peace and security.
Last but not least, I am most grateful to my colleagues,
both in Bujumbura and here at Headquarters, for their
invaluable support.
The President (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for his briefing.

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Seger.
Mr. Seger (spoke in French): Like Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, I would first like to warmly
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. As I have the
privilege of knowing you personally, I know that you
do not like Permanent Representatives to use a written
text so this time I will not use such a text.
On the one hand, I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his briefing
and to simply recall that the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the issue of Burundi (S/2014/36) is fully
relevant. Yesterday, I also submitted my own report to
the Security Council. I do not wish to come back to that
now but would just like to make two or three additional
comments.
Before doing so, I would once again like to thank
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, who is not only an
excellent Special Representative but also a friend.
I think that our success to date in building peace in
Burundi is certainly also due to the fact that, as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Peacebuilding Commission, we have worked hand
in hand and, I hope, will continue to do so. But that
success is thanks, too, to the excellent cooperation
with the Government of Burundi. Here, I would also
like to thank my neighbour on my right, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
Burundi, with whom I have truly had the privilege of
having an excellent relationship.
I would like to step back a little. Last June, I wrote
that the country had made considerable, or exceptional
progress. What we must do now — and it is even more
important at this stage — is to stay the course and to
maintain what I call the gains of the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi and of the
Geneva Partners Conference of October 2012. If we
stay that course, I am sure that we will succeed and
come out as winners. But, as in a marathon, the last
kilometres are always the most difficult and I believe

4/9

28/01/2014

that we are now in our final kilometre. That is why it is
so important to stay the course.
Here, I would like to mention three elements
that I think are particularly important in that regard.
As Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga has already said,
an important aspect is the constitutional review that
is currently under way. It is truly crucial for us, the
Government and the country to uphold that spirit of
consensus and also of the Arusha accords. We must
focus primarily on the parts of the Constitution on
which there is consensus. Moreover, the Burundi
configuration wrote a letter to the President of the
National Assembly precisley to encourage him along
those lines. That is my first piece of advice.
My second piece of advice, which the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General also
mentioned, concerns the 2015 elections. There, I think
that we are also on the right track. The opposition
parties with whom I spoke are ready to take part in
the 2015 elections and not to make the same mistake
that they committed in 2010. However, precisely in
order to enable everyone to participate in the electoral
process fairly and openly, the environment and the
political and legal framework must be truly fair, open
and transparent. There, as Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga
said, with regard to the Imbonerakure youth league, the
unrest that sometimes occurs must come to an end.
Thirdly, another aspect that I also believe to be
important for peacebuilding and unity is the issue
of land and other property. As the Council probably
knows, a new law that gave the National Commission
for Land and Other Property new powers was adopted
on 31 December. All that, to put it in a sentence, in
the context of restoring the property of those who were
deprived of it in 1972 and later.
It is important that justice be rendered but also
that it be done in a fair and just way that respects the
principles of reconciliation and peace. Everyone told
me that there is a significant ethnic connotation to that
dimension. That is truly something that we must bear
in mind. It is part of what the Arusha accords achieved.
I myself have said, and the President of the
Republic has reiterated — it is perhaps a rather common
saying — that there is no peace without development
and no development without peace. In that context,
when I spoke with the development banks — the African
Development Bank and the World Bank, with whom I
spoke in order to mobilize resources — the two banks

14-21867

28/01/2014

The situation in Burundi

also told me that they have some concerns about the
country’s future in the context of the investments that
they have made and continue to make in the country. A
political commission like ours making such an analysis
is one thing but if a bank, which by definition is not
a political institution, reaches the same conclusion, I
think that that is something that should make us listen.
What is also interesting is that the representatives of the
banks told me that the political support of the United
Nations, for them, is an assurance for the investment
that they are making in the well-being of the country.
Something that we should also perhaps bear in mind
is that it is really good for the country for economic
and social reasons that it be supported by the United
Nations.
I come back to the image of the marathon that I
mentioned earlier. When I was younger and my knees
would allow it, I ran half-marathons, not full marathons.
I remember that during the first one I ran, it was very
hot. I reached the twentieth kilometre and could go no
further. At one point, a friend came out of the crowd and
accompanied me for the last two or three kilometres,
which made it possible for me to finish the race.
I think that we are in exactly the same situation
with respect to Burundi. We still need some support to
finish the race, and I am sure that with that support we
are all going to be winners.
Obviously, when it comes to the principle of
national ownership, as the Special Representative said,
Burundi has every right to demand that the mandate
of the United Nations Office in Burundi come to an
end. But if that is the case, I would urge everyone in
the Chamber, Burundi and the Security Council that
this outcome and transition be undertaken in a way that
ensures the continuity of United Nations support. If I
understand correctly, the Government wants to continue
to work with the United Nations, but in another form.
Therefore, let us make sure that the transition occurs
in a way that would allow the United Nations to take
up those duties through the country team and other
functions. Instead of creating artificial deadlines now,
in my opinion we need to think about duties. What do
we need to do to allow the United Nations to take up
new duties in a smooth and unproblematic way?
I would just like to tell the Council that, I, as Chair,
and the configuration remain at the country’s disposal,
if it would like more support. However, I would also
like to tell the Security Council that we cannot replace
a permanent political presence of the United Nations

S/PV.7104

on the ground. Let us be aware of that fact, and of the
configuration’s limitations.
I would like to conclude by saying that I share the
optimism expressed by Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga
about the future of the country. We do not need very
much for things to move in the right direction. And
in the spirit of prevention and of concluding the
peacebuilding successfully, we must maintain that
support. I think that, with that, we shall succeed.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Seger
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Burundi.
Mr. Kavakure (Burundi) (spoke in French): It is a
pleasure for me to convey, on behalf of the Government
of Burundi and myself, the sincere greetings of the
President of the Republic, Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, to
all members of the Security Council. I have been asked
in particular to convey the President’s best wishes to
the Secretary-General and all members of the United
Nations system, and his hope that 2014 will be a
year of good health for the representatives and their
respective families and of success for all the projects
they undertake.
I would be remiss were I not to express my
gratitude to the President of the Security Council
and the Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission for their open cooperation
with our Government and all their efforts in the context
of peacebuilding in Burundi.
We would also like to acknowledge the United
Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB) and in particular
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for his praiseworthy
contribution to peacebuilding in Burundi.
On the occasion of the presentation of the report of
the Secretary-General on Burundi (S/2014/36), we must
come to a decision on the future of our cooperation with
a view to strengthening the achievements in the areas
of democracy and peace in our country. I would like
to share some considerations on this item with Council
members.
I should like briefly to summarize the mission’s
history. The Peacebuilding Commission was created by
resolution 1645 (2005) adopted on 20 December 2005.
Burundi, with other countries emerging from conflict,
such as Liberia and Sierra Leone, has been subject to the

14-218675/9

S/PV.7104

The situation in Burundi

Commission’s peacebuilding programme since 23 June
2006. A United Nations office tasked with monitoring
that programme, the Peacebuilding Support Office, and
the Peacebuilding Fund, established to finance related
projects, were also created.
Since then, the Office in charge of the programme
in New York and the United Nations Office in
Burundi — originally the United Nations Integrated
Office in Burundi (BINUB) — have worked with
the Burundian Government and other local and
international partners in many priority areas, including
good governance, the strengthening of the rule of
law, the rebuilding of communities, land issues, the
mobilization and coordination of regional integration,
and the gender dimension. That work has been carried
out through various commitments, informal and formal
meetings, and on-site visits. The follow-up of the
Burundi peacebuilding programme was also undertaken
by the Burundi configuration. The chairmanship of the
configuration was held first by Norway in 2007, then
Sweden in 2008, and by Switzerland since 2009.
The gradual drawdown of the United Nations
Operation in Burundi was the result of a compromise
between the United Nations and Burundi, in light of
the fact that the political, social and security situations
were increasingly improving. It was therefore time
to transform the mission into the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi with a mandate to build
peace and strengthen national capacities.
The transformation of BINUB into BNUB, with a
light footprint, for a first reporting period beginning
1 January 2011 was, as we all know, motivated by a
political, social and security situation that was also
becoming increasingly manageable. It therefore
followed that there was a need to continue building
peace and combatting poverty, which are the principal
enemies of Burundian society. The objective of the
Office was to develop, together with the Government,
a series of criteria for the future transformation of the
United Nations Office in Burundi into a United Nations
country team and to report regularly to the Security
Council on the progress achieved in that regard.
On 24 January 2013, the Government of Burundi
called on the international community from this
Chamber (see S/PV.6909) to take into account the
significant progress made by our country in many
areas and to move to a new framework for cooperation
with the United Nations in carrying out the gradual
transformation of BNUB into a new United Nations
6/9

28/01/2014

country team in Burundi. The Government of Burundi
believed that a period of 12 months was more than
enough to carry out the transformation. However,
despite the fact that the Secretary-General’s set of
benchmarks of 10 May 2012 allowed for the beginning
of the gradual transition of BNUB into a country
team, the Security Council decided to extend BNUB’s
mandate for a second time until 15 February 2014,
pursuant to resolution 2090 (2013) of 13 February 2013.
The Government of Burundi has cooperated fully
with the United Nations in the thorough implementation
of resolution 2090 (2013), thereby complying with all
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations in general and of its Article 25 in particular.
We transmitted a note dated 16 August 2013, to
the Secretary-General reiterating the desire of the
Government of the Republic of Burundi, in the view of
the progress achieved in all areas, as assessed against the
benchmarks for Burundi’s peacebuilding programme,
to see BNUB’s mandate come to an end on 15 February
2014, with responsibilities transferred to the United
Nations country team in Burundi, in accordance with
resolution 2090 (2013), of 13 February 2013.
The letter of the Secretary-General to the President
of the Republic of Burundi dated 26 December 2013,
referring to the talks held in Paris on the side-lines of
the Elysée Summit for Peace and Security in Africa, on
6 December 2013, brought the following points to his
attention:
“Following consultations, members of the
Security Council said they were reassured by the
dialogue under way between the two parties seeking
a solution that would adequately combine both the
desire for greater national ownership with the need
to provide optimal support to national efforts so as
to ensure together the success of the final stage of
the peacebuilding process and the strengthening of
democratic institutions. Such an approach would
allow for the gradual transition from the BNUB
presence towards activities focused primarily on
development assistance and carried out by the
United Nations country team.”
In his letter to the Secretary-General dated
31 December 2013, the President of the Republic
welcomed the open collaboration that exists and will
always exist, as well as the various forms of support
Burundi enjoys and will continue to benefit from
through the United Nations. He nevertheless reaffirmed

14-21867

28/01/2014

The situation in Burundi

the position of Burundi to uphold resolution 2090
(2013), which sets the end-date of BNUB’s mandate
as 15 February 2014, and provides for the subsequent
transfer of responsibilities to the United Nations
country team.
I would now like to make some comments on the
report before the Council today, beginning with the
democratic process. As indicated in the SecretaryGeneral’s set of benchmarks of 10 May 2012 and in
paragraph 6 of the report before the Council today,
inclusive political dialogue between the political parties
and the Government continued and will continue in the
framework of the first theme of the new peacebuilding
priority plan, namely, social cohesion and national
dialogue.
The Government endorses the recommendation
in paragraph 17 that electoral assistance be provided
to Burundi until 2015. The envisioned delivery of that
assistance could very well be carried out by a United
Nations country team in collaboration with other
partners mentioned in the report. In our view, the link
between the elections of 2015 and prolonging BNUB’s
mandate is not well established, given that there are
other mechanisms, including election observations,
that will involve a team of United Nations observers in
the run-up to, during and after the elections.
With regard to part B of the report, on security
and stability, the Government is of the view that
development aid is precisely what is needed to
respond to the problems of crime and armed robbery
resulting from the poor economic conditions and high
unemployment that affect a large part of the Burundian
population, as the report correctly stipulates.
With respect to paragraphs 19 to 23, the Government
is of the view that the professionalization of the defence
and security services is a long-term task, and thanks
the United Nations and other, bilateral, partners for
the multifaceted support provided to date in this area.
We view this as an area in which cooperation could
continue with the country team and leading bilateral
partners.
In that regard, the greatly appreciated presence of
Burundian troops in peacekeeping operations in Haiti,
the Sudan, Côte d’Ivoire and, in particular, Somalia and
the Central African Republic, is an eloquent illustration
that substantial progress has been made in the context
of the professionalization of our defence and security
forces. We are still, nonetheless, far from perfect.

S/PV.7104

This is a long-term task that must continue with all
of our development partners involved in this area of
cooperation.
With regard to transitional justice, addressed in
part C of the report, it is noted in paragraphs 24 and
25 that the Government is engaged in the process of
establishing a truth and reconciliation commission.
But for us, this is a matter of such great importance
that we must give it the necessary time to become
operational, once we have prepared the hearts of the
Burundian people. In that regard, we thank BNUB for
the workshops it held on this topic for representatives
of the National Assembly and Senators in April and
September 2013.
With regard to governance and institutional
strengthening, as addressed in part D of the report, the
Government of Burundi expresses its deep appreciation
for the support provided to institutions involved in
fighting corruption, the Office of the Ombudsman
and other local partners involved in the fight against
corruption, on the one hand, as well as for the
workshops held to raise awareness among civil society
organizations, Government officials and police officers
and the army, on the other.
Regarding the developments related to the
Commission nationale des terres et autres biens, the
Government believes that this is a work in progress and
that the outstanding issues can be considered under the
fourth theme of the new peacebuilding priority plan,
that is, the peaceful resolution of land disputes. It
should also be emphasized that the membership of the
Commission is inclusive and balanced along ethic and
regional lines.
With regard to the rule of law, as addressed in part
E of the report, it is clear that this is an ideal, which no
country in the world has ever perfected. In that respect,
the Government has undertaken a great number of
initiatives, including the National Conference on
Justice, the strategic plan of the Conseil supérieur de la
magistrature on judicial ethics and the revision of the
prison legal framework and corrections policy, all with
a view to improving the Burundian justice system.
With regard to human rights, and the paragraphs of
part F of the report, here too, the Government recognizes
that much progress has been made in the promotion and
protection of human rights. But challenges certainly
remain, and the Government of Burundi recognizes that.
That is why the third theme of the new peacebuilding

14-218677/9

S/PV.7104

The situation in Burundi

priority plan has been selected to continue to support,
in particular, the Independent National Commission on
Human Rights, whose performance has been praised by
a variety of partners.
As for regional integration, it is for us a political
choice inscribed in letters of gold in our two main
development policy instruments: Vision Burundi 2025,
which is a development planning tool that will guide
policies and strategies until 2025, and the second
version of its Strategic Framework for Growth and
the Fight against Poverty, which is anchored in Vision
Burundi 2025 and represents the federative context of
all sectoral and cross-sectoral policies.
With regard to economic and social development,
Burundi is aware that it cannot achieve the Millennium
Development Goals by the target date. Considerable
progress has been made, however, especially in the
social sectors, such as education and health. In any
event, development aid is essential to accelerating the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. To
that end, in July and October 2013 Burundi organized
sectoral conferences with its development partners so
as to ensure that the promises made in Geneva in 2012
are followed up by effective engagement.
With respect to the issue of the resettlement of
returnees and displaced persons, Burundi is striving
with great commitment, alongside its partners, to
make it a success. To that end, we have developed a
national strategy for the socioeconomic reintegration of
conflict-affected populations.
As to issues related to peacebuilding, as addressed
under section C of part III of the report, the United
Nations country team in Burundi will simply apply the
peacebuilding priority plan, which is the outcome of
a highly participatory and inclusive process involving
all key actors, including the Government, civil society
organizations, the international community and the
United Nations system in Burundi.
It is important to note that in 2013, in order to
consolidate peace and security, the Government
launched two very important national programmes: the
national security strategy and a national education and
patriotic training programme. Peace and security are
now a reality in Burundi, and strengthening them will
remain a top priority for our Government because they
are the foundation of and the appropriate framework for
achieving our political, social and economic agenda.

8/9

28/01/2014

With regard to the observations and recommendations
set out in the report, the Government of Burundi
takes note of the advice, contained from paragraph
66 onwards, concerning the conduct of fair, inclusive
and transparent elections. In this regard and as already
mentioned, the dialogue meetings among politicians,
organized in March 2013, as well as the constructive
atmosphere that prevailed during the consultations of
19 and 20 December 2013, are eloquent expressions of
the manifest intention of the Government to ensure the
success of the 2015 elections. We organized the 2005
and 2010 elections to the full satisfaction of the national
and international communities, and there is no doubt
that we shall do even better in 2015.
Again with respect to observations and
recommendations, paragraph 75 — regarding the
Secretary-General’s proposal to end the BNUB
mandate on 15 February 2015 by extending it for an
additional 12 months — has attracted the particular
attention of our Government, which had requested a
transitional period of six months in order to allow for
the dismantling of BNUB and the gradual transfer of
its responsibilities to the United Nations country team
in Burundi.
In the spirit of our harmonious collaboration and
open cooperation with the Secretary-General, and after
extensive consultations with various stakeholders,
the Government of Burundi submits to the Security
Council the following proposals.
First, we request the Council to adopt a resolution
closing the United Nations Office in Burundi pursuant
to resolution 2090 (2013). Secondly, we request
the Secretary-General to determine the practical
arrangements for the closure of BNUВ and the gradual
transfer of responsibilities to the United Nations
country team in Burundi, with periodic — perhaps
quarterly — progress reports, before the end of 2014.
Thirdly, we request the Secretary-General to ensure
that the new United Nations country team in Burundi is
up and running by January 2015. Fourthly, we request
the Secretary-General to consider the establishment,
immediately after the closing of BNUB, of a team of
electoral observers to be deployed before, during and
after elections scheduled in Burundi in 2015.
We solemnly call on the Security Council to support
and understand our position concerning the end of the
BNUB mandate, the objective of which is to close, in

14-21867

28/01/2014

The situation in Burundi

harmony and in concert, a very successful mission that
will remain a good mоdel for post-conflict situations.
In conclusion, we reiterate our deep appreciation
for all the support that our country has enjoyed and will
continue to enjoy from the United Nations system on
our long road to development.

S/PV.7104

The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

14-218679/9
