General Assembly-Forty-third Session

88

43/76. Review and implementation of the Concluding
Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the
General Assembly
A
DISARMAMENT AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/83 A of1 1 December1 97 9 ,

35/156 J of 12 December 1980, 36/97 K of 9 December
1 981 , 37 /100 E of 13 December 1982 , 38/7 3 H of 1 5
December 1 983 , 39/63 K of 12 December 1 984 and
40/1 51 A of 16 December 1985 ,

Expressing the growing alarm of the world community
over the dangers of the arms race, in particular the nu­
clear-arms race, and its adverse social and economic
consequences,
Noting that the present state of the international situa­
tion requires that the disarmament principles embodied in
the Charter of the United Nations become part and parcel
of any collective efforts aimed at ensuring a truly safe
world, including those undertaken by the Security Coun­
cil,
Reaffirming that the United Nations under its Charter
plays a central role and bears main responsibility in the
area of disarmament and the strengthening of interna­
tional security,
Recalling paragraph1 3 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,13 in
which the Assembly acknowledged that genuine and last­
ing peace can only be created through the effective im­
plementation of the security system provided for in the
Charter and the speedy and substantial reduction of arms
and armed forces, by international agreement and mutual
example,
Recalling that, under Article 26 of the Charter, the
Security Council is responsible for formulating, with the
assistance of the Military Staff Committee, plans for estab­
lishing an arms regulation system,
Noting the fact that the Security Council, which is
vested under the Charter with the principal responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security, has not
yet conducted any examination of the question of the ad­
verse effects of the arms race, especially in the nuclear
field, on international peace and security, as provided for
in the relevant General Assembly resolutions,
Welcoming the entry into force of the Treaty between
the United States of America and the Union of Soviet So­
cialist Republics on the Elimination of Their Intermedi­
ate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles,11 which opens the
process of genuine disarmament,
Mindful of the need to use all avenues for further pro­
gress through effective measures in the field of disarma­
ment,
1. Calls upon the Security Council, in particular its
permanent members, within the framework of its main
task, to contribute to establishing and maintaining inter­
national peace and security with the least possible diver­
sion of world human and economic resources to arma­
ment, and to take the necessary steps for the effective
implementation of Article 26 of the Charter of the United
Nations with a view to enhancing the central role of the
United Nations in facilitating solutions to the issues of
arms limitation, primarily in the nuclear field, and disar

mament, as well as the strengthening of international
peace and security;
2. Recommends that the nuclear-weapon States, which
at the same time are the five permanent members of the
Security Council, hold joint meetings and provide regular
information to the General Assembly, as well as to the
Conference on Disarmament, about the state of affairs as
regards the range of issues related to disarmament, espe­
cially in the nuclear field, the prevention of a nuclear war
and the status of the current agreements in the field of
arms limitation and disarmament, and about progress at
those negotiations which include the participation of the
nuclear-weapon States;
3. Recommends that the Security Council consider the
question of establishing, under Article 29 of the Charter,
such subsidiary bodies as it deems necessary for the per­
formance of its functions to facilitate a solution to disar­
mament issues;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution within the
framework of the agenda item entitled "Review and im­
plementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth
Special Session of the General Assembly".

73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
B
NUCLEAR-ARMS FREEZE

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in the Final Document of the Tenth Spe­

cial Session of the General Assembly, 13 the first special
session devoted to disarmament, adopted in 197 8 and
unanimously and categorically reaffirmed in 1982 during
the twelfth special session of the General Assembly, 87 the
second special session devoted to disarmament, the As­
sembly expressed deep concern over the threat to the very
survival of mankind posed by the existence of nuclear
weapons and the continuing arms race,
Convinced that, in this nuclear age, lasting world peace
can be based only on the attainment of the goal of general
and complete disarmament under effective international
control,
Welcoming the improvement of the relations between
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United
States of America and the conclusion of the Treaty on the
Elimination of Their Intermediate-Range and Shorter­
Range Missiles,11 as well as their agreement in principle to
reduce by 50 per cent their strategic nuclear arsenals,
Convinced of the urgency further to pursue negotiations
for the substantial reduction and qualitative limitation of
existing nuclear arms,
Considering that a nuclear-arms freeze, while not an end
in itself, would constitute an effective step to prevent the
continued increase and qualitative improvement of exist­
ing nuclear weaponry during the period when the negotia­
tions take place, and that at the same time it would pro­
vide a favourable environment for the conduct of
negotiations to reduce and eventually eliminate nuclear
weapons,

87 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Twelfth Special
Session, Annexes, agenda items g to 13, document A/S-12/32.

III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Convinced that the undertakings derived from the freeze
can be effectively verified,
Noting with deep concern that nuclear-weapon States
have not so far taken any action in response to the call
made in the relevant resolutions on the question of a nu­
clear-arms freeze,
1. Urges once more the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the United States of America, as the two
major nuclear-weapon States, to agree to an immediate
nuclear-arms freeze, which would, inter alia, provide for a
simultaneous total stoppage of any further production of
nuclear weapons and a complete cut-off in the production
of fissionable material for weapons purposes;
2. Calls upon all nuclear-weapon States to agree,
through a joint declaration, to a comprehensive nuclear­
arms freeze, whose structure and scope would be the fol­
lowing:
(a) It would embrace:
(i) A comprehensive test ban on nuclear weapons
and on their delivery vehicles;
(ii) The complete cessation of the manufacture of nu­
clear weapons and of their delivery vehicles;
(iii) A ban on all further deployment of nuclear weap­
ons and of their delivery vehicles;
(iv) The complete cessation of the production of fis­
sionable material for weapons purposes;
(b) It would be subject to appropriate and effective
measures and procedures of verification;
3. Requests the nuclear-weapon States to submit a
joint report, or separate reports, to the General Assembly,
prior to the opening of its forty-fourth session, on the im­
plementation of the present resolution;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session an item entitled "Nuclear-arms
freeze".
73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
C
WORLD DISARMAMENT CAMPAIGN

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in paragraph 15 of the Final Document of

the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,13 the
first special session devoted to disarmament, it declared
that it was essential that not only Governments but also
the peoples of the world recognize and understand the
dangers in the present situation and stressed the impor­
tance of mobilizing world public opinion on behalf of
disarmament,
Recalling also its resolution 42/39 G of 30 November
1987,
Having examined the reports of the Secretary-General
of 19 May 198888 and 4 October 198889 on the implemen­
tation of the programme of activities of the World Disar
mament Campaign by the United Nations system,
Having also examined the part of the report of the Secre­
tary-General of IO October 1988 dealing with the activi­
ties of the Advisory Board on Disarmament Studies relat­
ing to the implementation of the World Disarmament
88 A/S-15/9.
89 A/43/642.

89

Campaign,90 as well as the Final Act of the Sixth United
Nations Pledging Conference for the Campaign,9 1 held on

27 October 1988,
1. Reiterates its commendation of the manner in
which, as described in the above-mentioned reports, the
World Disarmament Campaign has been geared by the
Secretary-General in order to guarantee "the widest possi­
ble dissemination of information and unimpeded access
for all sectors of the public to a broad range of information
and opinions on questions of arms limitation and disarma­
ment and the dangers relating to all aspects of the arms
race and war, in particular nuclear war"; 92
2. Recalls that, as was also agreed by consensus in the
Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of
the General Assembly, the second special session devoted
to disarmament, it is likewise an essential requisite for the
universality of the Campaign that it receive "the co­
operation and participation of all States"; 92
3. Endorses once more the statement made by the Sec­
retary-General on the occasion of the Third United Na­
tions Pledfing Conference for the Warid Disarmament
Campaign 3 to the effect that such co-operation implies
that adequate funds be made available and that conse­
quently the criterion of universality also applies to
pledges, since a campaign without world-wide participa­
tion and funding will have difficulty in refecting this prin­
ciple in its implementation;
4. Reiterates its regret that most of the States that have
the largest military expenditures have not so far made any
financial contribution to the Campaign;
5. Decides that at its forty-fourth session there should
be a seventh United Nations Pledging Conference for the
World Disarmament Campaign, and expresses the hope
that on that occasion all those Member States that have
not yet announced any voluntary contribution may do so;
6. Reiterates its recommendation that the voluntary
contributions made by Member States to the World Disar-•
mament Campaign Voluntary Trust Fund should not be
earmarked for specific activities inasmuch as it is most
desirable that the Secretary-General enjoy full freedom to
take the decisions he deems fit within the framework of the
Campaign previously approved by the General Assembly
and in exercise of the powers vested in him in connection
with the Campaign;
7. Notes with appreciation that the Secretary-General
has given permanent character to his instructions to the
United Nations information centres and regional commis­
sions to give wide publicity to the Campaign and, when­
ever necessary, to adapt, as far as possible, United Nations
information materials to local languages;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session a report cov­
ering both the implementation of the programme of activi­
ties of the Campaign by the United Nations system during
1989 and the programme of activities contemplated by the
system for 1990;

90 A/43/685, sect. 11.D.
91 A/CONF.146/1
92 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Twelfth Special
Session. Annexes, agenda items 9 to 13, document A/S 12/32, annex V,
para. 4.
91 Sec A/CONFUl/SR I.

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

90

9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "World Disarma­
ment Campaign".

73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
D
UNITED NATIONS REGIONAL CENTRE FOR PEACE
AND DISARMAMENT IN AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 40/151 G of 16 December

1985 , 41/60 D of 3 December 1986 and 42/39 J of
30 November 198 7,
Taking note of the Political Declaration adopted by the
Eighth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
the Non-Aligned Countries, held at Harare from 1 to
6 September 1986 , in which the Heads of State or Govern­
ment, inter alia, reaffirmed the need to strengthen the role
of the regional bodies in mobilizing support for the World
Disarmament Campaign and, in this regard, welcomed
the establishment of the United Nations Regional Centre
for Peace and Disarmament in Africa at Lome,94
Bearing in mind resolution AHG/ Res.164 (XXIll), 95
adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Govern­
ment of the Organization of African Unity at its twenty­
third ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 2 7 to
29 July 198 7, by which it, inter alia, endorsed the Lome
Declaration on Security, Disarmament and Development
in Africa and the Programme of Action for Peace,
Security and Co-operation in Africa,96
Taking
into account the
report
of
the
Secretary-General,97
I. Expresses its satisfaction that the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa,
inaugurated on 24 October 1986 , has become operational;
2 . Commends the Secretary-General for his efforts in
taking the necessary measures to ensure the effective func­
tioning of the Centre, and requests him to continue to lend
all the necessary support to the Centre;
3. Expresses its gratitude to the Member States and the
international, governmental and non-governmental orga­
nizations that have already made contributions to ensure
the functioning of the Centre;
4. Appeals once again to Member States, as well as to
international, governmental and non-governmental orga­
nizations, to make voluntary contributions in order to
strengthen the effective functioning of the Centre;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.

73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988

E
CONVENTION ON THE PROHIBITION OF THE USE
OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
A/armed by the threat to the survival of mankind and to

the life-sustaining system posed by nuclear weapons and
by their use, inherent in concepts of deterrence,
Conscious of an increased danger of nuclear war as a result of the intensification of the nuclear-arms race and the
serious deterioration of the international situation,
Convinced that nuclear disarmament is essential for the
prevention of nuclear war and for the strengthening of in­
ternational peace and security,
Also convinced that a prohibition of the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons would be a step towards the com­
plete elimination of nuclear weapons leading to general
and complete disarmament under strict and effective inter­
national control,
Recalling that in paragraph 58 of the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,13 it is
stated that all States should actively participate in efforts
to bring about conditions in international relations among
States in which a code of peaceful conduct of nations in in­
ternational affairs could be agreed upon and that would
preclude the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming that the use of nuclear weapons would be a
violation of the Charter of the United Nations and a crime
against humanity, as declared in its resolutions
1653 (XVI) of 24 November 1961 , 33/ 71 B of 14 Decem­
ber 19 78 , 34/83 G of 11 December 19 79 , 35/152 D of
12 December 1980 and 36/92 I of 9 December 1981,
Noting with regret that the Conference on Disarmament,
during its 1988 session, was not able to undertake negotia­
tions with a view to achieving agreement on an interna­
tional convention prohibiting the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons under any circumstances, taking as a ba­
sis the text annexed to General Assembly resolution
41/60 F of 3 December 1986 and 42/39 C of 30 Novem­
ber 198 7,
1. Reiterates its request to the Conference on Disarma­
ment to commence negotiations, as a matter of priority, in
order to reach agreement on an international convention
prohibiting the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons un­
der any circumstances, taking as a basis the draft Conven­
tion on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons an­
nexed to the present resolution;
2. Also requests the Conference on Disarmament to re­
port to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session on
the results of those negotiations.

73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
ANNEX
Draft Convention on the Prohibition of the
Use of Nuclear Weapons
The States Parties to this Convention,

Alarmed bythe threat to the

9 4 See
95 See

A/41/697-S/18392,annex, sect. ,
I para. 58.
A/42/699,annex 11.
96 A/40/761-S/l 7573,annex. For the printed text,see Official Records

of the Security Council, Fortieth Year, Supplement for October, November
and December 1985,document S/17537,annex.
97 Al43/689.

verysurvival ofmankind posed bythe ex­
istence ofnuclear weapons,
Convincedthat anyuse ofnuclear weapons constitutesa violation of
the Charter ofthe United Nations and a crime against humanity,
Convincedthat this Convention would bea step towards the complete
elimination ofnuclear weapons leading to generaland complete disarma­
ment under stricland effectiveinternational control,
Determinedtocontinue negotiations for the achievement ofthis goal,

--

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

---

-

-

Have agreed as follows:
Article I

The States Parties to this Convention solemnly undertake not to use or
threaten to use nuclear weapons under any circumstances.
Article 2

This Convention shall be of unlimited duration.
Article 3

I. This Convention shall be open to all States for signature. Any
State that does not sign the Convention before its entry into force in ac
cordance with paragraph 3 of this article may accede to it at any time.
2. This Convention shall be subject to ratification by signatory
States. Instruments ofratification or accession shall be deposited with the
Secretary General of the United Nations.
3. This Convention shall enter into force on the deposit of instru­
ments of ratification by twenty five Governments, including the Govern
ments of the five nuclear weapon States, in accordance with paragraph 2
of this article.
4. For States whose instruments of ratification or accession are
deposited after the entry into force of this Convention, it shall enter into
force on the date of the deposit of their instruments of ratification or
accession.
5. The depositary shall promptly inform all signatory and acceding
States of the date of each signature, the date of deposit of each instrument
of ratification or accession and the date of the entry into force of this
Convention, as well as of the receipt of other notices.
6. This Convention shall be registered by the depositary in accor­
dance with Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations.

--

cials, particularly from the developing countries, to ac­
quire more expertise in the sphere of disarmament,
Believing that the forms of assistance available to Mem­
ber States, particularly to developing countries, under the
programme will enhance the capabilities of their officials
to follow ongoing deliberations and negotiations on disar­
mament, both bilateral and multilateral,
I . Reaffirms its decisions contained in annex IV to the
Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of
the General Assembly and the report of the Secretary­
General98 approved by resolution 33/7 1 E of 14 Decem­
ber 1 978;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments of the
Federal Republic of Germany, Hungary, Japan, Sweden,
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United
States of America for inviting the 1988 fellows to study se­
lected activities in the field of disarmament, thereby con­
tributing to the fulfilment of the overall objectives of the
programme;
3. Commends the Secretary-General for the diligence
with which the programme has continued to be carried
out;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the im­
plementation of the programme within existing resources;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session on the im­
plementation of the programme.
73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988

Article 4

This Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Rus­
sian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the
Secretary General of the United Nations, who shall send duly certified
copies thereof to the Government of the signatory and acceding States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto
by their respective Governments, have signed this Convention, opened
for signature at
__ on the _day oL
__ __ one thousand
nine hundred and
•

F
UNITED NATIONS DISARMAMENT FELLOWSHIP, TRAINING
AND ADVISORY SERVICES PROGRAMME

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision, contained in paragraph 108 of the
Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the Gen­
eral Assembly, 13 the frst special session devoted to disar­
mament, to establish a programme offellowships on disar­
mament, as well as its decisions contained in annex IV to
the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session
of the General Assembly, 87 the second special session de­
voted to disarmament, in which it decided, inter alia, to
continue the programme and to increase the number of
fellowships from twenty to twenty-fve as from 1 983,
Noting with satisfaction that the programme has already
trained an appreciable number of public officials selected
from geographical regions represented in the United Na­
tions system, most of whom are now in positions of re­
sponsibility in the field of disarmament affairs in their re­
spective countries or Governments,
Recalling its resolutions 37/100 G of 13 December
1 982, 38/73 C of 1 5 December 1983, 39/63 B of 1 2
December 1984, 40/ 1 5 1 H of 1 6 December 1 985, 4 1/60 H
of 3 December 1986 and 42/39 I of 30 November 1 987,
Noting with satisfaction that the programme, as de­
signed, has enabled an increased number of public offi-

91

- -- -

G
UNITED NATIONS REGIONAL CENTRE FOR PEACE
AND DISARMAMENT IN ASIA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 42/39 D of 30 November 1 987,
by which it decided to establish the United Nations Re­
gional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia with
headquarters at Kathmandu,
Taking into account its decision that the Centre should
provide, on request, substantive support for the initiatives
and other activities mutually agreed upon by Member
States of the Asian region for the implementation of mea­
sures for peace and disarmament through appropriate uti­
lization of available resources, and should co-ordinate the
implementation of regional activities in Asia under the
World Disarmament Campaign,
I . Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Sec­
retary-General of 19 October 1 988;99
2. Welcomes the signing of an agreement and a memo­
randum of understanding between the Government of Ne­
pal and the United Nations regarding the establishing of
the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disar­
mament in Asia;
3. Commends the administrative measures taken by
the Secretary-General to ensure the establishment and
functioning of the Centre, and requests him to continue
lending all possible support;
4. Invites Member States and interested organizations
to make voluntary contributions for the effective function­
ing of the Centre;
98 A/33/305.
99 A/43/568.

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

92

5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session on the im­
plementation of the present resolution.

73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
H
UNITED NATIONS REGIONAL CENTRE FOR PEACE,
DISARMAMENT AND DEVELOPMENT IN LATIN AMERICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 41 /60 J of 3 December 1986

and 4 2/39 K of 30 November 1 98 7,
Welcoming the inauguration of the United Nations Re­
gional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development
in Latin America on 9 October 198 7,
Recalling also the Acapulco Commitment to Peace, De­
velopment and Democracy signed by the heads of State of
States members of the Permanent Mechanism for Consul­
tation and Concerted Political Action on 29 November
1 98 7, 100 as well as the meeting of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Permanent Mechanism held at Cartagena,
Colombia, in February1 988 ,
Taking into account that the scope of action of the Cen­
tre includes Latin America and the Caribbean,
Also welcoming the holding by the Centre of the
Workshop-Seminar of Experts on Disarmament from 4 to
6 May 1988 ,
Taking note of the final documents of the Conference of
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Movement of Non­
Aligned Countries, held at Nicosia from 7 to 10 Septem­
ber 1988 ,55
Expressing its gratitude to the Member States that have
made valuable contributions to the functioning of the Cen­
tre,
Convinced that in carrying out its activities the Centre
will seek to promote relationships based upon mutual con­
fdence and security among countries of the region in a
spirit of harmony, solidarity and co-operation aimed at
the implementation of measures that foster peace, disar­
mament and social and economic development in Latin
America and the Caribbean,
1. Reaffirms that the United Nations Regional Centre
for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin
America, in conformity with its mandate contained in
resolution 4 1 /60 J, is called upon to explore new avenues
for concerted political action among the countries of the
region and to strengthen further the intra-Latin American
and Caribbean links in a framework of harmony,
solidarity and co-operation that will enable the region to
become an effective area of peace;
2. Takes note with satisfaction of the holding of the
Conference of Experts on the Strengthening of Political
Co-operation in Latin America and the Caribbean in the
fields of peace, disarmament, development and security,
within the framework of the World Disarmament Cam­
paign, at Lima from6 to 9 December1 988 , which will also
examine various conceptual and organizational aspects of
the Centre to enable it to fulfil its objectives;

too A/42/844-S/l9314, annex. For the prmted text. see Ojfcial
Records of the Security Counc,I, Forty-second Year. Supplement Jbr
October. November and Decemhcr 1 9� 7. document S/ 1 911 4, annex.

3. Recommends that the Centre hold two meetings
during 198 9 with a view to reaffirming its role as a centre
for documentary collection, diffusion and dissemination,
as a forum for the promotion of peace, disarmament and
development measures in the context of the World Disar­
mament Campaign and as an organ for the co-ordination
of studies, research and programmes in the fields of its
competence;
4. Invites once again Member States and international,
governmental and non-governmental organizations to
make voluntary contributions to the Centre;
5. Decides to rename the Centre "United Nations Re­
gional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development
in Latin America and the Caribbean";
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit that ap­
peal to all Member States in order to ensure the effective
functioning of the Centre;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session on the im­
plementation of the present resolution.

73rd plenary meeting
7 December 1988
43/77.

Review of the implementation of the recommen­
dations and decisions adopted by the General As­
sembly at its fifteenth special session
A

SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTS AND
THEIR IMPACT ON INTERNATIONAL SECURITY

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, at its tenth special session, the first spe­

cial session devoted to disarmament, it unanimously
stressed the importance of both qualitative and quantita­
tive measures in the process of disarmament,
Observing that at no stage since the first special session
devoted to disarmament has the qualitative aspect of the
arms race been seriously addressed by the international
community,
Noting with concern the existing potential in technologi­
cal advances for application to military purposes, thus es­
calating the level and sophistication of armaments,
Recognizing that such a development will have a nega­
tive impact on the security environment while causing a
major setback to disarmament efforts,
Stressing, in this context, the importance of effectively
addressing this problem and ensuring that scientific and
technological developments are not exploited for military
purposes but harnessed for the common benefit of man­
kind,
Emphasizing that the proposal contained in the present
resolution is without prejudice to research and develop­
ment efforts being undertaken for peaceful purposes,
Recognizing the interests of the international com­
munity in the subject and the need to follow closely such
developments,
1 . Requests the Secretary-General to follow future
scientific and technological developments, especially those
which have potent ial military applications, and to evalu­
ate their impact on international security, with the assis­
tance of qualified consultant experts, as appropriate, and
