A/72/368–S/2017/741

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
29 August 2017
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-second session
Items 37 and 38 of the provisional agenda*

Security Council
Seventy-second year

The situation in the Middle East
Question of Palestine

Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine
Report of the Secretary-General **
Summary
The present report is submitted in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 71/23. It contains replies received from the parties concerned to the notes
verbales sent by the Secretary-General pursuant to the request contained in paragraph 25
of the resolution. The report also contains the observations of the Secretary -General
on the current state of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and on international efforts to
move the peace process forward with a view to achieving a peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine. The report covers the period from September 2016 to August
2017.

* A/72/150.
** The present report was submitted late, owing to the fact that additional time was required to
ensure that important developments taking place during the reporting period were adequately
documented.

17-14908 (E)

130917

*1714908*

A/72/368
S/2017/741

I. Introduction
1.

The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 71/23.

2.
On 1 July 2017, pursuant to the request contained in paragraph 25 of the
above-mentioned resolution, I addressed the following letter to the President of the
Security Council:
“I have the honour to refer to resolution 71/23, which the General
Assembly adopted on 30 November 2016, at its seventy-first session, under
the agenda item ‘Question of Palestine’.
“Paragraph 25 of the resolution requests the Secretary-General to
continue his efforts with the parties concerned, and in consultation with the
Security Council, towards the attainment of a peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine and the promotion of peace in the region and to submit to
the General Assembly at its seventy-second session a report on these efforts
and on developments on this matter.
“In order to fulfil my reporting responsibilities under this resolution, I
should be grateful if you would kindly convey to me the views of the Security
Council by 31 July 2017.
“Recalling the Secretariat’s obligation to observe the page limit of its
reports, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 52/214, I would like to
encourage the Security Council to limit its submission to 1,500 words.”
3.

As at 23 August, no response had been received to that request.

4.
In a note verbale dated 23 May 2017 to the parties concerned, I sought the
positions of the Governments of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic, as well as the State of Palestine, regarding any steps taken by them to
implement the relevant provisions of the resolution. As at 31 July 2017, replies had
been received from Israel and the State of Palestine.
5.
The note verbale dated 28 June 2017 from the Permanent Observer Mission of
the State of Palestine to the United Nations reads as follows:
“Resolution 71/23, ‘Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine’,
constitutes the General Assembly’s comprehensive, authoritative stance
regarding the question of Palestine and the historic efforts to achieve a just,
lasting, peaceful solution. The principles affirmed therein, in conformity with
international law and other relevant resolutions, constitute the pillars of a
solution, and the broad support granted annually for the resolution confirms
the international consensus in this regard.
“On the eve of the fiftieth anniversary of Israel’s occupation of
Palestinian and Arab territories in 1967, the Assembly again resoundingly
supported this resolution. This was a clear rejection of Israel’s cynical
narrative denying the occupation, while actively entrenching it by all illegal
means, and obstructing the efforts to peacefully resolve the Israeli -Palestinian
conflict, which remains the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
“Upholding its political, legal and moral responsibilities, including the
obligations stemming from resolution 181 (II), the Assembly has reiterated its
calls for, inter alia, Israel’s complete withdrawal from the Palestinian territory
occupied since June 1967, including East Jerusalem; realization of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, primarily the right to self determination and the right to their independent State; achievement of the two State solution of Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace and security
2/16

17-14908

A/72/368
S/2017/741

within recognized borders based on the pre-1967 borders; and a just solution
for the Palestine refugee question based on resolution 194 (III).
“The Assembly’s reaffirmation of the requirements for a just solution
was considerably reinforced by the Security Council’s adoption of resolution
2334 (2016). That resolution, pursued earnestly by the State of Palestine with
conscientious Council members, reflects the international community’s longstanding commitment to peace via implementation, inter alia, of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
446 (1979), 452 (1979), 465 (1980), 476 (1980), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and
1850 (2008), and full respect for the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, including the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory
by force.
“The Council’s demands in resolution 2334 (2016) echo the Assembly’s
demands in resolution 71/23, underscoring the international consensus and
exigency of peace efforts. This action has helped restore some credibility to
the Council, which has been impaired by the failure to implement its
resolutions and hold Israel, the occupying Power, accountable for its
violations. It has also provided renewed hope for a solution, critical for
alleviating the despair of Palestine’s youth and reviving belief in the
possibility of a better future, free from occupation, fear and want.
“Resolution 2334 (2016) was welcomed globally. It was viewed as urgent
in light of the deteriorating situation on the ground; escalation of tensions and
cycles of violence; erosion of the two-State solution on the 1967 lines due to
Israel’s unrelenting entrenchment of the occupation and annexation attempts,
mainly through settlement activities flagrantly violating international law; and
lack of a political horizon to bring an end to the Israeli occupation, ensure
Palestinian rights and secure a just peace.
“While the Council explicitly reiterated the demand that Israel cease all
settlement activities in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and fully respect its legal obligations, it further underlined that it
‘will not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard
to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties through negotiations’, and
called upon all States ‘to distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between the
territory of the State of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967’.
Palestine has consistently made these calls in its bilateral and multilateral
outreach, viewing them as fundamental for salvaging the two -State solution
and advancing its realization.
“Considering the obligation to protect civilians, the Council’s call for
cessation of all acts of violence against civilians, including acts of terror, and
all acts of provocation, incitement and destruction, and for accountability, has
also been widely supported.
“Also welcomed were the Council’s call for the launch of credible
negotiations on all final status issues and for collective efforts to promote
peace, ‘aimed at achieving, without delay, a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East on the basis of the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map and an end to the
Israeli occupation that began in 1967’.
“The Palestinian leadership has affirmed readiness to abide by resolution
2334 (2016) in its entirety and commitment to its implementation, just as it has
strived to uphold all relevant resolutions, including resolution 71/23. This
17-14908

3/16

A/72/368
S/2017/741

includes the commitment to non-violence and peaceful, political, diplomatic,
legal means for attainment of Palestinian rights and a just, lasting solution and
cooperation with all international and regional efforts to this end.
“Israel, on the other hand, reacted with blatant hostility and contempt
towards the Security Council following the resolution’s adoption, publicly
declaring its disrespect of the Council’s authoritative decisions and demands.
The Israeli Government proceeded to violate the resolution aggressively in the
months thereafter with advancement of plans for construction of thousands
more settlement units across the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem; continuation of virulent rhetoric and incitement against the
Palestinian people and leadership; and continued complicity in and la ck of
accountability for the violence, terror and crimes committed by its settlers and
soldiers against Palestinian civilians.
“Yet, despite Israel’s violations — whether in times of peace process or
political stalemate — the Palestinian leadership has adhered to the peace path.
For nearly 30 years, Palestine’s position has mirrored the global consensus on
the two-State solution. This began with the Palestine National Council’s
acceptance of the solution in the 1988 Declaration of Independence, a major
compromise agreeing to establish the Palestinian State on only 22 per cent of
our historic homeland, for the sake of realizing Palestinian rights, including to
independence, and establishing a just peace. This compromise remains the
primary testament to our commitment to peace and, with the 2002 Arab Peace
Initiative, represents the boldest contribution towards solving the conflict and
should be recognized as such.
“Commitment to this compromise has been clearly affirmed, including at
the highest levels by President Mahmoud Abbas and the Executive Committee
of the Palestine Liberation Organization. Moreover, it has been bolstered by
repeated pledges to peacefully resolve the conflict, in accordance with the
Charter and the relevant United Nations resolutions, as confirmed, inter alia, in
the 28 September 2011 application by the State of Palestine for admission to
United Nations membership, and with international law, as reflected in
Palestine’s accession to numerous international treaties and conventions.
“It has also been the mainstay of Palestine’s regional and international
engagement, through every peace initiative and United Nations endeavour and
all other multilateral and bilateral engagement, including as reflected in the
relevant declarations by the League of Arab States, the Non-Aligned
Movement, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Group of 77, and
in diplomatic and cooperation agreements concluded with many States that
have recognized Palestine.
“In the period since the adoption of resolution 71/23, this commitment
has been borne out in the Palestinian leadership’s cooperation with, inter alia,
the French initiative, including in regard to the Paris Peace Conference on
15 January 2017; efforts by the new United States administration of President
Donald J. Trump to advance peace, including affirmation of readiness to
engage in negotiations; efforts by the Quartet members, collectively and
individually, as reflected in the series of meetings held by President Abbas and
other high-level Palestinian officials in Brussels, Moscow, Washington, Cairo
and Riyadh, among others; and Arab States’ efforts, including reaffirmation of
the Arab Peace Initiative by the Arab Summit Conference in Jordan in Mar ch
2017.
“It should be considered extraordinary that this commitment to a
peaceful path has endured despite continuous exacerbation of the injustice
4/16

17-14908

A/72/368
S/2017/741

inflicted on the Palestinian people by the decision to partition Mandate
Palestine by resolution 181 (II) in 1947 and the ensuing tragedy of the 1948
Nakba through 50 years of Israel’s foreign occupation since 1967. The
consequences have been grave for our people, who have withstood incessant
human rights violations, violence and terror, and war crimes under this halfcentury occupation, in breach of international law, including humanitarian and
human rights law, relevant United Nations resolutions, the relevant provisions
of the Rome Statute, and the 2004 advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice.
“The reality is that Israel’s occupation has only subsisted — and can only
subsist — on violations. It is illegal in every dimension and manifestation,
causing immeasurable suffering, indignity and insecurity for the Palestinian
people, amounting to a constant protection crisis.
“These violations include, inter alia: military raids by the occupying
forces causing Palestinian civilian casualties, including loss of life; arbitrary
arrest and detention operations and imprisonment of 6,500 Palestinians,
including children and women, who are routinely exposed to physical and
psychological abuse and torture, with the male population most severely
affected; restrictions on movement and other fundamental freedoms, including
to worship, education, health care, development and water; and imposition of a
10-year blockade on Gaza, isolating and collectively punishing the 2 million
Palestinians there. Such actions constitute grave breaches of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Ti me of War and
are compounding dire humanitarian and socioeconomic conditions, which, the
United Nations country team has determined, will lead to Gaza being
uninhabitable by 2020 if the situation is not immediately remedied.
“Also severely affecting the civilian population’s well-being, as well as
the contiguity and unity of the Palestinian land and the chances for realizing
the two-State solution on the 1967 lines, are the violations committed in the
context of Israel’s unlawful colonization campaign through its construction
and expansion of colonial settlements, the wall and military infrastructure in
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. This has also involved countless
military orders, so-called ‘legislative schemes’ and other illegal practices
aimed at facilitating settlement activities, including confiscation of land,
demolition of homes and structures, forced displacement of civilians and
exploitation of natural resources, altering the demographic and geographic
situation on the ground and dragging us ever closer to a one-State reality of
apartheid.
“Israeli incitement and inflammatory rhetoric on Jerusalem and
provocations and violence by Jewish extremists against Muslim and Christian
holy sites, particularly targeting the Haram al-Sharif, also continue to stoke
sensitivities and threaten to trigger a religious conflict. Such violations are
being perpetrated jointly and non-stop by the Government of Israel, the
occupying Power, its military occupying forces and extremist settlers.
“Against this backdrop, Palestine’s contribution to the implementation of
relevant resolutions and the objective of peace and stability must also be
measured by all that the Palestinian Government and national institutions have
done over the decades to mitigate the occupation’s devastating consequences
and preserve peace prospects. Confronted by perpetual decline of the
humanitarian, socioeconomic and security situation, we have exerted all
efforts to alleviate our people’s suffering, allay tensions, ensure calm and
security, promote reconciliation and give hope to our people that a better
17-14908

5/16

A/72/368
S/2017/741

future is within reach and that not another generation will have to suffer the
fate of occupation, oppression, dispossession and exile that their forefathers
have borne. Such hope is vital for pushing against the radicalism and
extremism plaguing the region, especially among youth.
“While unusual in a situation of occupation — perhaps unprecedented —
we have pursued these objectives continuously in every sector, as reflected in
the priorities set in successive Palestinian National Development Plans
presented by Prime Minister Rami Hamdallah and preceding Governments,
and also in the United Nations Development Assistance Framework. The
programmes of United Nations agencies, with the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) at the
forefront, along with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Development
Programme, the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women and numerous other organizations, have been
instrumental in this regard, as have been the assistance and solidarity extended
to Palestine by concerned States from every corner of the globe.
“Such support has been exemplary in the case of UNRWA, which has
received generous voluntary funding from donor countries since its
establishment in 1949. As of this note’s writing, efforts continue with
stakeholders and partners, including host countries, to foster more predictable,
sufficient and sustained support to UNRWA to effectively implement its
mandate. This support is vital for over 5.3 million Palestine re fugees
registered with UNRWA, millions of whom still live in 58 camps in Jordan,
Lebanon, Syria and Occupied Palestine. These efforts recognize the
indispensability of the humanitarian and development aid of UNWRA; its
critical stabilizing role in the region; the commitment made in the New York
Declaration for Refugees and Migrants to ensure sufficient funding to the
Agency; and the fact that for millions of refugees, UNRWA is the only lifeline,
pending a just solution. Our engagement on this also constitut es a substantial
contribution to the peace we seek.
“While our efforts and international support have been constant, what
remains absent is the political will to implement the relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, imperative for achievement of a peaceful
settlement. Despite all good-faith intentions, the international community
continues to fail to fulfil its legal, political and moral obligations in the face of
Israel’s total disrespect for the law. This failure is even more strikin g in this
fiftieth year of Israel’s occupation, with no viable political horizon for its end.
“The cycle of Israeli impunity and lack of accountability continue to
thwart peace efforts, deepening the political impasse. Since Israel’s suspension
of American-led peace talks in 2014, insufficient pressure has been exerted on
the Israeli Government to cease its violations and destruction of the two -State
solution. Even after the Council’s adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), there
has been no meaningful effort to compel Israeli compliance; rather, it
continues its violation without consequence.
“As called for in resolution 2334 (2016), Israel must, inter alia,
demonstrate through policies and actions a genuine commitment to the two State solution and create conditions necessary for promoting peace. It is time
for Israel to cease its lip service to the two -State solution; its propaganda
distorting the reality of its unlawful occupation; its incitement against the
Palestinian people and leadership; and its mockery of the United Nations. Its
respect for the law must be demanded without exceptions or conditions.
6/16

17-14908

A/72/368
S/2017/741

“Only international law can ensure that the negotiations on final status
issues — Jerusalem, Palestine refugees, settlements, borders, security,
prisoners and water — result in a just, sustainable peace. As reflected in the
Secretary-General’s agenda for the United Nations, peaceful resolution of
conflicts requires a human rights perspective, a justice perspective, a
development perspective, and not just a security perspective, and the root
causes of the conflict must be addressed.
“In line with the permanent responsibility of the United Nations t owards
the question of Palestine, we appeal again for serious efforts to implement the
relevant resolutions towards realizing Palestinian rights, including of the
Palestine refugees; ending the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and finally
achieving the independence of the State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital; and establishing lasting peace, security and coexistence between
the Palestinian and Israeli peoples on the basis of the two -State solution on the
1967 lines. The Palestinian leadership reaffirms its commitment to a peaceful
and just solution, and likewise urges the international community to uphold its
obligations and commitments.”
6.
The note verbale dated 31 July 2017 from the Permanent Mission of Israel to
the United Nations reads as follows:
“Over the course of the past year, the wave of deadly terror attacks
against the people of Israel has continued unabated. One of the most recent
such attacks took place on 21 July, when a Palestinian terrorist infiltrated the
home of the Solomon family in Chalamish and slaughtered three members of
the family as they sat together for the traditional Friday night Sabbath meal.
This heinous crime was preceded, just a week before, by the killing of two
Israeli policemen on the Temple Mount by terrorists who took advantage of
Israel’s policy of open entry to the Temple Mount, smuggling in weapons and
hiding them in the Holy Compound. Using the compound as a staging ground,
they attacked and killed the two police officers, desecrating the holy s ite and
turning it into an arena of bloodshed and terror.
“It must be clear that such appalling terrorist attacks do not occur in a
vacuum. They are a result of the constant Palestinian incitement to violence
and glorification of terror, which are fundamentally incompatible with
advancing peace. The incitement starts from the top; Palestinian Authority
President Mahmoud Abbas has publicly endorsed the payment of salaries to
convicted terrorists and their families. As part of this incessant incitement to
terror, public spaces are regularly named after mass murderers. To name but
one timely example, in the West Bank town of Burqa, a youth centre for
women was recently named after Dalal Mughrabi, the Palestinian terrorist
who, in 1978, led a group of terrorists who hijacked a civilian bus and killed
37 Israelis, including 12 children.
“A clear and unequivocal message must be delivered to the Palestinian
leadership: stop encouraging terrorism, stop hate speech and stop educating
children to hate. Above all, they must stop offering cash rewards and publicly
honouring those who commit acts of terrorism. Such glorification of violence
against innocent people and adulation of those who commit these horrific acts
are utterly incompatible with the commitment to coexistence and peaceful
relations with Israel, which must be at the foundation of a future Palestinian
State.
“Israel also believes that a sound and developing Palestinian economy is
a prerequisite for stability and security and, as such, is an Israeli in terest as
well. Despite the ongoing Palestinian violence, Israel is moving ahead with
17-14908

7/16

A/72/368
S/2017/741

steps to improve the Palestinian economic situation and the standard of living
of the Palestinian population. In this context, the first commercial agreement
between the Israel Electric Corporation and the Palestinian Authority was
reached recently (10 July 2017) to increase the supply of electricity to Jenin in
northern Samaria, to ensure a sufficient supply for the summer months and the
entire year.
“Furthermore, on 13 July 2017, it was announced that Israel, Jordan and
the Palestinian Authority, through the facilitation of the United States, have
reached an agreement, as part of the Red Sea-Dead Sea project, on a large
water infrastructure project which will provide billions of gallons of additional
water supply for each of the three parties.
“Under the agreement, it is expected that the Palestinian Authority will
be able to purchase up to 32 million cubic metres of fresh water from Israel at
preferential prices, substantially increasing the amount of water provided to
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
“At the same time, Israel is continuing its dialogue with the Palestinian
Authority on economic issues. At the end of May, Israeli Finance Minister
Moshe Kahlon met with Palestinian Authority Prime Minister Rami Hamdallah
in Ramallah, to brief him on recent steps decided upon by the Israeli Cabinet
to improve the economic situation in the Palestinian Authority. Furthermore,
the bilateral dialogue between the respective Ministries of Finance has been
resumed at the level of Director General of Ministry of Finance.
“In Gaza, Israel is facing a more complex and challenging security and
political environment than ever, but is nonetheless undertaking extensive
efforts to improve the humanitarian and economic conditions of the people of
Gaza, while striving to safeguard the basic and legitimate security needs of
Israeli citizens.
“Israel has been continuing to facilitate the reconstruction of Gaza
through the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism. Since October 2014, the joint
mechanism with the Palestinian Authority and the United Nations has enabled
the entry of over 8.2 million tons of various types of construction materials
into the Gaza Strip. As of January of this year, 102,331 damaged housing units
had been renovated, out of a total of 130,000. More than 11,500 new housing
units are in advanced stages of construction, while hundreds are ready for
occupancy. Hundreds of public projects, including schools, clinics, mosques
and parks, have been completed or are near completion.
“The past year also witnessed an increase of exports from Gaza to the
West Bank, Israel and abroad. It is important to note that, last March alone,
372 loads of marketed goods were carried by truck from Gaza, a record total
since Hamas took over more than a decade ago. In addition, an aggregate
conveyor is currently being built in the Kerem Shalom crossing and is
expected to become operational soon. The conveyor is expected to
substantially increase the capacity to export goods from the Gaza Strip.
“Unfortunately, alongside these positive developments, the terror
organization Hamas continues to steal and confiscate building materials
intended for the reconstruction of Gaza and the humanitarian develop ment
needs of its residents, and repurpose them for their own military objectives:
for the digging and construction of terror tunnels, rearmament and rocket
manufacturing. Israel will not tolerate this abuse of the Gaza Reconstruction
Mechanism or other attempts by Hamas to bolster its terror infrastructure.

8/16

17-14908

A/72/368
S/2017/741

“In parallel, there has also been an alarming increase in the number of
attempts to smuggle prohibited goods into the Gaza Strip during 2016,
including small unmanned aerial vehicles, lasers and military uniforms.
During the past year, Israeli security forces thwarted 1,226 such attempts,
which constitutes a 165 per cent increase in comparison with 2015.
“The Gaza Strip is suffering from a chronic and acute shortage of energy.
The electricity crisis in the Strip is a matter of an internal dispute between the
Palestinian Authority and Hamas. Since Hamas’s takeover of the Gaza strip in
2007, the Palestinian Authority has been paying the cost of electricity for the
Gaza Strip. This year, the Palestinian Authority announced its refusal to
continue to make the necessary payments.
“In order to meet all of Gaza's electricity needs, a constant supply of
400 MW is required. Supply from Egypt accounts for 25 MW (6.25 per cent).
The power station in Gaza has the capacity to supply 120 MW (about 30 per
cent); prior to stopping payment completely, the Palestinian Authority usually
purchased only enough fuel to supply 60 MW (about 15 per cent of demand).
The Palestinian Authority has been paying Israel for provi ding for
approximately one third of the Gaza Strip’s electricity demand (approximately
125 MW). As per the agreement with the Palestinian Authority, this sum of
money is deducted from tax revenues that Israel collects for the Palestinian
Authority.
“Due to the current dispute between Hamas and the Palestinian
Authority, the latter has stopped purchasing fuel for the Gaza power station.
Therefore, the power station is not producing electricity.
“Furthermore, on April 30, the Palestinian Authority announc ed that, as
of May 22, 2017, it would reduce its payments to Israel for electricity to the
Gaza Strip from approximately $11.4 million a month to approximately
$7.1 million.
“It must also be emphasized that the reason Hamas refuses to pay its own
electricity bill is not for lack of money. Hamas prefers to budget its financial
resources to enhance terrorism and terror capabilities, rather than civilian
infrastructure that would benefit Gaza residents, such as a steady supply of
electricity. Unless and until the Palestinian Authority and Hamas change their
policy, significant power shortages are expected to continue, and Gaza ’s
residents will continue to pay the price of the feud between Hamas and the
Palestinian Authority.
“Israel is not interested in any escalation of the situation in the Gaza
Strip and is making every effort to prevent deterioration in the daily lives of
Gaza’s residents.
“In addition, Israel is also undertaking efforts to improve the economic
situation in the West Bank. Last year, there was a significant increase in the
number of truckloads crossing to and from Jordan via the Allenby Bridge.
Over 49,000 truckloads filled with goods crossed the bridge — an increase of
over 22 per cent compared with 2015.
“The number of people crossing the bridge, the primary crossing point
for Palestinians, also set a new record in 2016 at over 2.2 million, most of
them Palestinian civilians — an increase of more than 10 per cent compared
with 2015.
“As part of the effort to ease access for the Palestinian population, Israel
decided to expand the operating hours of the Allenby Bridge. As of 20 June
17-14908

9/16

A/72/368
S/2017/741

and through 10 September, the bridge will be open for crossing 24 hours a day,
and beginning in 2018, the Allenby Bridge will be open 24/7 all year round.
“The decision to expand the operating hours of the Allenby Bridge is one
part of a comprehensive plan to upgrade the crossing, which includes
structural improvements, upgraded parking and other measures designed to
facilitate ease of travel and increase the commercial activity.
“In this context, it is also important to mention the approval of
construction plans to pave roads from the Japanese industrial zone in Jericho
to Highway 90 and to Allenby Bridge. The project, funded by the Japan
International Cooperation Agency, will provide better access for trucks
transporting products, manufactured goods and equipment from the Japanese
industrial zone in order to promote trade and commerce.
“The aforementioned steps taken by the State of Israel attest to i ts
commitment to a peaceful resolution to the conflict. Israel aspires for peace. It
is our sincere hope that creating the environment for enhanced economic
activity will encourage the resumption of direct negotiations, leading to the
realization of the vision of two nations living side by side, in security and in
peace.
“The Israeli-Palestinian conflict will be resolved only through direct
bilateral negotiations without preconditions. Attempts to impose solutions or
to dictate parameters and timetables will only drive peace further away. Thus,
Israel utterly rejects Security Council resolution 2334 (2016). The resolution is
unequivocally hostile to Israel and will only make peace harder, not easier, to
achieve.
“Finally, it is imperative to reiterate, once again, Israel ’s right to exist as
the nation State of the Jewish people, in peace, with secure borders, and our
steadfast opposition to any attempt to undermine Israel ’s legitimacy. The
Palestinian refusal to recognize Israel as a Jewish State — based, inter alia, on
a continued denial of any historic Jewish connection to its land — remains one
of the main obstacles to peace between Israel and the Palestinians.”

II. Observations
7.
International efforts to promote the peaceful settlement of the question of
Palestine continued to focus on the possibility of creating a framework for the
parties’ return to meaningful negotiations. The Quartet principals met in New York
on 23 September 2016, agreeing on the importance of close and continuing
coordination of all efforts to achieve the common goal of the two-State solution and
reiterating their call on the parties to implement the recommendations of the Quartet
Report of 1 July 2016. Quartet envoys also released statements twice in response to
heightened tensions on the ground. As they met in Jerusalem on 13 July, they
expressed serious concern over the worsening humanitarian situation in Gaza. Soon
after, on 22 July, in response to the heightened tensions in Jerusalem, they called on
all to de-escalate the situation while upholding the status quo at the holy sites.
8.
On 23 December 2016, the Security Council adopted its resolution 2334
(2016), in which it reiterated some of the key obstacles to achieving a negotiated
two-State solution that had been identified in the report of the Middle East Quartet
in July 2016: the continuing policy of settlement construction and expansion;
continued acts of violence and terrorism; incitement to violence; and the situation in
Gaza. In the resolution, the Council also called on both sides to take steps on the
ground to create the conditions for successful final status negotiations.
10/16

17-14908

A/72/368
S/2017/741

9.
On 15 January 2017, France hosted a conference in Paris at which some 70
countries and international organizations reaffirmed their support for the two -State
solution and their readiness to continue encouraging both parties to return to
meaningful negotiations. On the same date, the Russian Federation hosted
representatives of Palestinian factions in Mosco w and stressed the need to overcome
divisions so as to create the conditions for meaningful negotiations. On 29 March in
Jordan, Arab leaders committed to relaunching peace negotiations and reaffirmed
their commitment to the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative. The new United States
administration has also focused on efforts to restart negotiations and advance peace.
10. The situation on the ground was characterized by continued tensions, with
spikes of violence and a sharp rise in settlement activity in the occupi ed West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. A polarized public discourse across the political spectrum
in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory continued. Tensions rose in East
Jerusalem in July, after an attack in the Old City on 14 July, which left t wo Israeli
police officers and their assailants dead. In response to the attack, Israel installed
metal detectors and security cameras at the entrances to the Holy Esplanade, which
was immediately condemned by Muslim religious authorities and the Palestini an
leadership as unilateral actions violating the historical status quo in the holy sites.
Despite international calls for calm, protests and violence erupted after Friday
prayers on 21 July, with four Palestinian protesters dying as a result of the respon se
of Israeli security forces. The same night, a Palestinian stabbed to death three
members of an Israeli family living in the Israeli settlement of Halamish. The
situation eased after Israel withdrew the new security measures; Muslim religious
authorities and the Palestinian leadership subsequently instructed worshippers to
return to the Al-Aqsa Mosque for prayers.
11. In Gaza, a fragile ceasefire largely held but the situation remained volatile,
owing mostly to worsening socioeconomic conditions, delays in reconstruction,
continued restrictions on movement and the deepening political divide between the
Palestinian Authority in the West Bank and the de facto authorities in Gaza.
12. Stabbings, vehicle attacks and shootings by Palestinians targeting Israel is and
clashes between Palestinians and the Israeli security forces continued to claim lives.
During the reporting period, a total of 73 Palestinians were killed, 38 of whom were
perpetrators or alleged perpetrators of attacks, and more than 3,800 Palestin ians
were injured. Five Israeli civilians and 8 security forces personnel were killed, and
at least 176 Israelis, civilians and security forces personnel were injured.
13. The level of force used in countering some of the violence remains a matter of
concern. A number of Palestinian fatalities call into question the nature of the
response of the Israeli security forces, including the apparent disproportionate use
of lethal force. I once again call for necessary precautions to be taken when
decisions to use force are made; in particular, live fire should be used only as a last
resort, with any resulting death or injury properly investigated. Between October
2015 and March 2017, some 270 Palestinians were killed, nearly 180 of them while
carrying out or allegedly carrying out attacks against Israelis. According to the
Ministry of Justice, the Israel Defense Forces opened 24 investigations into
suspected unlawful use of force, of which only 1 resulted in an 18 -month sentence
for manslaughter. It is the duty of Israel to ensure a prompt and independent
investigation into incidents in which the use of force has resulted in death or injury,
and to ensure accountability where there is evidence of wrongdoing.
14. I reiterate the firm condemnation by the United Nations of all terrorist attacks.
While the Security Council, in resolution 2334 (2016), called upon both parties to
refrain from provocative actions, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric, such actions
continued. Official media and social media outlets affiliated with Fatah continued to
17-14908

11/16

A/72/368
S/2017/741

praise perpetrators of past terrorist attacks against Israeli civilians, while Hamas
leaders continued their unacceptable practice of celebrating recent attacks against
Israeli civilians as “heroic”. Israeli officials have also employed provocative
rhetoric and promoted legislation that has the potential to inflame tensions on the
ground. Leaders on all sides must stop incitement and consistently and
unequivocally stand against acts of terror and violence in all its forms.
15. Throughout the reporting period, the Israel Defense Forces continued to
conduct search and arrest operations, while the Palestinian Authority continued to
arrest suspected Hamas affiliates in the West Bank. At the end of July,
450 Palestinians were held by Israeli authorities under administrative detention,
compared with 700 at the beginning of the reporting period. I am especially
concerned about the continued reports of detainees on hunger strikes. On 17 Ap ril,
an estimated 1,500 Palestinian prisoners and detainees started a hunger strike to
protest their conditions in Israeli prisons. Their fast lasted until the start of
Ramadan, when some of their requests were met. I reiterate my call to end the
practice of administrative detention and to either charge all detainees or
immediately release them.
16. At the end of May, Israel held 331 Palestinian children in detention on security
grounds. This is down from a peak of 444 cases in March 2016, but double the
numbers recorded in May 2015, when 163 children were held in Israeli prisons. All
children should be treated with due consideration to their age and may be detained
only in situations that are justified under international humanitarian law or
applicable human rights norms.
17. After a three-year decline in incidents of settler violence, there has been a
noticeable increase in 2017. According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, 124 such incidents have been documented, resulting in the
deaths of 4 Palestinians 1 and the injury of 69, as well as property damage.
18. In resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council calls on Israel to take steps to
cease all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. Instead, settlement activities have risen sharply. During the reporting
period, and particularly after the adoption of the resolution, Israeli authorities
announced tenders for the construction of some 3,000 housing units in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. In addition, since the beginning of
2017 the Government has approved the advancement of plans for the construction of
more than 7,000 units in West Bank settlements. On 1 February, the Government
announced its intention to establish a new settlement for the residents of the illegal
Amona outpost, following its demolition by order of the Supreme Court of Israel. In
late March, the Government declared 241 acres in the West B ank as “State land”.
19. On 6 February, the Israeli Parliament approved the so -called Regularization
Law, which, if implemented, would permit houses that had been built in settlements
on land privately owned by Palestinians to remain in place, while offer ing the
landowners only a choice between compensation through payment and
compensation in the form of alternative land. The legal framework created by the
law is estimated to have the potential to retroactively “regularize” thousands of
housing units and remove significant legal obstacles to the “legalization” of dozens
of settlement outposts currently considered illegal by the Government of Israel. The
law marks the first time that the Knesset has extended its jurisdiction to matters
concerning property of Palestinians living in the West Bank, reflecting a significant
shift in the long-standing government position concerning the legal status of the
__________________
1

12/16

Two were persons shot by settlers during alleged stabbing and ramming attacks.
17-14908

A/72/368
S/2017/741

territory and the applicability of Israeli law therein. It contravenes international law
and, according to the Attorney General of Israel, is unconstitutional.
20. The continued settlement plans, new legislation, retroactive legalizations and
official statements signal that the strategic settlement enterprise of Israel continues
to expand. In the first seven months of 2017, the number of plans advanced was
already 60 per cent higher than the number for all of 2016, with the number of
tenders eight times the annual total for that year. Such activities undermine the
chances for the establishment of a viable, contiguous Palestinian State as part of a
two-State solution. I reiterate that settlements are illegal under international law and
an obstacle to peace, and undermine the two -State solution.
21. Demolitions of Palestinian homes in Area C of the occupied West Ban k
continued, with a significant decline having occurred since February 2017. During
the reporting period, 388 structures were demolished, leading to the displacement of
some 462 Palestinians, half of them children. In addition, the loss of water wells,
solar panels and animal shelters has had an impact on the livelihoods of more than
5,500 people. The Bedouin community in particular is paying a heavy price, with
some facing even an imminent threat of being forced to relocate. Unlike in Area C,
demolitions in East Jerusalem continued at a fast pace throughout the reporting
period, with 155 structures demolished and nearly 300 people displaced as a result.
Palestinians require access to a fair planning and zoning regime, so that they do not
resort to the building of unauthorized structures that lead to unjustified demolitions,
which often have an impact on the most vulnerable people. Demolitions and forcible
evictions, carried out when there is no military necessity, contravene international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
22. Also of concern are the continued punitive demolitions of the family homes of
Palestinian perpetrators or alleged perpetrators of attacks against Israelis. The
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has pre viously reported that
punitive home demolitions have an impact on the entire family, constitute a form of
collective penalty in breach of article 33 of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and breach the oblig ation of Israel to
ensure Palestinians’ rights to adequate housing and to freedom from arbitrary or
unlawful interference with privacy, family or home, and other relevant norms. As an
Israeli military committee concluded in 2005, such demolitions are unpro ven as a
deterrent and fuel tension by exacerbating feelings of injustice and hatred.
23. Palestinians continued to advance their State-building programme, although it
was limited to the territory under the control of the Palestinian Authority, which
excludes Area C, East Jerusalem and Gaza. Despite the progress made in building
the governance capacities of the Palestinian Authority, the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International Assistance to Palestinians
remains concerned about its fiscal and economic viability. At its meeting held in
Brussels on 4 May, the Committee discussed the key socioeconomic challenges
faced by the Palestinian Authority. Regrettably, a number of issues remained
unresolved between the parties, including those relating to access and movement,
energy, water and fiscal sustainability.
24. I am encouraged that the Israeli and Palestinian Ministers of Finance have
since come together to move a number of issues forward, and that they have made
progress in discussions on value-added tax clearance revenues. In early June, in
accordance with the electricity agreement signed in September 2016, Israel
transferred $30 million to the Palestinian Authority in lieu of equalization levies and
health stamps and agreed to conduct monthly transfers in the future. The meeting of
the Israeli-Palestinian Joint Water Committee held in May (the first such meeting in
seven years) and the 13 July agreement for an increase in water supply for
17-14908

13/16

A/72/368
S/2017/741

Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza are positive steps that need to be supported.
The signing on 10 July of an interim power-purchasing agreement, which will allow
for the first Palestinian-owned and -operated substation in Jenin, is also encouraging.
25. The Middle East Quartet has consistently called on Israel to implement
positive and significant policy shifts, particularly in Area C , consistent with the
transition to greater Palestinian civil authority contemplated by prior agreements. In
May, Israel announced measures designed to help the Palestinian economy in the
West Bank, including the proposed reprioritization of the enforcemen t of zoning
laws in parts of Area C adjacent to several Palestinian cities potentially allowing for
their residential, industrial and agricultural use; the development of industrial zones
in Tarkumiya and Hebron; and the expansion of the hours of operation of the
Allenby Bridge crossing into Jordan. I strongly encourage Israel to continue to
implement measures of this nature, in order to facilitate sustainable growth and job
creation for the Palestinian economy.
26. In February, the Palestinian Authority took a significant step towards
strengthening its institutions and improving governance, by finalizing the
Palestinian National Policy Agenda: National Priorities, Policies and Policy
Interventions (2017-2022), which reiterates its commitment to State-building and
guaranteeing the rule of law. In January, the Palestinian Authority approved its
general budget for 2017 and, owing to the strong fiscal performance in the previous
year, was able to reduce its budget deficit to approximately $580 million. Continue d
fiscal discipline and a push for revenue growth will be essential, as economic and
financial conditions are likely to remain restrictive, in particular given the continued
trend of decreasing international support.
27. On 13 May, the Government of the State of Palestine held municipal elections,
albeit only in the West Bank. Local elections, if held simultaneously in both Gaza
and the West Bank and conducted in line with international standards, can
contribute to the advancement of Palestinian reconciliation. Gaza and the West Bank
should be reunified under a single, legitimate and democratic Palestinian Authority
on the basis of the principles of the Palestine Liberation Organization and the rule
of law, in accordance with existing agreements.
28. In Gaza, the humanitarian situation remains dire. Three years after the latest
round of hostilities, approximately 25,500 people remain internally displaced and
47 per cent of households are food-insecure or vulnerable to food insecurity. The
chronic energy shortage and water deficiencies became even more acute during the
reporting period. Movement in and out of Gaza remains extremely limited for its
residents, a reality that is particularly harmful to those seeking medical treatment.
These conditions exacerbate record-high unemployment rates and chronic aid
dependency. In a report released on 11 July, the United Nations country team
underscored that most of the projections for 2020 made in an earlier report in which
Gaza had been deemed unlivable had come to pass, with conditions deteriorating
even further and faster than anticipated.
29. In March, as a result of an internal vote, Hamas elected a new leadership and
formed an administrative committee, which was seen by many as a direct challenge
to the legitimate Palestinian Government of national consensus. In response, the
Palestinian Authority reduced payments to thousands of its employees in the Gaza
Strip in April and decided to cap its purchase of electricity from Israel for Gaza,
leading Israel to reduce the supply of electricity that it provides to the Strip by some
30 per cent as from 22 June. This cut came in addition to the earlier temporary
shutdown of the Gaza power plant, which supplies another 30 per cent of the
electricity for Gaza, due to a dispute between the Palestinian Authority and Hamas
over the taxation of fuel.
14/16

17-14908

A/72/368
S/2017/741

30. At the time of reporting, electricity was unavailable for an average of 20 hours
daily in Gaza. Hospitals were forced to postpone elective surgeries and to reduce
cleaning, catering and sterilization services by 80 per cent. Desalination plants were
functioning at 15 per cent of capacity, and the majority of Palestinians in Gaza
received water for only a few hours every three to four days. As much as 100,000
cubic metres of raw sewage was discharged into the Mediterranean Sea on a daily
basis. As at 21 June, Egypt had facilitated the entry of fuel that allowed the Gaza
power plant to be brought back into use. I welcome the support provided by Egypt
to the people of Gaza at a moment of need. In addition, the United Nations is
providing nearly 900,000 litres of emergency fuel per month for critical health,
water and waste management infrastructure. These measures provide a temporary
lifeline to the residents of Gaza, but they are not sustainable solutions. The parties
must come to a sustainable agreement, or the population of Gaza will continue to
suffer.
31. I also welcome the decision by Egypt to open the Rafah crossing for travellers
on 43 occasions and its ongoing steps to facilitate more frequent and predictable
openings of the crossing, while respecting the legitimate security concerns of Egypt
with regard to the Sinai Peninsula.
32. Despite persistent security and governance challenges and funding shortages,
the reconstruction process in Gaza has continued. Three years after the escalation of
hostilities, almost all damaged or destroyed schools, hospitals and water and energy
facilities have been or are being repaired or rebuilt. While significant progress has
also been made on housing, nearly 3,800 totally destroyed homes and more than
57,000 damaged homes have yet to be reconstructed or repaired. Complete
reconstruction is within sight but requires that donors fulfil their funding
commitments. A large funding gap with respect to the rehabilitation of productive
sectors in Gaza also inhibits recovery, and I strongly encourage all Member States
to fulfil their commitments to support the reconstruction and development of Gaza.
The temporary Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism has allowed much of this
reconstruction to take place. I reiterate that the Mechanism was designed as a
temporary measure and that the ultimate objective of the United Nations in Gaza
continues to be the lifting of all closures within the framework of Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009) and in a manner that addresses the legitimate security
concerns of Israel.
33. The 2017 Humanitarian Response Plan, which is aimed at addressing the
humanitarian needs of 2 million Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank, requests
$552 million. This represents a 3 per cent reduction compared with 2016, but
remains elevated owing largely to the significant humanitarian needs in Gaza. In
July, the humanitarian country team issued a new $25 million appeal in response to
the energy crisis. The appeal highlights key unfunded projects, along with a few
new interventions that have been added to address the changing humanitarian
context. I strongly encourage all Member States that have not don e so to fulfil their
commitments without delay.
34. I remain concerned that limited crossing capacity and a range of other
restrictions, along with a lack of Palestinian unity, mean that significant
improvement in the humanitarian situation and overall ec onomy of Gaza remains
unlikely. In that context, the risk of violent escalation remains ever present in Gaza
as underlying causes of previous conflicts remain unaddressed. The effects of these
persistent pressures on security continue to be felt. As at 23 August, Palestinian
militants in Gaza had fired a total of 23 rockets at Israel, 14 of which had impacted
Israel, none of them causing injuries. The Israel Defense Forces had reportedly
responded with a total of 27 air strikes in Gaza, causing injuries to three
Palestinians. I call on all Palestinian factions to ensure respect for international law
17-14908

15/16

A/72/368
S/2017/741

and not to engage in activities that risk destabilizing the situation and the
reconstruction process. Similarly, I call on Israel to ensure that any military act ions
comply with the principles of distinction, proportionality and military necessity.
35. Lasting progress in Gaza can be realized only on the basis of Palestinian unity, an
end to the illicit arms build-up and militant activities, and a full lifting of movement
and access restrictions in line with Security Council resolution 1860 (2009).
36. I remain worried about the state of human rights and freedoms in Gaza. Of
particular concern are reports of arbitrary detention and ill-treatment in detention
centres. On 3 April and 3 May, Hamas carried out six executions of Palestinians,
bringing to 28 the number of death sentences carried out since its takeover in 2007.
I condemned those actions and remain deeply concerned that further executions are
anticipated. I call on the de facto authorities to refrain from carrying out further
executions. I also urge the Palestinian Authority to fulfil its responsibilities with full
respect for international human rights law.
37. The Palestinian Government of national consensus must be empowered and
enabled to assume its rightful responsibilities in Gaza, including in particular at the
crossings with Israel and Egypt. I strongly urge Palestinian factions to advance
genuine Palestinian unity on the basis of democracy and the Palestinian Liberation
Organization and Quartet principles. Genuine unity will also improve the ability of
the Palestinian Government to meet the pressing economic problems that are adding
to the frustration and anger of Palestinians. The United Nations stands ready to
support all efforts in that direction.
38. I remain seriously concerned about the lack of political progress and the high risk
of further violence and radicalization. The 50-year anniversary of the 1967 Arab-Israeli
war and the occupation of the Palestinian territory is a stark reminder: for too long,
leaders on both sides have failed to take the difficult steps needed for peace. There is
no alternative to the two-State solution for the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The
proponents of the status quo and the critics of the two-State solution offer no viable
alternative that meets the legitimate aspirations of both Israelis and Palestinians.
39. The report of the Middle East Quartet and Security Council resolutions have
clearly outlined what is needed for the advancement of a sustainable and just peace.
Israel can take the necessary steps to stop settlement expansion and construction in
order to preserve this prospect, while the Palestinian leadership can demonstrate its
commitment to tackling the challenges of violence and incitement on its side. This
will create an environment that will facilitate bilateral final status negotiations that
the international community can support. We remain resolut e in our commitment to
help Palestinians and Israelis overcome these challenges.
40. I would like to express my deep appreciation to the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov, for his
outstanding service in what remains a challenging context. I am also most grateful
to the Commissioner General of UNRWA, Pierre Krähenbühl, for his unwavering
commitment and the remarkable work carried out by his staff for Palestinian
refugees. In addition, I pay tribute to all staff who work under difficult, and at times
dangerous, circumstances in the service of the United Nations.
41. I will continue to ensure that the United Nations works towards the
establishment of an independent, democratic, contiguous and viable Palestinian
State living side by side in peace with a secure Israel in the framework of a
comprehensive regional settlement consistent with Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003), 1860 (2009) and 2334 (2016) and in
accordance with the Quartet road map, the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet report
and the principle of land for peace.
16/16

17-14908
