A/66/PV.60

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

60

th plenary meeting
Friday, 18 November 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Qatar)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 32
Support by the United Nations system of the efforts
of Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies
Report of the Secretary-General (A/66/353)
Mr. Elmegrabi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation wishes to commend the Secretary-General
for his report on support by the United Nations of the
efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate
new or restored democracies (A/66/353). We wish also
to express our appreciation for the continued efforts of
the Secretary-General and the assistance provided by
all United Nations organs to new or restored
democracies, in keeping with the rule of law and the
fundamental international values and principles of the
United Nations.
The General Assembly, by its resolutions 62/7
and 64/12, declared 15 September as the International
Day of Democracy. The Day was celebrated for the
first time in 2008. My delegation supports the
recommendation made by the Secretary-General in his
report that all countries throughout the world should
celebrate the Day and promote it actively by
encouraging their own citizens, especially young
people, to participate in such celebrations. My country
hopes that it will be able to hold such celebrations for
the first time next year, like all the other countries of
the free and democratic world.

Democracy is an essential factor in building
strong, healthy and just societies and a key instrument
for achieving development for the benefit of
humankind as a whole. It plays a crucial role in
reducing poverty and strengthening human prosperity,
through democratic policies that are diversified and
inclusive and that allow citizens to choose the political,
economic, social and cultural systems that they want.
Although there are similarities among democratic
systems, there is no one model of democracy, and it is
not restricted to one country or one region. The peoples
of the Arab region are today knocking on the door of
democracy, in what has come to be known as the Arab
Spring.
In the context of this debate on new or restored
democracies, I should like to recall the democratic
experience of Libya before the 1969 coup d’état carried
out by Colonel Al-Qadhafi against the legitimate
authorities.
After its independence in 1951 and during the
reign of King Idris as-Senussi, Libya experienced the
first democratic experiment in the region, adopting a
Constitution that organized the life of people and
preserved their rights. Libyans had an elected
Parliament, and there was separation between the
legislative, executive and judicial powers. If that
experience had continued, Libya today would have
been one of the leading free and democratic countries
of the world.
However, the coup d’état of Colonel Al-Qadhafi
put an end to that experiment. Under his rule, Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-59963 (E)

*1159963*

A/66/PV.60

became one of the worst dictatorships the world has
known. The people of Libya suffered autocratic rule for
42 years. During the reign of Al-Qadhafi, Libya knew
no form of democracy until the day arrived when the
people of Libya spoke up and decided to liberate
themselves from that regime. Today they aspire to start
a new life under the rule of law and to establish a
democratic State that believes in pluralism, respect for
human rights and basic freedoms.
Democracy for us is the choice, indeed more than
a choice — it is an indispensable necessity. The people
of Libya hope that the international community will
support them in realizing their legitimate aspirations to
establish a democratic State. The United Nations
assumed the leadership role in the efforts of the
international community to support the transition and
the reconstruction that Libya is carrying out. It seeks to
establish an independent, united, democratic State
through the establishment of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya under the leadership of
Special Representative Ian Martin and thanks to the
Security Council resolution 2009 (2011), which calls
for helping Libya in its national efforts to restore
security, peace and order, to strengthen the rule of law
and national reconciliation, and to begin the process of
drafting a constitution and an electoral process.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon visited Libya on
2 November to see with his own eyes the efforts
undertaken so far, and the President of the General
Assembly accompanied him.
We hope that international support will continue
and that it will strengthen our efforts to respond to the
needs of the Libyan people during the transitional
period and to train Libyan personnel in all fields
necessary for the strengthening and consolidation of
democracy.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): Allow me, at the
outset, to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity
to speak on the agenda item concerning support by the
United Nations system for efforts of Governments to
promote and consolidate new or restored democracies.
I would also thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on this item (A/66/353), which is
particularly meaningful for the Philippines as a nation
that stands proud of its long tradition of democracy in
Asia and as one of the founding members of the
International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies (ICNRD).

2

It may be recalled that it was the Philippines that
hosted the first International Conference of New or
Restored Democracies and that it was during the
second Conference, in Managua in 1994 — which built
upon and expanded the experiences shared in
Manila — that the ICNRD decided to ask the
Secretary-General, at the forty-ninth session of the
General Assembly, to undertake a study on ways in
which the United Nations system could support the
efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate
new or restored democracies. We are happy to see that
initiative alive, vibrant and more relevant today than
ever.
In recent months, we have witnessed a wave of
popular aspiration for democracy in different parts of
the world, including across parts of the Middle East
and North Africa. People are voicing their hopes for
more open and democratic societies, cognizant that
democracy can further advance people’s fundamental
rights and freedoms, such as the right of citizens to
choose their representatives through regular, free and
fair elections with universal and equal suffrage, the
right to equal protection under the law, to freedom of
opinion and expression, to peaceful assembly and
association, and to freedom of thought, conscience and
religion.
During this critical juncture in the process of
transition and consolidation of democracy in countries
of those regions, it is essential that the United Nations
stand ready to provide its expertise to ensure that
democratic processes are strengthened, especially in
those parts of the world where democracy is still
fragile. In that regard, we welcome the broad range of
multifaceted assistance that the United Nations
continues to provide to enhance national efforts that
foster and develop transparent, participatory and
accountable democratic processes and institutions. That
assistance includes support to strengthen democratic
governance and the rule of law, to promote and protect
human rights, to draft constitutions and electoral
assistance, to enhance civil engagement and to
empower women.
We also support the Secretary-General’s approach
of making use of lessons learned and the peer-to-peer
exchange of proven practices as a valuable form of
assistance. It enhances and complements the efforts
and initiatives of global democracy movements such as
the ICNRD and the Community of Democracies to

11-59963

A/66/PV.60

promote democratic values in a spirit of international
cooperation.
It has been said that the future of a democratic
Government cannot be divorced from the global
context in which each society must function. A global
dialogue, therefore, is clearly essential for all of us
who embrace genuine and inclusive democracy so that
we can act collectively to support gains made in the
achievement of democracy and to address threats to
democratic progress. New and restored democracies
can learn from each other as well as from old and
established democracies. Old and established
democracies must also learn from newer ones, since
democracy evolves with the challenges of changing
times.
My delegation recognizes the value of democracy
as an integral part of political processes for the
reconciliation and development of national societies
and for peace and security in the international
community within a broader and comprehensive
concept of security. Our consistent support for
initiatives and programmes of groups of countries with
common aspirations, such as the ICNRD and the
Community of Democracy, reflects our determination
to promote democracy around the world as we continue
to further strengthen our own democratic practices and
institutions back home.
It is in that context that we extend our full
support to the United Nations system in the promotion
of democracy and that we concur with the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations on enhancing the impact of
the International Day of Democracy, on strengthening
the democracy assistance of the United Nations and on
building synergies and enhancing the degree of
complementarity and coordination between the ICNRD
and the Community of Democracies.
My delegation is certain that our common
aspiration for the achievement of democracy will
enable us all to embrace genuine and inclusive
democracy, to collectively address the challenges
contained in the democratic ideals and turn them into
opportunities to further and strengthen the institution
of democracy all over the world.
Mr. Al-Hajri (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): The State
of Qatar has for several years now been on its
democratic march, with rapid and bold steps towards
genuine democracy, under the wise sponsorship and
instruction of His Excellency Sheik Hamid bin Khalifa

11-59963

Al-Thani, the Emir of Qatar. His Excellency has
affirmed on many occasions his determination to
continue this democratic process and to consolidate its
foundations so that it may succeed in building a state
of law based on transparency and accountability and
the strengthening of the role of legislative and
constitutional institutions. In confirmation of that, His
Excellency declared, during the opening of the work of
the Consultative Council, that in the second half of the
year 2013 the State of Qatar will see the first elections
to the Council. During the Consultative Council
meeting we announced that those first elections will be
held in the second have of 2013.
The International Conferences on New or
Restored Democracies have played an important role in
the promotion of democracy. The role played by
Governments,
parliaments
and
civil
society
organizations in these Conferences, in an interactive
and positive manner, is a groundbreaking experience
that has provided equal opportunities in a climate of
democracy, openness and freedom. Furthermore, it not
only allows for exchange of information and expertise
that enriches both theory and practice with regard to
democratic reform; it also enables civil society
organizations to establish partnerships and close
cooperation in the process of consolidating democracy
on the regional level.
The Assembly is aware that we hosted the sixth
International Conference on New or Restored
Democracies in Doha in 2006. The aim of the
Conference was to promote democracy at the
international level by following up on and
implementing recommendations of the Conference.
Between 2006 and now, democratic action has seen
considerable progress in many regions. A number of
activities were undertaken to further objectives such as
the promotion of the importance of democratic
movements and the revitalization of international
dialogue on the concepts and principles of democracy
and the fundamental values of democracy, while also
striving to develop a culture of partnership with
governments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union,
international forums on democracy, and the United
Nations.
The State of Qatar has also been striving to
establish the infrastructure necessary to create an
executive standing body that would be responsible for
implementing the programme of the democratic

3

A/66/PV.60

movement. That could be an example for presidencies
of the movement.
With regard to the efforts of Governments to
promote and consolidate new and restored
democracies, we must pay tribute to the role being
played by the United Nations in developing democratic
institutions and practices. It does this by enhancing
national capacities to implement democratic practices
and principles, by supporting the holding of fair and
free elections and encouraging civil society to
participate therein, and by undertaking mediation
efforts in problematic political situations in order to
prevent conflicts. While we stress the importance of
the United Nations in this regard, Qatar pays particular
attention to the United Nations Democracy Fund,
which is intended to encourage democracy throughout
the world through providing assistance for projects that
aim at promoting and consolidating democratic
institutions and at facilitating democratic rule.

There is no doubt that the wave of change that
has swept over the Middle East in recent months has
surprised many States, large and small, due to the
acceleration of change arising from various factors.
They include security and economic and development
issues, including the need to alleviate poverty, improve
living conditions and reduce youth unemployment —
young people represent approximately 60 per cent of
the population in many of these countries — and the
failure of governments to take the necessary steps to
ensure that work opportunities and productive
employment exist for everyone. All these factors,
including the right to education and effective health
systems, have contributed to triggering modern
revolutions in the Middle East.
In this state of affairs, the young people have
demanded their rights and a role in bringing genuine
changes to contribute to socio-economic progress. The
recent uprisings have shown that there are new and
important ways for moving towards desired change.
Young people in our societies have been able to use
modern information technology and the Internet in a
positive way in this unrest. The events have
demonstrated that the governments that wish to work in
a positive way with the young generation are the most
capable of ensuring success and of adapting to change
in their societies. As such, governments must learn
how to work with young people in society and promote
democratic process for change.

Despite the many democratic reforms that have
taken place in a number of regions, it is still the case
that the challenges are enormous in many areas of the
world. In order to achieve genuine democracy, the
Millennium Declaration (resolution 55/2) stressed the
importance for governments and national and local
parliaments to work together with civil society to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals and to
transform these challenges into opportunities to
promote democratic and effective governance, while
taking account of the need to undertake homegrown
democratic reforms that take into consideration the
national cultures, traditions and particularities of each
society, in accordance with the spirit and principles of
relevant international instruments.

Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): In November 2009, the
General Assembly entrusted the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela with the chairmanship of the New or
Restored Democracies movement.

One of the most important achievements of the
International Conference on New or Restored
Democracies that was chaired by Qatar was reflected in
the decision by the General Assembly to observe on
15 September every year the International Day of
Democracy (resolution 62/7), which was celebrated for
the first time in 2008. The International Day of
Democracy provides an opportunity to enhance
awareness among citizens of the importance of
democracy and of participation in establishing societies
based on equity and equality. This year, we
concentrated on activities involving the history of
democracies through the evolution and victories that
have been achieved, particularly by young people, in
terms of freedom of expression and self-determination.

Unfortunately, and for reasons that are well
known worldwide, my country was unable to host an
international conference. In that context, my delegation
thus began the procedures that are in consonance with
the tradition and practice of the movement in order to
transfer the chairmanship to a Member State of a
different regional group. We wish to emphasize that
during our chairmanship we carried out activities to
promote the importance of the New or Restored
Democracies movement worldwide, and we shall
report on them at a later date. The process to elect the
new Chairperson of the New or Restored Democracies
movement is under way. It is up to the Eastern
European countries to reach a consensus in order to
choose the country to chair the upcoming session of the

4

11-59963

A/66/PV.60

New or Restored Democracies movement. When that
occurs, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, together
with the country chairing the movement, will introduce
a draft resolution on support by the United Nations
system of the efforts of Governments to promote and
consolidate new or restored democracies, under agenda
item 32.
My country underscores that all of the regions of
the world, their Governments, parliaments and civil
and social organizations are represented within the
New or Restored Democracies movement. The
movement promotes democratic values in the
framework of social justice and religious and cultural
diversity. Democracy should not be perceived as a
merely political system; rather, it is an integral form of
societal organization, a way of life that evolves taking
into account the idiosyncrasies, cultures and specific
traditions of every country and region of the world. A
rich diversity of democracies and political and cultural
plurality form the global landscape of our times. While
democracies may share common features, there is no
single or universal model of democracy.
Under the leadership of President Hugo Chávez
Frías, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has chosen
a model of participatory democracy through a
constituent and ongoing process based on the
sovereignty of the people, thus enabling the people to
decide on the path to their own destiny. As a result,
political and civil liberties are thriving in Venezuela,
and we are progressing towards successful
achievement of a social, economic and cultural
development that will benefit all Venezuelans, not only
an economic or political elite that has in the past
monopolized power in our country.
No country has the right to hold itself up as a
paradigm of democracy, or to seek to export its
political model to countries of different histories,
cultures and traditions. The use of force and violence
to impose democracy negates its essence and
contravenes its values and principles.
We wish the incoming Chairperson of the New or
Restored Democracies movement the best of success in
carrying out its mandate.
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Thank
you, Sir, for giving my country the opportunity to
speak on this important topic.

11-59963

(spoke in French)
Tunisia welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral entitled “Support by the United Nations
system of the efforts of Governments to promote and
consolidate new or restored democracies” (A/66/353)
and calls upon all Member States to pay particular
attention to the recommendations in that important
report.
It is certain that the popular revolution
experienced in Tunisia was a revolution against
dictatorship, injustice and corruption. However, it was
fundamentally an aspiration aimed at laying the
groundwork for a society based on modern democratic
values and citizenship that will prepare a new path
forward in which each and every one will share the
responsibility for ensuring a genuine society that is
based on the universal values of freedom, justice and
equality and seeks to preserve human dignity and
guarantee the rights of the people against any form of
discrimination or social exclusion.
The revolution was a historic milestone. It was a
decisive step that realigned Tunisia’s path, allowing it
to resume its place within the concert of nations and
within the vital forces that support the universal human
rights of freedom, democracy, tolerance, equal
opportunity and respect for human rights in all of their
aspects and dimensions.
Today, promoting human rights and defending
civil liberties and democracy represent our country’s
highest
priorities.
The
transitional
Tunisian
Government is determined to make those values a
genuine reality, in line with the objectives of the
popular revolution. It has thus established an approach
based on promoting and protecting human rights,
which was especially demonstrated by a general
amnesty for all political prisoners of the former
regime; the dissolution of the political security
apparatus; and Tunisia’s accession to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court, the Optional
Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment and the International Convention for the
Protection
of
All
Persons
from
Enforced
Disappearance. In the same way, we have begun in
Tunisia to open offices and representative facilities for
many international agencies and organizations active in
the area of human rights, including the Office of the

5

A/66/PV.60

United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.
In that connection, the Government of Tunisia has
endeavoured to accelerate reform of the judicial system
in order to adapt it to the new demands to combat
corruption and prosecute those who were involved in
the killing of demonstrators and torture, as well as
those who were involved in plundering public assets,
by establishing two independent national commissions
that are responsible for investigating cases of
corruption
and
financial
improprieties,
for
investigating violations and abuses against the Tunisian
people during the revolution, and for implementing
international machinery such as the 2003 United
Nations Convention against Corruption, which Tunisia
has adopted and in which respect it is readapting its
national laws.
Tunisia would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate its appeal to all relevant States to help in the
repatriation of Tunisian assets so as to ensure that they
are used for the various urgent development
programmes, which will assist in establishing
democracy on a solid economic foundation.
Tunisia is firmly determined to meet the
challenge of establishing democracy, the genuine rule
of law and democratic institutions. A major challenge
for our country has been the organization of free and
transparent elections for a national assembly, which
was held on 23 October. Preparations for the elections
were carried out by an independent electoral
mechanism. Tunisians turned out in massive numbers
for the first free and transparent elections of Tunisian
history and were able to vote enthusiastically and
passionately to elect a constituent assembly. That
exercise was the first time that many Tunisians had
voted in their life. The high turnout manifested the
people’s longing for democracy, justice and liberty.
In that regard, I would like to inform the
Assembly that the turnout was clearly enormous,
exceeding 80 per cent in many voting stations. I also
take this opportunity to pay tribute to the efforts made
by all United Nations bodies that undertook to support
the democratic process in Tunisia since the beginning.
I would also like to take this opportunity to repeat
my warmest thanks to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
who always maintained confidence in the Tunisian
people and their choices. He personally supported the

6

democratic process in Tunisia ever since the revolution
began on 14 January.
I would like to emphasize once again the
importance of implementing the recommendations in
the Secretary-General’s report, particularly regarding
the international assistance to be provided in support of
democratic transitions and the special attention that
should be given to young people as drivers of change
and bearers of the values of democracy and freedom.
Finally, allow me to reiterate how much Tunisia
values its international and regional commitments as a
country that is working for peace, international legality
and the realization of the principles and values of the
United Nations. We are determined to play an active
role in the forefront of international relations and to
meet the aspirations of a people who have achieved a
peaceful revolution aimed at taking up the challenges
of democracy and regaining their rights, freedom and
dignity.
The President: In accordance with resolution
57/32, of 19 November 2002, I now call on the
observer of the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Mr. Motter (Inter-Parliamentary Union): The
year 2011 has the potential to represent the greatest
leap forward for democracy in a generation. Across the
Arab world, popular aspirations for freedom and
democracy have brought changes that were
unimaginable only a year ago. Revolutions in Tunisia,
Egypt and Libya have swept aside long-established
regimes, and those countries have embarked on the
difficult and uncertain path of democratization. Those
transitions are fragile. No one can say how much
progress will have been made a year from now, or what
direction it will take. But the desire for freedom is a
powerful one. Once unleashed, this is a force that
cannot easily be stopped.
The Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) believes
that the international forums that facilitate the sharing
of good practices among new or restored democracies
are very important. Each democracy is unique, but the
lessons learned in one country undergoing the process
of democratization are likely to be of great interest to
other countries travelling along a similar path. We will
continue to provide a parliamentary dimension to the
International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies and will work towards its rapprochement
with a similar mechanism, namely, the Community of
Democracies. We invite all countries to participate

11-59963

A/66/PV.60

actively in such gatherings in order to help strengthen
democracy worldwide.
Elections alone do not lead to political stability,
and nothing guarantees that new democracies will not
revert to authoritarian regimes. Most countries in the
world have multiparty systems of Government. Yet
much remains to be done to consolidate open and
effective democratic institutions. The consolidation of
democracy requires time, as well as long-term
commitment on the part of State authorities. Without
that commitment, political leaders may fail to satisfy
the expectations of the people.
Over the past year, we were reminded many times
that the removal of an authoritarian leader does not
automatically ensure the birth of democracy. That will
require strong representative institutions that can
further support a culture of democracy. Consolidating
democracy therefore also requires active measures to
ensure an ongoing dialogue between political
representatives and citizens. A functional democracy
must allow all voices of society to be heard.
Parliaments play a crucial role in building a
relationship between political leaders and citizens and
in providing the basis for a viable democracy. As the
most representative institution of Government,
parliaments need to ensure that the diverse interests of
society are reflected, reconciled and articulated in
sound policies for the benefit of all. The IPU devotes
much of its work to helping parliaments become ever
more democratic, that is, more representative,
transparent, accessible, accountable and effective. Over
the past year, the IPU has engaged in capacity-building
projects in Afghanistan, Cambodia, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Guinea-Bissau, Maldives, Palestine, Rwanda, the
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, the Sudan and Viet Nam.
Those projects include, among many other aspects, the
provision of advisory services on ethics and integrity,
support for women parliamentarians and caucuses, and
parliamentary engagement with the Millennium
Development Goals.
The basis for a trusting relationship between
political representatives and citizens is, of course, free
and fair elections and transparency and accountability
in funding political life. To that end, the parliaments
represented at the 124th IPU Assembly in April
demonstrated political commitment by adopting a
resolution on the prevention of electoral violence and

11-59963

another on transparency and accountability in the
funding of political parties and election campaigns.
Our upcoming Parliamentary Hearing at the United
Nations, a week from now, will address the issue of
political accountability from the perspective of the
political participation of young people, effective
cooperation with civil society, and budget
transparency.
The IPU also works to equip parliaments with the
necessary tools to educate their constituents about the
tenets of democracy and the role of parliaments within
it. People around the world expect a lot from their
representatives, especially in new or restored
democracies, but those expectations may often be
unrealistic. Parliamentarians are asked to help provide
access to health care, schools and jobs, as well as,
increasingly, to solve constituents’ personal problems.
Citizens’ expectations can only be fulfilled if
parliamentarians are given the opportunity to focus on
their principal functions of making law and holding
Government to account. To address that issue, the IPU
theme for the International Day of Democracy this year
was “What do citizens expect from their parliaments?”
In order to better understand the relationship between
parliaments and citizens, the IPU and the United
Nations Development Programme are cooperating to
publish the first global parliamentary report, which will
appear in early 2012. More than 1,000 members of
parliament from around the world were surveyed for
the report, which explores how parliaments are
adapting in order to effectively address the people’s
continuously changing needs.
In conclusion, regardless of historical, cultural,
and economic differences, the aspiration to live in
societies based on the rule of law, justice, equality,
human rights and democratic values is universal. It is
those values that will continue to guide the work of the
IPU at this critical juncture in the development of
democracy around the world. The future looks bright,
as long as we are ready to seize the opportunity.
The President: In accordance with resolution
58/83, of 9 December 2003, I now call on the observer
of the International Institute for Democracy and
Electoral Assistance.
Mr. Tommasoli (International Institute for
Democracy
and
Electoral
Assistance):
The
International Institute for Democracy and Electoral
Assistance (International IDEA) reaffirms its

7

A/66/PV.60

commitment to working in partnership with the United
Nations, including within the context of processes for
new or restored democracies, to support democracybuilding by stressing the linkages between democracy
and the pillars of the work of the United Nations.
On the occasion of the most recent celebration of
the International Day of Democracy, International
IDEA stressed the need for everyone to understand that
we are now firmly in the century of the citizen.
Nothing exemplifies this better than the events of the
past year in the Arab region. Over the past decade, we
have witnessed a shift of power from the State to the
people in an unprecedented way. Globalization has led
to national boundaries breaking down, and the
communications revolution has led to a flattening of
information hierarchies in societies.
People now have access to information as never
before, and they are using that information to influence
decision-making processes at the political level.
Individuals and non-governmental organizations play
ever-increasing roles in policymaking. Popular access
to transnational information flows means that events in
one country can rapidly cause ripple effects in another.
Information about political decision-making is no
longer in the hands of the few, but is communicated in
real time around the world. That brings with it a more
urgent need for accountability on the part of decisionmakers. Backroom politics no longer holds, as citizens
can more easily hold their political leaders to account.
Economic development in many countries has led
to the rise of the middle class, who are demanding not
just fulfilment of their basic economic needs but equal
access to economic opportunity and to political
decision-making. Economic inequality, access to
opportunity and a surging aspiration for basic freedom
and human dignity are huge mobilizing forces in many
countries, particularly among young women and men
who feel excluded or marginalized by political or
economic elites. Those were the issues that triggered a
vegetable seller in Tunisia to protest — and thereby set
in motion the events in the wider Arab world.
In that light, what are the implications of the
century of the citizen for democracy? Recent events
have reaffirmed that citizens are at the heart of
democracy and that democracy has proven itself
central to citizens’ aspirations. Citizens are the driving
force for democratic change, and international actors

8

should respect their leadership in building their
democracies.
The shift of power to the citizen also brings many
challenges, not least of which is the need to bridge the
gap between popular mobilization and traditional
political institutions. While political parties and
traditional actors of democracy have been weakened,
informal processes of expression and political
mobilization are becoming stronger. Young people turn
to social media rather that to democratic institutions to
express their views, vent their frustrations and
mobilize.
At the same time, democracy cannot deliver
without institutions. That means that we need to seek
creative new approaches to allow democracy to be
strengthened — and not weakened — by the ongoing
power shift to the citizen. And we have to build on and
gather from experiences from the global South, not
only from the more traditional established
democracies, in order to do so. International actors
working with democracy need to reach out to new
social groups and be a source of knowledge for the
people, rather than just for the elites of societies. Most
important of all, international actors working with
democracy need to respect the people and support their
integrity in their own democracy-building efforts.
International IDEA stands ready, together with the
United Nations, to meet those expectations.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this agenda item.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 32.
Agenda item 118
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
Draft resolution (A/66/L.5/Rev.1)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia to introduce
draft resolution A/66/L.5/Rev.1.
Mr. Al Oyaidi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
The Government of Saudi Arabia would like to
introduce the draft resolution presented by Saudi
Arabia in document A/66/L.5/Rev.1, entitled “United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre”.
The draft resolution is being introduced in
accordance with the agreement signed by Saudi Arabia

11-59963

A/66/PV.60

on 19 September 2011, in which the Saudi Government
expressed its interest in supporting international efforts
to implement the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, in accordance with resolutions
60/288, 62/272, 64/235 and 64/297.
My Government is fully aware of the financial
crisis faced by the international community and the
scarcity of financial resources for the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and programmes,
and of the need for further efforts to build capacities in
countries that need the most assistance for such
programmes. Therefore, the United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre and its trust fund in the amount of
$10 million would serve to provide such support —
relieving the United Nations of financial burdens over
the next three years — and to give the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force the chance to
implement many important activities and projects in
the field, in accordance with the relevant resolutions
just mentioned.
Intensive consultations have been conducted
among the Member States during this sixty-sixth
session of the General Assembly on the draft resolution
before us, in a spirit of transparency and consensus.
The first step towards that consensus was the adoption
in the Sixth Committee of draft resolution
A/C.6/66/L.25, on which there was general agreement
at the Committee’s 30th meeting on 11 November.
Many important meetings were held last month
on the issue of counter-terrorism during the High-level
Symposium on International Counter-Terrorism
Cooperation under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral, and on the occasion of the tenth anniversary
of the creation of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism, as well as the Sixth
Committee meeting in which we considered all
measures to counter international terrorism. Those
meetings reaffirmed the progress made in countering
terrorism over the past decade, both in terms of
national legislation and the exchange of experience.
However, many challenges remain if the international
community is to rid itself of terrorism.
I would like to commend the efforts of the United
Nations, its Member States, regional organizations and
non-governmental organizations towards that noble
objective. Today, let us celebrate our great achievement
as a joint working group in establishing the first United

11-59963

Nations body specialized in countering terrorism,
namely, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre,
and in giving it the necessary legislative mandate and
strategy to counter terrorism. The Centre will play an
important role in supporting the United Nations in the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy by supporting the capacity-building
efforts of Member States that need counter-terrorism
assistance.
At the beginning of this session, under the
auspices of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the
General Assembly witnessed significant progress on
the strengthening of the efforts and activities of all
relevant international bodies to truly implement
resolution 64/235 of 2009 at the High-level
Symposium, held on 19 September. In line with the
initiative launched by the Custodian of the Two Holy
Mosques following the Brazilian declaration of the
Arab-Latin American Summit, held on 11 and 12 May
2005, the Arab summit held in Algeria on 22 and 23
March 2005, the Ministerial Meeting between the Gulf
Cooperation Council States and the European Union on
5 April 2005, the ministerial meeting of the Gulf
Cooperation Council States on 13 March 2005 and the
Yemen meeting on 22 and 23 June 2005, we look
forward to the international counter-terrorism
conference expected to be hosted by the Kingdom in
the first quarter of 2012 as a first step towards
eliminating international terrorism and achieving a
world of peaceful coexistence and amity among all
cultures, religions and ethnicities without exception.
We call on the General Assembly to adopt the
draft resolution by consensus without a vote.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I call on the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to inform the Assembly that my
Government has decided to withdraw its support for
draft resolution A/66/L.5/Rev.1 on the establishment of
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I call on the
representative of Saudi Arabia to introduce oral
revisions to draft resolution A/66/L.5/Rev.1.
Mr. AlFarhan (Saudi Arabia): In accordance
with procedure, we would like to announce some oral
revisions to draft resolution A/66/L.5/Rev.1.

9

A/66/PV.60

In paragraph 2, the wording would become the
following:
“Welcomes the decision of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia to fund for three years the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre established
within the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force Office to be funded
through voluntary contributions.”
The second amendment, in paragraph 5, would
read as follows:
“Decides to review the implementation of
the present resolution at the sixty-eighth session
of the General Assembly within the existing
reporting and review framework of the fourth
biennial review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.”
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before giving
the floor to the speaker in explanation of vote before
the vote, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Cabello de Daboin (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we would
like to reiterate our condemnation of any act of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations by
whomever, against whomever and wherever it is
committed, including acts where there is the direct or
indirect involvement of a State.
Secondly, we wish to reiterate our commitment to
the fight against terrorism. My country therefore
welcomes any initiative seeking to achieve that
objective. We are convinced that international
cooperation is the only way to prevent such a scourge
from spreading. The establishment of the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre seems to meet that
aim.
Unfortunately, today, we are concerned about the
continued existence of the Centre following its three
initial years once the donated funds are exhausted. We
are also concerned about how the Centre will
ultimately operate, its working methods, who will
comprise its Advisory Board and how its members will
be selected.
However, in the light of those concerns and
bearing in mind that the international community has
given the Centre a unique character in the fight against

10

terrorism, demonstrating its spirit of cooperation in
adopting by consensus the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, my country will not
violate that principle, which has prevailed to date. We
have therefore joined the consensus as a sign of our
commitment to the fight against terrorism. We hope
that such a principle of consensus is taken into account
whenever a draft resolution pertaining to the Global
Strategy is to be adopted, because, if not, we will be
promoting and jeopardizing progress in that area.
Likewise, we hope to see the outcomes of the
Centre in the next report, as stipulated in the draft
resolution.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
will now take action on draft resolution
A/66/L.5/Rev.1, entitled “United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre”, as orally revised.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like
to announce that since the submission of draft
resolution A/66/L.5/Rev.1, in addition to those
delegations listed in the document, the following
countries have also become sponsors of the draft
resolution: Belgium, Bulgaria, Chad, Comoros,
Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Iraq, Italy,
Madagascar, Montenegro, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, United
States of America, and Uzbekistan.
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/66/L.5/Rev.1, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/66/L.5/Rev.1, as orally revised,
was adopted (resolution 66/10).
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 118.
Agenda item 120
Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations
Draft resolution (A/66/L.9)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Libya to introduce draft
resolution A/66/L.9.

11-59963

A/66/PV.60

Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): On
1 March, the General Assembly adopted resolution
65/265, by which it suspended Libya’s membership of
the Human Rights Council. This was indeed a sound
resolution in support of the Libyan people and in
response to the crimes and violations of human rights
that were being committed by the Al-Qadhafi regime, a
regime that exploited every possibility available to it in
killing and tormenting the people of Libya.
Today, the people of Libya have succeeded in
ridding themselves of the tyrant and have begun the
political process for establishing a democratic State
that respects human rights and basic freedoms. The
new Libya deserves to return to the Human Rights
Council in order to contribute, along with the rest of
the Council’s members, to protecting and promoting
the values of human rights as agreed on internationally
and to defending those who defend those rights and
freedoms.
Here, I would like to reiterate the commitment of
the National Transitional Council and all the Libyan
authorities to respecting all of Libya’s obligations in
the area of human rights. I want to reaffirm that the
new Libyan authorities will devote great attention to
establishing the rule of law and will in good faith and
with the best of intentions meet its obligations under
the conventions and agreements to which Libya is a
party. The Government of Libya will cooperate with
other States in protecting human rights everywhere in
compliance with the mechanisms established within the
Human Rights Council.
The people of Libya have suffered greatly as a
result of the violations of human rights over the
42 years of Al-Qadhafi’s rule. They have sacrificed
more than 30,000 martyrs; 50,000 more have been
maimed or wounded in their fight to restore their rights
and dignity and to live in peace and security after
ridding themselves of the tyrant. In the future, these
people will accept no violations of their human rights
or allow another tyrant to rule over them and dictate
their destiny. The new Libyan authorities are well
aware of the fact that some violations did take place
during the confrontation between the revolutionary
forces and those of the tyrant and directly after the
arrest of Al-Qadhafi. That will not be overlooked.
Those violations are, however, isolated, individual
incidents that are being carefully investigated in order
to achieve justice and the rule of law, and to make sure
that they are not repeated.

11-59963

The new Libyan authorities will encourage civil
society organizations, particularly those concerned
with human rights, in order to promote a culture
conducive to human rights and their protection. They
will also provide support to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
cooperate with it to help achieve its mandate. I wish to
assure everyone here that no violation of human rights
will take place on Libyan territory in future, and if that
should happen, the perpetrator will never get away
with it. Draft resolution A/66/L.9 submitted to this
Assembly reaffirms Libya’s commitment to its
obligations and to fulfilling its duties in accordance
with international human rights law to protect and
strengthen human rights, democracy and the rule of
law. The resolution also decides to restore Libya’s
membership in the Human Rights Council. I am
honoured on behalf of all the sponsors of the draft
resolution to submit it to the General Assembly. I call
on the General Assembly to adopt it without a vote.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
will now begin consideration of draft resolution
A/66/L.9.
Before giving the floor to the representative of
Uruguay, who wishes to speak in explanation of vote
before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Silveira (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): The
Government of Uruguay takes note of draft resolution
A/66/L.9 welcoming Libya’s declaration of its
commitment to respect and protect human rights and its
cooperation
with
the
relevant
international
mechanisms, in particular with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
We would like to emphasize that the fact that
Uruguay joins the consensus on this draft resolution in
no way alters our position with respect to our
recognition of the new Libyan authorities. Uruguay
continues to closely monitor the facts as they develop
in order to reach a decision on that matter. Uruguay
considers it advisable for the Human Rights Council to
continue to track the situation in Libya, especially
during its nineteenth session, at which the investigative
commission
will
present
its
report
and
recommendations. Likewise, during that same session,
the Council should adopt the outcome of the Universal
Periodic Review of Libya, which is the appropriate

11

A/66/PV.60

moment for that country to declare its response to the
recommendations of the working group, which met in
November 2010.
Uruguay hopes that Libya will take advantage of
those opportunities to assume its commitments in the
area of human rights and that it will be able to
cooperate with the universal system for the promotion
and protection of human rights. At the same time,
Uruguay hopes that Libya will request the technical
assistance and the support it needs from the United
Nations system and from the international community
in order to implement those recommendations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
will now take action on draft resolution A/66/L.9,
entitled “Restoration of the rights of membership of
Libya in the Human Rights Council”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that in addition to those delegations listed
on document A/66/L.9, the following countries have
also become sponsors: Andorra, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chad,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Djibouti,
Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Ireland, Iceland, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Oman, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Thailand, TimorLeste and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
The President (spoke in Arabic): A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,

12

Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand, Niger, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Yemen
Against:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Ecuador,
Nicaragua, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Botswana, Cuba, Viet Nam

Barbados,

Draft resolution A/66/L.9 was adopted by
123 votes to 4, with 6 abstentions (resolution
66/11).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Viet Nam,
Bulgaria, Nigeria and the Netherlands advised the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before giving
the floor to speakers in explanation of vote after the
voting, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba abstained in the voting on resolution 66/11,
which has just been adopted. My delegation feels
obliged to express its firmest rejection of the manner in
which this subject has been manipulated within the
organs of the United Nations, in particular in light of
Security Council resolution 1973 (2011), under which
NATO violated international law. For more than six
months, NATO unceasingly bombarded Libya, leading
to loss of life as well as suffering for countless human

11-59963

A/66/PV.60

beings, while the General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council did not lift a finger, failing to express
the slightest note of concern. As a result of that
aggression, we have now witnessed a humanitarian
tragedy in Libya that calls into question the actions of
the United Nations, in particular with respect to human
rights. Cuba reiterates its belief that the clause in
resolution 60/251 that allows the exclusion of members
legitimately elected to the Human Rights Council leads
to manipulation and the application of double
standards.
Ms. Medal (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish):
Nicaragua wishes to explain its vote against resolution
66/11, just adopted by the General Assembly.
As a fundamental principle, Nicaragua rejects the
language of war between peoples and war as a means
to resolve disputes between States. From the outset,
Nicaragua has rejected and condemned the foreign
aggression against the Libyan people and the violation
of their right to full exercise of self-determination. We
have all witnessed the shameful manipulation of
Security Council resolution 1973 (2011) and the illegal
nature of the war waged by NATO against the
sovereignty of a United Nations Member State, a war
that has violated the very Charter of the Organization.
Western Powers and NATO have carried out illegal
military attacks on a country to impose a change of
regime that is in accord with their geopolitical and
economic interests.
The United Nations must not ignore the clamour
of international public opinion and cannot be complicit
in the massacres of civilians and violations of the
human rights of the fraternal Libyan people that have
been perpetrated in the name of the supposed
responsibility to protect. Those countries that have
arrogated the right to make themselves supreme judges
of the supposed violations of human rights of third
countries are themselves the greatest violators of
human rights on the planet. Those same countries are
blind to their own massive violations of human rights
domestically and pretend that we all are ignorant of
that.
The Libyan people should be represented by a
Government that is inclusive, legitimate and
representative and that fully respects the human rights
and the fundamental freedoms of all of its citizens. The
Libyan people deserve respect for their right to peace
and to the sovereign determination of their future

11-59963

through exercise of the right to self-determination.
Only thus will its voice have validity and credibility in
the Human Rights Council.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela voted against
resolution 66/11 for the following reasons.
First, I wish to recall that the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela energetically condemns the exclusion of
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya from the Human Rights
Council. Venezuela opposed that exclusion, which it
viewed as part of a manoeuvre by imperial Powers to
pave the way to intervene — as subsequently happened —
in a sovereign country, imposing a government through
force and use of military intervention and occupation.
We must recall that the NATO forces violated the
mandates established by Security Council resolutions
1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) by providing military
assistance, offering weapons and political and military
support to the forces opposing the Government of
Muammar Al-Qadhafi. They thereby exacerbated the
armed conflict that was taking place in the country,
destroying years of economic and social progress
achieved by the Libyan people and causing the death of
thousands of innocent people. In the name of the
defending civilians, incessant bombing campaigns
murdered thousands of civilians.
Only a few minutes ago, we were discussing
democracies. Venezuela believes that wars, bombings,
civilian deaths and invasions of countries are not
mechanisms to establish democracies but, on the
contrary, to deny them in the most absolute manner.
The Bolivarian Government can only reject, and
therefore vote against, the initiative to restore to Libya
its status as a member of the Human Rights Council.
As we have already said, the National Transitional
Council does not legitimately represent the Libyan
people. Furthermore, in Libya, with the endorsement of
the National Transitional Council, horrendous and
massive human rights violations have been carried out.
We must condemn the festive manner in which the
macabre assassination of the Libyan leader, Muammar
Al-Qadhafi, was celebrated. We must condemn the
manner in which the bodies of the Libyan leader and
other leaders were put on display as if they were a
spectacle. Such acts run counter to the most basic
values of any religion that exists in the planet.

13

A/66/PV.60

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates
that it does not and will not recognize any Government
that has been installed by missiles, bombings and by
the indiscriminate aggressive acts of imperialist
Powers. The Government in this case does not embody
the sovereign will of the Libyan people.

charted for the country; no elections have been
organized; there is no elected Government; and
Colonel Al-Qadhafi was assassinated before the very
eyes of the international community, when he should
been tried fairly, with the right to defence, as is
required under the rule of law.

Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
welcomes the restoration of Libya to the Human Rights
Council. We welcome the commitments Libya has
assumed to respect its obligations under international
human rights norms to promote and protect human
rights, democracy and the rule of law and to cooperate
with the relevant international human rights
mechanisms. We refer in particular to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the international commission of inquiry established
by the Human Rights Council in its resolution S-15/1.
Libya has overcome an historic stage in its political
life. Now it must build a democratic system that
responds to the sovereign wishes of its people.

All these facts, witnessed by the international
community in recent months, should have been taken
into account when it came time to adopt the resolution.
That is why Bolivia rejected it, aligning itself with a
number of other countries that expressed similar views.

Chile hopes to be able to work with the Libyan
delegation in Geneva, as we are both members of the
Human Rights Council.

The President (spoke in Arabic): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote.
I shall now give the floor to those representatives
who wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): I would like to
speak on behalf of the European Free Trade
Association member States Iceland, Norway,
Switzerland and Liechtenstein to briefly put on record
our understanding of the resolution we have just
adopted.

Mr. Archondo (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia voted against resolution 66/11
supporting the reinstatement of Libya’s rights of
membership in the Human Rights Council.

Paragraph 8 of resolution 60/251, on the
establishment of the Human Rights Council, states that
the General Assembly may suspend the rights of
membership in the Council of a member of the Council
that commits gross and systematic violations of human
rights.

Our position has not changed in any way. Like
other delegations that made mention of this, we believe
that Security Council resolution 1973 (2011) was
manipulated and its objectives radically changed. The
aim of the resolution was to protect unarmed civilians
in Libya, but the outcome was regime change in that
country, which was not the mandate of the United
Nations or of the Security Council.

In March 2011, Libya was the first member of the
Council to have its rights of membership suspended in
accordance with that provision. We welcomed that
decision by the Assembly as both a clear statement on
the human rights situation in Libya at that time and as
an important precedent in the full implementation of
the provisions governing the establishment of the
Human Rights Council.

We believe also that the circumstances
surrounding the expulsion of Libya from the Human
Rights Council have not changed. Shocking and
flagrant violations of human rights continue to be
committed in Libya before the very eyes of the
international community. We believe that the situation
involving human rights violations in Libya has not
changed, and we therefore express our concern at the
fact that the United Nations has not sought to monitor
the situation. There are still armed militias in Libya;
chaos continues to reign in terms of the imposition of
authority; there is no clear transition or specific course

The restoration of the membership rights that we
have just decided on comes with a clear obligation on
the part of Libya to uphold the highest standards in the
promotion and protection of human rights, in
accordance with paragraph 9 of resolution 60/251, as is
the case for all other members of the Council.

14

We
therefore
welcome
Libya’s
stated
commitment to upholding its obligations under
international human rights law, to promote and protect
human rights, democracy and the rule of law, and to
cooperate with the relevant international human rights

11-59963

A/66/PV.60

mechanisms, as well as the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the International
Commission of Inquiry and the International Criminal
Court. It is against this background that we
co-sponsored the resolution.
We would also like to place on record our
understanding that decisions of the Assembly to
suspend and restore membership rights are part of the
competence given to the Assembly under resolution
62/51 and complementary to the Assembly’s
competence to elect the membership of the Council.
This role does not require input from the Human
Rights Council itself, and we are pleased to see that the
Assembly has made responsible use of its competence
today.
Mr. Herczyński (Poland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
On 1 March, the General Assembly took the
unprecedented decision to suspend Libya’s human
rights Council membership upon recommendation of
the February 2011 special session of the Human Rights
Council. In the meantime, the international community
has been able to welcome the end of an era of
despotism and repression in Libya. We are encouraged
by the statements made by the Chair of the National
Transitional Council on the need to respect the
standards of international human rights and
humanitarian law and to deliver concrete results in that
regard.
We support the new Libyan authorities in taking
forward an inclusive transition process based on
respect for democratic principles, human rights and, in
particular, the rights of women and the rule of law.
Following the decision of the General Assembly
to recognize the National Transitional Council of Libya
as the legitimate representative of the country and the
human rights commitments made by Libya, the Human
Rights Council, on 28 September, recommended to the
General Assembly that it lift the suspension of Libya’s
membership rights in the Human Rights Council at its
current session. The EU welcomes the fact that recent

11-59963

developments have permitted the Assembly to reinstate
Libya’s rights of membership in the United Nations
body specifically set up to promote and protect human
rights.
In that regard, we would like to recall paragraph
9 of resolution 60/251 establishing the Human Rights
Council, which stresses that members of the Council
must uphold the highest standards in the promotion and
protection of human rights and shall fully cooperate
with the Council. The States members of the EU were
pleased to vote in favour of that resolution. The EU
now encourages Libya to ensure the full promotion and
protection of human rights and to consider making
voluntary pledges and commitments in that respect, in
the spirit of paragraphs 8 and 9 of resolution 60/251
and in keeping with the obligations stemming from
Human Rights Council membership.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): We
welcome Libya back to the Human Rights Council.
Muammar Al-Qadhafi’s Libya was the only member of
the Council that has ever been suspended for gross and
systematic violations of human rights, as called for in
resolution 60/251, which created the Council. We
commend the new Libyan Government for the strong
affirmation that it made in Geneva at the Human Rights
Council’s most recent session committing Libya to
“uphold[ing] the highest standards in the promotion
and protection of human rights” for all its people, as
provided for in paragraph 9 of the Human Rights
Council’s founding resolution 60/251. We look forward
to working closely with our Libyan colleagues to
address critical human rights concerns in Libya and
around the world.
We see a future in Libya with a new Government
that responds to the democratic aspirations of the
Libyan people, respects their universal human rights
and adheres to Libya’s international commitments and
obligations. Backed by increasing international
support, the National Transitional Council has
demonstrated a clean break from the Al-Qadhafi legacy
through its sincere willingness to protect and respect
the rights and fundamental freedoms of the Libyan
people and to respond to their legitimate aspirations for
good governance that embraces human rights
principles and gives its citizens a meaningful voice in
how they are governed. We support that effort.
Nonetheless, we remain concerned by reports of
human rights abuses and violations in Libya. The

15

A/66/PV.60

National Transitional Council has stated that it will
work to ensure security and accountability according to
the rule of law and in line with Libya’s international
obligations and commitments, which protect all people
in Libya, regardless of nationality, race or political
affiliation. We have called on the National Transitional
Council to hold Libya to those commitments, and the
Council has cooperated fully with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the International
Organization for Migration and non-governmental
organizations as they have visited detention facilities to
investigate reports of arbitrary detention and the abuse
of Libyans and sub-Saharan Africans.
We commend the National Transitional Council
for its openness and willingness to work with the
international community and for calling upon the
United Nations to provide technical assistance to assist
it in protecting human rights, particularly for
individuals belonging to vulnerable groups, and to
support transitional justice.
The United Nations has invaluable expertise in
areas that will be crucially important in the days,
weeks and months ahead, including security sector
reform, humanitarian affairs, political reconciliation,
human rights assistance, constitutional development,
transitional justice and elections. It will be important to
ensure that assistance in those and other areas is
coordinated across the United Nations system. As the
situation stabilizes, the United States will continue to
be fully engaged with our international partners,
particularly the United Nations, to ensure that the
Libyan people have the support they need to build their
new country.
Mr. Morrill (Canada): Canada voted in favour of
the important resolution 66/11.
The end of the Al-Qadhafi regime has allowed the
Libyan people to turn the page on more than 40 years
of tyranny and one-man rule. It opens a new chapter in
Libya’s history, where the Libyan people can fulfil
their aspirations for freedom, democracy and respect
for human rights and the rule of law. The new Libya
needs to be an inclusive Libya, where everyone can
find a place. Consequently, Canada welcomes the
strong commitment by the Prime Minister of Libya,
Mr. El Keib, to establish a State based on human rights
and the rule of law. Like him, we believe that the
emergence of democracy and social equality in Libya

16

will not happen without the full realization of women’s
rights.
The first Libyan women’s conference in the postQadhafi era, One Voice, was held in Tripoli this past
weekend. The conference had an important message for
all Libyans, namely, that Libyan women want to be
included in all aspects of society, including the new
Government. As the process to establish the interim
Government draws to a conclusion and as Libyans look
towards the new Constitution and democratic elections,
it is Canada’s hope that the aspirations of all Libyans
will be realized by respecting the rights of all Libyans.
It is a reflection of that hope that we here are very
pleased to see this resolution pass.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica welcomes the reinstatement of Libya to the
Human Rights Council. In doing so, we draw attention
to the commitments that Libya has entered into to
respect the obligations that derive from international
human rights law, in particular its announcement that it
will continue to promote and protect the rights of its
peoples, democracy and the rule of law and to
cooperate with international human rights mechanisms
that are relevant in this field, especially with the Office
of the High Commissioner of the United Nations for
Human Rights, as well as with the International
Commission of Inquiry that was established by the
Human Rights Council in resolution S-15/1. Its
cooperation and the cooperation of the entire
international community with the International
Criminal Court are of equal importance.
Costa Rica wishes to underscore that, pursuant to
resolution 60/251, the members of the Human Rights
Council are called upon to apply the most stringent
norms for the promotion and protection of human
rights and cooperate fully with the Human Rights
Council. They are also subject to the Universal Period
Review mechanism throughout the term of their
membership. We therefore call for the effective
implementation of those commitments and for the
establishment of specific machinery that will make that
possible. The Libyan Government must continue its
efforts aimed at ensuring that the rights of all
individuals, including those who are suspected of
having carried out war crimes or human rights
violations, are respected, including the right to a fair
trial and to due process.

11-59963

A/66/PV.60

Finally, we believe that the international
community must support the new Libyan authorities in
their task of ensuring the full implementation of human
rights in the country. The international community has
the duty to improve its response capacity in order to
provide proper assistance and support for humanitarian
strategies. In that regard, Costa Rica earlier supported
the suspension of Libya’s membership in the Human

Rights Council for the reasons that were previously
outlined and now we co-sponsored resolution 66/11 on
Libya’s reinstatement and welcome the country back to
the Council.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of item 120.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

11-59963

17
