THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

N_E:W YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. . , . . . . . , , . . . . , . . . . _. . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . ,

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 23 September 1977 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/ 12402) . . . . . . , . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2034)

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published In yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

--

----_

mI_-

2034TN
Held in New York

-._.-___-

MEETlNG

on Thursday,

29 September

Presi&xt: Mr. Riidiger von WECljMAR
(Federal Republic of Germany).

1977, at 5 p.m,

At the invitation
of the President,Mr. N’Dong (Gabon]
a& Mr. Wa@aki(Kenya) took the placesreservedfor them
at the sideof the Councilchamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

3. The PRESIDENT: Membersof the Councilhavebefore
them the text of a draft resolution sponsoredby the United
Kingdom and contained in document S/12404. I should
like also to draw the attention of the Council membersto
document S/12406 containing the text of a letter dated 28
September 1977 from the representa.tiveof Benin to the
Presidentof the Council.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2034)

4. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The position of
PinCiPk
of the Soviet Union on the Rhodesianproblem
has been repeatedly set forth in the Security Council and
other United Nations organs. The Soviet Union categorically favours the earliestpossibletransfer of power to the
genuine representativesof the people of Zimbabwe, the
national liberation movement headed by the Patriotic
Front.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Question
concerning
the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 23 September 1977 from the Permanent
Represcntativc or the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
atldrcsscd to the President of the Security Council
(S/12402)
The meeting was t~ullcd to order at 6.25 p.m.

5. This approach of ours flows from the Fundamentalline
of Soviet external policy aimedat the total elimination of
all the remnants of the system of colonial oppression,of
the infringement of the equality and jndependenceof
peoples and of all hotbeds of colonialismand racism.The
Soviet Union seeksno privilegesfor itseIf in Africa; it does
not covet concessionsor bases,nor does it impose on
African countries its own world outlook. AS wasstressedby
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the USSR, Mr. Andrei
A, Gromyko, in his recent statement during the general
debate in the GeneralAssembly:

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 23 September 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to tile United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (s/12402)

‘C. . . Our aimsin Africa areindependence,freedomand
peacefor its peoples.

1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the Council
that 1 have rcccivecl letters from the representatives Of
Gabon and Kenya, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the question on the agenda.
Consequently, 1 propose, in accordance with the USUd
practice and with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, under the provisions of Article 3 I of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

“We do not conceal the fact that in Africa, as
elsewhere,our sympathieslie with the Statesthat have
embarkedon a progressivepath of development,a path of
social and economic transformations for the benefit of
the masses.We openly declare our complete solidarity
with the peoples fighting for the liquidation Of the
remainingstrongholdsof colonialismand racism.“’
The sooner an end is put to thoseanachronisms
of our age,
colonialism, racism and apartheid, the purer will be the
atmospherein Africa and throughout the world.

2. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I now invite the representatives of Gabon
and Kenya to t&c the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council cllamber, on the understanding that tlley
will be invited to take a place at the Council table whenever
they wish to address the Council.

I Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second Ses-

sion,Plenary Meetings, 8th meeting,paras.156 and 157.
1

6. The Security Council and the General Assembly have
adoptccl a great number of important and useful decisions
confirming the inalienable right of the people of Zimbabwe
to self-determination and independence, and have provided
for a number of measures aimed at the elimination of the
racist regime of Smith. If this r&ime still dares to defy the
world community, it is only because the appropriate
measures and sanctions have not been observed by certain
States Members of the United Nations. The consistent
implementation of United Nations decisions on the Rhodesian settlement, the implementation of sanctions against the
Smith rCgime and its ally South Africa--that is the direct
way in which a just solution to the Rhodesian problem,
entirely in keeping with the will and aspirations of the
people of Zimbabwe, can be and must be ensured.

the appointment of a representative of the SecretaryGeneral to hold talks with the parties in Rhodesia.
10. At the same time, we listened attentively at yesterday’s meeting (ibid./ to the statement of one of the leaders
of the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe, who, in principle, did
not object to the appointment of a representative of the
Secretary-General. As far as we know, this is also the
position of a number of African countries. We also take
into account the explanations to the effect that the
functions of the representative of the Secretary-Genera1
would be of a limited and preliminary character and would
in no way be used to the detriment of the national
liberation movement of the people of Zimbabwe. In these
circumstances, the Soviet delegation finds it possible not to
impede the adoption of the draft resolution contained in
document S/ 12404.

7. The valiant struggle of the people of Zimbabwe for its
freedom and independence must end in total victory. We
cannot permit a situation where the people of Zimbabwe is
deprived of the fruits of this victory as a result of various
kinds of behind-the-scenes scheming. There is no need to
recall how much has been done in the past by way of
attempts to impose upon the people OCZimbabwe all kinds
of plans for a “settlement”. The people of Zimbabwe,
continuing their heroic struggle for total liberation, have
rejected those plans because, in essence, they were designed
to ensure, by various means, the consolidation of the
position of oppression in which they were kept by the
colonialists.

11. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (translation from G?inese): In
recent years, the struggle of the Zimbabwe people for
national independence and liberation, particularly their
armed struggle, has been mounting vigorously, and continual new victories have been achieved. The just struggle of
the Zimbabwe people has won the powerful support of the
African countries and people and the people of the rest of
the world. The front-line African States have long given
firm support to the struggle of the Zimbabwe people and
made heavy sacrifices to that end. Besieged by the great
African people, the Smith racist rBgime is beset with
difficulties at home and abroad and assailed from all sides,
finding itself in utter desperation and isolation.

8. The delegation of the USSR does not want now to go
into an analysis of the most recent Anglo-American plan for
a settlement in Rhodesia. However, we cannot accept either
direct or indirect forms of recognition of that plan as a
possible basis for a Rhodesian settlement. Representatives
of the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe and of a number of
Arrican countries have pointed to the neo-colonialist
tendencies of its provisions, At this stage, we consider it
necessary to express our categorical objections to the fact
that the United Nations should bc, in one form or another,
involved in measures connected with a Rhodesian settlement which might be prejudicial to the national liberation
struggle of the people of Zimbabwe. In this regard, we
cannot forget the sad experience of United Nations
participation in certain events on the African continent
which had tragic consequences. We cannot permit the
United Nations to be used once again to cover up a
neo-colonialist approach to a solution of the problems of
eliminating the colonial system in Africa.

12. But historical and contemporary experience has told
us that no reactionary forces in the world will ever step
down from the stage of history of their own accord. Before
their extinction, they are bound to resist desperately in a
last-ditch fight by every possible means. This is a universal
law true both in the past and at present, whether in China
or abroad. The Smith racist regime is no exception to this.
Therefore, all the revolutionary people understand that it is
imperative to use revolutionary dual tactics in dealing with
the counter-revolutionary
dual tactics and that armed
struggle is the fundamental way towards genuine and
complete national liberation. Negotiations must be based
on fighting. The armed force of the people must only be
strengthened and not weakened before the enemy lays
down his arms completely. In 1945, when referring to our
peace negotiations with the Kuomintang, the Chinese
people’s great leader and teacher, Chairman Mao Tsetung,
taught the Chinese people that it was necessary to adopt
the policy of waging a “tit-for-tat”
struggle against the
Kuomintang reactionaries. He pointed out: “The arms of the
people, every gun and every bullet, must all be kept, must
not be handed over”. And he added: “If we hand over our
guns, won’t the Kuomintang have too many? ” Thus the
Chinese people were fully prepared, and when the Chiang
Kai-shelc clique perfidiously renewed its sanguinary attacks
on them, the Chinese people, relying on their own armed
force, dealt crushing blows at the Kuomintang and finally
liberated the whole of China and buried the Chiang
dynasty.

9. Thcreforc, the Soviet delegation has the most serious
doubts also about the British proposal with regard to the
appointment of a representative of the Secretary-General to
hold talks with the interested partics in Rhodesia. In his
statement in the Council /2033rd meeting], the Secretary
of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the
United Kingdom said that the decision of the Security
Council to appoint a representative of the SecretaryGeneral would in no way mean approval of the AngloAmerican plan. Nevertlleless, we do have some grounds for
being apprehensive that such a decision may be used to
approach this plan by the back door. The Soviet delegation
cannot therefore support the draft resolution providing for

13. The General Assembly and the Security Council have
adopted a good number of resolutions on the question of
2

Rhodesia. These resolutions strongly condemn the Southern Rhodesian racist rCgime as illegal, call for the strengthening of all-round mandatory sanctions against this r6gime
and resolutely support the Zimbabwe people in their just
struggle to strive for national independence by all means.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
with that request.
it was so decided.
18. Mr. TREIKI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): Mr, President,
first I must congratulate you on the skill and wisdom that
you have demonstrated in the course of this month as
President of the Security Council. Your term in this high
position has been witness to a number of difficult but very
important debates, and we have therefore indeed been
fortunate to have had a diplomat with your experience and
dedication as our President. 1 must aiso take this occasion
to thank you personaily for the warm words of welcome
that you have extended to me.

14. Recently, the United Kingdom and the United States
put forward their “proposals for a settlement” of the
situation in Rhodesia [see S/12393/. At present, the
Chinese delegatjon has no intention of making an over-all
comment hcrc on the proposals in their entirety. That can
be done later if necessary. However, we think at least we
can now say that the substance of these proposals is not in
accord with the spirit of the relevant resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly and the Security Council, and in
some respects is even contradictory to those resolutions.
These proposals in their present form are not conducive to
the furtherance of the Zimbabwe people’s armed struggle
and can hardly lead the Zimbabwe people to their genuine
national liberation and independence.

.f

19. My congratulations
and thanks go also to your
predecessor in this high post, the distinguished representativc of France, on the equally excellent manner in which he
presided over our affairs last month.

15. It is difficult for us to understand that, while the
British-American proposals are only preliminary proposals
made by one of the parties concerned, proposals which are
still in the process of negotiations with the Patriotic Front
of Zimbabwe and the African States concerned and whose
final destiny remains unpredictable, the United Kingdom
representative should now request the Security Council to
confirm one of the provisions in these proposals, that is,
that the Secretary-General will be invited to appoint a
representative “to enter into discussions with .the British
Resident Commissioner designate and with all the parties
concerning the military and associated arrangements” in
Rhodesia. Although the United Kingdom representative has
told us that this does not affect or prejudge the future of
the proposals, this abnormal practice of turning things
upside down or putting the cart before the horse, as the
English saying goes, cannot but make us suspect that its
purpose is to create an impression that the Security Council
had basically approved or confirmed the British-American
proposals themselves and given the necessary authorization,
and then to use it to further weaken and disrupt the armed
struggle of the Zimbabwe people, No doubt such an
eventuality would adversely affect the struggle of the
Zimbabwe people for national liberation.

20. The Security Council has been asked to consider the
draft resolution of the United Kingdom calling for the
appointment of a United Nations special representative in
Southern Rhodesia. In presenting the draft resolution
yesterday /2033rd meeting/, the Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom
noted that this was a limited step. In referring to our
discussions here, he said that tlobody was rerluircd to
pronounce himself on the package as a whole. His statement on the matter echoed many of the assurances given to
African delegations in recent days. The appointment of a
special representative at this time, it has been said, does not
in any way imply an acceptance, or even a consideration, of
the wider proposals set out in the Anglo-American proposals for a settlement contained in document S/l 2393 I
21. In the view of my delegation, this is an important -indeed, a fundamental- point. The Security Council is not
now discussing the substantive provisions of the AngloAmerican proposals. It could only discuss them after
careful consideration, and the discussion even then would
have to bc a lengthy one.

17. The PRESIDENT: At this point 1 should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from the
representatives of Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and
Mauritius, which is to be circulated in document S/12407
and which reads as follows:

22. We must also stress that, given the fact that the
Council has not yet even started discussion of the wider
proposals, it would be altogether wrong for a special
representativeof the United Nations in Southern Rhodesia
to discussthem, or in any way to engagein discussions
which would imply an acceptance of any substantive
matters in those proposals.We are therefore very concerned
about the thrust of certain arguments made before the
Council yesterday and about the growing presscomment to
the effect that the Council’s willingness to consider the
appointment of a specialrepresentative is in fact a step in
the direction of United Nations support for the AngloAmerican proposalsasa whole.

“We, the undersigned members of the Security Council,
have the honour to request that during its current
meeting devoted to consideration of the ‘Question COP
cerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia’, the Security
Council extend an invitation, under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure, to Mr. Callistus Ndlovu,
representative of the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe.”

23. Moreover, the terms of the draft resolution itself seem
to my delegation to be oddly ambiguous.This ambiguity
could land the special representative and the Security
Council in precisely the situation WCwant to avoid. The
draft resolution is rather general in its terms, and this
generality might be misinterpreted. It says that the special

16. Iii view of the foregoing, we cannot support the draft
resolution submitted by the United Kingdom representative. But taking into consideration the position of the
African States concerned, we will not participate in the
vote on the said draft resolution.

‘,I
I

3

and

representative is “to enter into discussions” concerning
arrangements
that are considered t0 be necessary for the
transition to majority rule. But what we would like to
know is what these arrangements are and by Whom they are
considered to be necessary. That is not clearly specified at
all. It would appear that the special representative would be
free to make his own judgement about what is necessary
and what is not, and that, of course, would be desirable.
However, when we look at the text of the statement
contained in document S/12395 of 8 September, we find,
in our view, considerable cause for alarm. That document
sets out the general lines of the arrangements regarding
security which are judged to be necessary for the implementation of the Anglo-American plan as a Whole. h the first
paragraph on “implementation”, however, it appears to
confine the role of the special representative to discussion
of the details of “the respective roles of all the forces in
Rhodesia”.

just

struggle

struggle of
Illust

our

c0tltiJluC

brothers
until

in
the

rXiSt

Zimbabwe and that this
r6ghc
is licluidated,

7’). 111fact, we are happy about this Anglo-American
initiative, although it IlilS cml:
SO late. Because of our
previous
experience with tlKSC countries, especially Great
IQitajn, in our continent. WC are not yet convinced of the
sincerity of these proposals. Nevertheless, there is IWW llew
hope, We trust that the two countries
will al>ply this kind
10 0tlle1
parts
of‘ the
African
of initiative, this spirit,
continent ;mtl other parts 01‘ tile world where racist rbgimes
still exist.
30. We do hope that in adopting this draft resolution the
Security Council will be helping to brjng about the
immediate liquidation of this racist rdgime. My delegation
has no objection in principle to the draft resolution.
31. The PRESIDl~NT: I wish at this stage to welcome the
presence in the Council of the Sccrctary-General of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, Mr. Shahi.

24. The fact that the discussions are to be led by the
Kesident Commissioner designate might well mean that the
special representative would find himself discussing the
details of the security arrangements set out in the AngloAmerican document, arrangements which are part and
parcel of the Anglo-American proposals for an over-all
settlement. The Anglo-American proposals, as set out in
document S/12395, state that one of the principal objectives of the Resident Commissioner designate will be to
“create the single army of Zimbabwe”. If the special
representative were to enter into discussions on this subject,
and on others outlined in that document, he would be
implicitly accepting the framework for security arrangements set out in the Anglo-American proposals. As was
made clear yesterday, the Patriotic Front is contesting
precisely these arrangements. I would refer members of the
Council concerned about this matter to the relevant
sections of the comments by the Patriotic Front on the
Anglo-American proposals. Those comments are contained
in document S/12406 of 28 September.

3%. The next spcakcr is the hlinistcr for Foreign Affairs of
Kenya, Mr. Waiyaki. I welcome him and, in accordance
with the Council’s decision, invite him to talic a place at the
Council tilble 2nd LO lll:l!ie his St;ltCUC!lt.
Mr. WAIYAKI (Kenya): Mr. l’rcsidcnt, I lhnk
you
the members of the Council for inviting MC to address
this august body on the subject under discussion. 1 am
particularly happy to see you prcsicling over the affairs of
the Security Council for the month of Scptcmber and, in
particular. over thcsc tnectings when we are considering a
very important Ul1CCt of the l”ol~lcm of the decolunization
of Zimbabwe. As a distinguished diplotnat from the Federal
Republic of Germany, a country which maintains very
cordial and mutually fruitful rclntions with my country,
Kenya, you have :I wealth of cspcricnce anti the capacity to
tackle difficult issues, atd tllitt is of great value to IIS.
33.
and

25. The delegation of Libya takes the view that if WCare
to keep to the terms of reference proposed for these
discussions, we must make sure not to commit the special
representative to the acceptance of any matter of substance
in the Anglo-American proposals and, particularly, not to
anything contained in the annex to those proposals, as set
out in document S/12395.

34. The request of my Govor~!~ncr~l
to participate in this
debate Was primq7tcd by the realizalion tllilt. without any
question,
the subject
under discussic.m and the decision
th
Council is being requested to make are very important and
have many long-term cwiscq~ic~iccs. We apprcciatc that it
was the desire of many nmnbcrs
01’ the
Council that the
debate should be short. tn view, hwcvcr,
ol‘ the fact that
this problem has been with us for over a rlccailc, and iii
view of the far-reaching implications of the decision of the
Council, we feel it is imperative to ctmsiiler the matter in
some detail in order to facilitate spceilier implementalian
of tllC
SUllSCqucnt
stages
ill’
tllc
proposals. We should
:I11
understand where WCarc going.

26. As far as my country is concerned, WC support
without reservation the struggle of our brothers in Zimb&we. This just struggle should not bc diverted. We shall
not accept any interpretation of the mission of the United
Nations special representative that would imply
any SUP.
Port
for the suspellsion
of the just struggle
of our brothers
in Zimbabwe. No one in Africa wants war, but if war is
necessary to liberate a country, then it is a just war.

3.5. We apprcciatc that the C’oiincil Ius agrwcl generally
not to discuss the suhstancc of the Anglo-American
proposals for a scttlcmcnt in l<horlesia, although, 17CcP
liarly, the Council is being ;~sked to take the first step
towards iniplen~enting those ptq~~sals. WC must go aloq
with the wisdom of the Council ~1 we should like to join
those who have spoken before us in expressing support for
th
appointment
of il represcntatjve of the Secretary.

27. The President of Libya has clearly declared that unless
the whole of the African continent is independellt
we in
Libya shall never regard ourselves as an independe1lt
country.
28. Thus, it should be clear that the United Nations musl
not be involved in any way in any action to divert the real

General.
in

4

hmncnt

SO let me say
S/ 12404,

tklt

we 2ccf.q

the

request

contained

We certainly commend the energy

and wisdom brought to this intractable problem by the
British Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs, Mr. Owen, since hc assumed his responsibilities last
year, and the determined support of the United States
Government principally through Mr. Andrew Young. Their
efforts complement the armed struggle being successfully
carried out by the patriots of Zimbabwe.
36. As 1 have said, the request before the Council, though
limited in scope today, has very great significance for the
United Nations. For the last 12 years the United Nations
role in the problem of Zimbabwe has been limited to the
imposition of limited economic sanctions against the rebel
r6gime. Today, the Council is being asked to approve the
appointment of a representative of the United Nations who
will carry out certain responsibilities with regard to
discussions and negotiations with the British Resident
Commissioner designate and all the parties. We should like
an assurance that the parties concerned do not incluJc rebel
Ian Smith.
37. We in the Kenya delegation share the reservations
expressed yesterday /2033& meeting/ by the representative of the Patriotic Front, Mr. Joshua Nkomo, because we
do not believe that the United Nations should take any
action that would shift, however briefly, the responsibility
of the administering Power from that Power to the United
Nations. We support the involvement of the United Nations
in helping to find a solution to the problem of Zimbabwe,
but we do not think that tJle United Nations should be
called upon to undertake the negotiations which have been
going on between the administering Power and the rebel
regime for the past 12 years.
38. It should be a condition, in our view, of United
Nations entry into Zimbabwe that the administering Power
should undertake, in unequivocal terms, that the rebel
rigime will step down and Southern Rhodesia will return to
legality to enable the British representative to assume the
responsibilities incumbent upon the British in Zimbabwe.
We consider that the discussions and negotiations leading to
the surrender of power by the illegal regime should be
continued by the l3ritish representative, supported by the
United States.
39. We further feel that the United Nations representative
and the British Resident Commissioner could not coexist
with the rebel Smith, who has led an illegal Government
buttressed by all the armed forces, including the Selous
Scouts and mercenaries, for the past 12 years. The illegal
rCgime and the undesirable elements in its armed forces
would embarrass the United Nations representative and the
British Resident Commissioner, to say the least. We
consider that with the British Resident Commissioner and
the United Nations representative assuming the responsibilities proposed for them in the Anglo-American package
deal, the administering Power must be in a position to
guarantee unimpeded development in the shortest time
possible to majority rule in Zimbabwe.
40. We share the view of those who have spoken before US
that the United Nations should co-operate with the
administering Power to help bring about a negotiated
settlement in Zimbabwe, but we believe that the Africans

are unlikely to agree to a cease-fire first and thereafter carry
out discussions for the transitional arrangements. This, we
believe, is not realistic and it does not appear to US to be
fair that a representative of the Organization should
undertake such an unrealistic mission before the necessary
climate and ground work have been developed. Inasmuch as
it is not realistic to ask the British Resident Commissioner
to enter Zimbabwe with the illegal regime still in control of
the Government, we think it is unrealistic to request the
United Nations representative to undertake the mission of
arranging a cease-fire when, quite clearly, judging from all
evidence available, those involved in fighting are not ready
to enter into cease-fire arrangements at this time. We
certainly do not expect the freedom fighters of Zimbabwe
to be asked to lay down their arms before they can see that
what they have been fighting for has been achieved Of is
definitely in sight. A, cease-fire should not be synonymous
with a laying down of arms. It is because we believe that
the Organization should do a good job and be helpful rather
than compound an already compiicatcd situation that we
consider that the United Nations representative should not
be appointed in a hurry before the stage is carefully
prepared. Tile United Nations is, in a limited way, and at
the request of the administering Power, at variance with the
illegal rCgime. This fact cannot be denied, and therefore no
action should be taken by the United Nations which would
create the impression that it is recognizing the illegal rCgime
against which it has been righting for the last 12 years.
41. Nay J repeat, in conclusion, that my delegation
supports the proposals before the Council but considers
also that there are important aspects of the proposals that
should be evaluated and the consequences weighed before
the United Nations plunges into Zimbabwe. As the representativc of the J’atriotic Front requested--and we support
his request --there should be consultations with the l’atriotic
Front in appointing the United Nations representative and,
more particularly, in defining more specifically the role he
is expected to play when he is appointed.
42. The PRESIDENT: 1 thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kenya for his kind words addressed to me as well
as for his reference to the cordial relations between our two
countries.
43. The next speaker is the representative of Gabon, who
wishes to make a statement on behalf of the current
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
44’. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretation jirom Frenclz):
Sir, my delegation is pleased t,o see you presiding over the
work of the Council during the month of September; our
satisfaction is particularly great, because your country and
mine enjoy excellent relations of friendship and co-operation.
45. It is to convey the importance that my country and
the Organization of African Unity attach to the quest for a
just and equitable solution to the Rhodesian problem that I
have asked to participate in this debate. The member
countries of OAU have always followed with great interest
developments in the situation in southern Africa, particu-

movement until the conditions for a final settlement have
been met and accepted by the parties to the conflict.

larly in Rhodesia ever since a minority of individuals, in
defiance of international opinion, took the unilateral
decision to seize power. The member States of OAU have
also contributed to the adoption of resolutions, both in our
own regional organization and in the United Nations, aimed
at putting an end to that unacceptable situation.

51. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Gabon
for the kind words he addressed to me and for his reference
to the close relations between our countries.
52. As there are no other speakers, 1 should like to make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of the
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.

46. We must unfortunately note that, to date, none of the
initiatives and resolutions aimed at a peaceful solution of
this problem which is hardly a credit to the human race
have been implemented, but have remained a dead letter.
We must also note that it is thanks only to the determination of the free peoples of Africa and to the intensification
of the armed struggle waged by the Patriotic Front that the
great Powers, which could have prevented this situation,
have finally come to understand the need to remedy it.

53. It has been the consistent policy of my Government
throughout all debates regarding southern Africa that the
necessary and long overdue changes in that part of the
world to which the international community is so desperately looking forward should be brought about by peaceful
means. This principle applies not only to the abandonment
of the policy of apartheid, which runs contrary to all
considerations of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
but also to the Namibian and Rhodesian questions.

47. Although it should be recognized that these initiatives
do point the way to a settlement of the problem, inasmuch
as they provide for the appointment of a representative of
the Secretary-General in Rhodesia, I should like to stress
here, on behalf of the current Chairman of OAU, that free
and independent Africa does not endorse all aspects of the
settlement proposed by the Anglo-American plan. At this
stage, therefore, we are not endorsing the Anglo-American
plan but merely considering exploratory measures that may
lead to a peaceful settlement of the distressing problem of
Rhodesia. That is in keeping with both the letter and the
spirit of the action taken by the Government of the United
Kingdom, which took the initiative in calling this meeting
of the Security Council. That, in any case, is the understanding of the OAU member States.

54. We listened attentively to the able presentation of the
British Foreign Secretary, Mr. Owen (2033rd meeting], and
we are pleased to learn that there are now sufficient
prospects for a peaceful settlement in which the United
Nations would play an important role. We are well aware
that the final political settlement is not yet ready for
consideration by the Council but that an initial step should
be taken to allow the involvement of the Organization in
the current efforts to achieve the independence of Zimbabwe by peaceful means.
55. We share the view that the United Nations has to play
an important role in order to ensure these conditions. We
welcome the idea of giving the Secretary-General the
mandate to appoint a special representative who would
work together with the Resident Commissioner and who
would embark upon a process of talks with all the parties
concerned in order to find out what further measures
would be needed to ensure the political acceptability of the
package as a whole.

48. I should like to stress that, as Mr. Joshua Nkomo
stated, the choice of the representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Rhodesia should be made and his mandate
determined in close consultation with the members of the
Security Council and the parties to the conflict. With that
thought in mind, I should also lilce to stress that, for free
and independent Africa, the negotiations about to begin
can be productive only if no preconditions are set and if
they are held between the colonial Power, the United
Kingdom, and the Patriotic Front, the latter being the only
organization qualified in the circumstances to represent the
interests of the Zimbabwe people.

56. The Federal Republic of Germany will be ready to
support the efforts of the special representative in every
possible way. It is equally ready to give all political support
to the continued efforts of the United Kingdom and the
United States in furthering this political solution. My
delegation is pleased, therefore, to support the draft
resolution before the Council,

49. These negotiations must not make it possible for
certain elements to use the situation to obstruct the process
that should lead to independence. Specifically, the appointment of. a representative of the Secretary-General in
Rhodesia, which we accept, must not be a delaying tactic
that will make it possible for the Ian Smith regime to get its
second wind and annihilate the aspirations of the Zimbabwc people, who have already lost many of their sons in
their quest for the realization of their ideals of freedom and
independence in dignity. It has been noted that the rebel
regime of Ian Smith has always used moments of euphoria
produced by the announcement of negotiations or discussions to delude world public opinion and to consolidate its
war arsenal in order to frustrate the aspirations of the
Zimbabwe people and the international community for
freedom.

59. First, we suggest the addition of a new preambular
paragraph reading as follows:

50. As for the African States, they will remain ever more
vigilant and they will actively support the liberation

“Having heard the statement by Mr. Joshua Nkomo,
co-leader of the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe,“.

57. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT. I give the
floor to the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
who wishes to introduce some amendments to the draft
resolution.
58. Mr. KIKHIA (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): In reference
to the draft resolution submitted by the United Kingdom in
document S/12404, I should like, on behalf of the three
African members of the Council--Benin, Mauritius and
Libya-, to propose two slight improvements to that draft,

6

60. The second amendment concerns operative paragraph I. After the word “appoint”,
we propose the
addition of the words “in consultation with the members of
the Security Council”.

a solution to the problem by peacefulmeans.1 shallreport
to the Council as soon as possibleon the resultsof my
representative’sdiscussionswith the British ResidentCorn.
missionerand with all the partiesconcerned.

61. 1 hope Foreign Secretary Owen will not find it
difficult to accept these two slight improvements to the
draft.

68. Once againI wishto assureyou, Mr. President,andthe
membersof the Council that I and my colleagues
will do
our utmost to carry out successfullythis difficult but
extremely important task.

62. Mr. OWEN (United Kingdom): Having heard the
discussion and the argumentation, I accept the amendments
proposed and would wish them to be incorporated into the
draft resolution proposed by my Government.

69. The PRESIDENT: The Secretaryof State for Foreign
and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom has
askedto make a statementafter the vote andI now call on
him.

63. The PRESIDENT: With the amendments proposed by
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and accepted by the United
Kingdom as the sponsor of the original draft resolution, the
revised text will soon be distributed to Council members as
document S/I 2404/Rev. 1.

70. Mr. OWEN (United Kingdom):Mr. President,I should
first like to thank you for the distinguishedway in which
you have conducted our proceedingsboth today and
yesterday and to expressmy gratitude to you for that. I
should like to expressalsomy senseof privilegeto all the
membersof the Council for havingme participatein this
discussion.It is the first time I have beento the Security
Council and I hope it will not be the last. The SecretaryGeneral’s statement regardingthe way he will approach
his task was of great help and comfort. I am
consciousof the fact that I have put a resolutionto the
Council which will put a heavytaskon the United Nations.
I believe, however, it will fulfil those great tasks and
responsibilities in the way to which we have grown
accustomed, particularly under the Secretary-General,I
thank the membersof the Councilfor their support.

64. As there are no further speakers, I take it the Council
is ready to proceed to vote on the revised draft resolution.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In jbvour: Benin, Canada, France, Germany, Federal
Republic of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius,
Pakistan, Panama, Romania, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Venezuela.
Against: None.

71. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris Mr. Callistus
NdIovu. I welcome him and, in accordancewith the
Council’sdecision, invite him to take a placeat the Council
table and to make his statement.

Abstaining: Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
The draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes to none
with one abstention. 2

72. Mr. NDLOVU: On behalf of the ZimbabwePatriotic
Front I wish to thank you, Mr. I’resident,andthe members
of the Council for giving me the opportunity to clarify our
interpretation of the resolutionjust adopted.Mr. Joshua
Nkomo, co-leader of the Patriotic Front, expressedour
reservationsto this august body [2033rd meeting] on the
appointment of a United Nations reptesentativeand we
wish to restate our position on the matter now, namely:
(a] that the presentexercisedoesnot prejudiceour position
on the British constitutional proposalsand that what has
been done here is a separatematter from the consideration
of the British proposalsthemselves;(b) that when the
resolution refers to “all partiesconcerned” it meansthe
parties involved in the armedconflict, namelythe Patriotic
Front, on the one hand, and the British, through their
settlers in Zimbabwe, on the other; (c)that the United
Nations representativewill be appointedby the SecretaryGeneral who will make surethat his mandateis clearly
defined and not subjectto manipulationby thosewho are
opposedto a free Zimbabwe.In this regard,hisrole should
be defined in terms that enhanceand advancethe objective
of decolonization. Should it turn out in the processthat
what has been done here is an attempt to sabotagethe
struggleof the people of Zimbabwe,the Patriotic Front will
reservethe right to act accordingly.

One member (China) did not participate in the voting.
65. The PRESIDENT: The Secretary-General
speak. I now call upon him.

wishes to

66. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have noted with the
closest attention the discussions in the Council and the
terms oCthe resolution which has just been adopted. I shall,
of course, immediately take the necessary action to
implement the request addressed to me in the resolution to
appoint a personal representative for the purpose described
therein. I hope to be able to inform the Council in the near
future, after appropriate consultations, of the name of my
representative. In seeking for a representative, I shall of
course pay particular attention to experience and the
speciai circumstances.
67. While 1 wish to assure the Council that I and my
representative shall do all in our power to achieve satisfactory results, I am under no illusion as to the very great
complexities and difficulties of the task that has been
entrusted to us. Success will depend in very large measure
on the co-operation and understanding of the parties
concerned and on the degree of their determination to find

The meeting rose at 7.30 p.m.

2 See resolution 415 (1977).
7

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may bc obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
or write to: United

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publirations
des Nations
LInies sent en vente dans les librairies
depositaires
du mondc entier. Informer-vous
auprPs de votre libraire
h : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou CcnPve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

and distributors
Nations,
Sales

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidns
estin
buidoras
en todas partes dei mundo.
Consulte
Unidas. Seccicin
de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirijaso
a: Naciones

New York

in other

,

Litho

in United

Nations,

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

currencies)

77-70001-October

1978-2,200
