A /77/PV.66*

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

66th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 18 April 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I now invite the attention of the
General Assembly to a report of the Fifth Committee
under sub-item (b) of agenda item 118, entitled
“Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contributions”, issued as document A/77/568/Add.1.
Members will recall that the General Assembly
concluded its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 118 at its 34th plenary meeting on 15 November
2022. In order for the Assembly to consider the report
of the Fifth Committee under that sub-item, it will be
necessary to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 118.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 118?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly will now consider the reports of the Fifth
Committee on agenda items 118 (b), 138, 143, 144
and 136.
I request the Rapporteur of the Committee,
Mr. Marinko Avramović of Bosnia and Herzegovina,

to introduce in one intervention the reports of the Fifth
Committee before the Assembly.
Mr. Avramović (Bosnia and Herzegovina),
Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee: I have the honour
to present to the General Assembly the reports of the
Fifth Committee containing recommendations on
issues considered during the first part of the resumed
seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly. The
Fifth Committee met from 3 to 31 March, holding three
plenary meetings, numerous informal consultations, as
well as many informal and formal consultations.
Let me now present the reports of the Fifth
Committee containing recommendations on issues that
require action by the General Assembly.
Under sub-item (b) of agenda item 118, entitled
“Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contributions”, in paragraph 4 of its report A/77/568/
Add.1, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, the appointment of Minhong Yi of the
Republic of Korea as a member of the Committee on
Contributions for a term of office beginning on the date
of appointment by the General Assembly and ending on
31 December 2023.
Under agenda item 138, entitled “Programme
budget for 2023”, in paragraph 6 of its report A/77/672/
Add.1, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution entitled
“Special subjects relating to the programme budget for
2023”, which was adopted by the Committee without
a vote.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-10978 (E)

*2310978*
*Reissued for technical reasons 28 September 2023.

A/77/PV.66

18/04/2023

Under agenda item 143, entitled “Human resources
management”, in paragraph 6 of its report contained
in document A/77/818, the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
The resolution is the first comprehensive resolution
on human resources management adopted by the
Committee in six years.

The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Committee have been made
clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant
official records. Therefore, if there is no proposal under
rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Committee that are before the Assembly today.

Under agenda item 144, entitled “Joint Inspection
Unit”, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/77/819, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution which was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.

The President: Statements will therefore be limited
to explanations of vote.

Finally, under agenda item 136, entitled “Review
of the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly, in paragraph 8
of its report A/77/673/Add.1, the adoption of the draft
resolution entitled “Progress towards an accountability
system in the United Nations Secretariat”, which was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
In paragraph 9 of the same report, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption
of the draft decision entitled “Questions deferred
for future consideration”, which was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
I thank delegations for their cooperation and the
spirit of compromise which enabled the Committee to
finish its work on time. Allow me to also express sincere
gratitude to the Secretariat of the Fifth Committee
for its continued and tireless efforts in supporting
our work. I would also like to thank the Chair of the
Fifth Committee, Ambassador Philippe Kridelka and
his team, Mr. Basiel Bogaerts and Ms. Lina Hadboun,
for the dedicated way in which they guided us through
our work, as well as my colleagues in the Bureau,
Mr. Abdulla Ali Abdulrahman Mohamed Ahmed,
Mr. Masotsha Mongezi Mnguni and Mr. Carlos
Videche Guevara, working with whom is always a truly
gratifying experience.
I look forward to working with all Member
States to ensure the success of the second part of
the resumed session that will take place in May, in
which the Committee will focus on the financing of
peacekeeping operations.
The President: I thank the Rapporteur of
the Committee.
2/6

It was so decided.

May I remind members that, in accordance with
General Assembly decision 34/401, when the same
draft resolution is considered in a Main Committee
and in plenary meeting, a delegation should, as far
as possible, explain its vote only once, that is, either
in the Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different from its
vote in the Committee, and that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats. When there are multiple proposals
under an agenda item, statements in explanation of vote
before the voting on any or all of them should be made
in one intervention, followed by action on all of them,
one by one. Therefore, there will be an opportunity for
statements in explanation of vote after the voting on
any or all of them in one intervention.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we will proceed to take decisions in the same manner as
was done in the Committee, unless notified otherwise
in advance.
I should therefore hope that we may proceed to
adopt without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Committee. The result of
the voting will be uploaded to the e-deleGATE Portal,
under “Plenary Announcements”.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contributions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/568/Add.1)
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the report of the Committee on sub-item (b)
23-10978

A/77/PV.66

18/04/2023

of agenda item 118, entitled “Appointments of members
of the Committee on Contributions”, concerning a
vacancy in the membership of the Committee on
Contributions as a result of the resignation of Ji-sun Jun
of the Republic of Korea.
In its report, the Committee recommends that
the General Assembly appoint Minhong Yi of the
Republic of Korea as a member of the Committee on
Contributions for a term of office beginning 18 April
2023 and ending on 31 December 2023.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Minhong Yi as a member of the Committee
on Contributions for a term of office beginning on
18 April 2023 and ending on 31 December 2023?
It was so decided (decision 77/409 B).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 118?

Agenda item 138
Proposed programme budget for 2023
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/672/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution
entitled “Special subjects relating to the programme
budget for 2023”.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 138.
Agenda item 143
Human resources management
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/818)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
3/6

The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The
draft
resolution
(resolution 77/278).

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 143.
Agenda item 144
Joint Inspection Unit
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/819)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution
entitled “Joint Inspection Unit”.

It was so decided.

The
draft
resolution
(resolution 77/263 B).

We will now take a decision on the draft resolution
entitled “Human resources management”.

The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The
draft
resolution
(resolution 77/279).

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 144.
Agenda item 136
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/673/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution and a draft decision recommended
by the Committee in paragraphs 8 and 9 of its report,
respectively.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution
and the draft decision, one by one.
The draft resolution is entitled “Progress
towards an accountability system in the United
Nations Secretariat”. The Committee adopted the
draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
23-10978

A/77/PV.66

The
draft
resolution
(resolution 77/280).

18/04/2023

was

adopted

The President: The draft decision is entitled
“Questions deferred for future consideration”. The
Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 77/548 B).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 136.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it for this meeting.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will also recall that, at
its 3rd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 18 to
the Second Committee. To enable the Assembly to take
action expeditiously on the draft decision, may I take
it that the Assembly wishes to consider agenda item 18
directly in plenary meeting and proceed immediately to
its consideration?
It was so decided. (decision 77/505 B).
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Sustainable development
Draft resolution (A/77/L.60)
The President: I now give the floor to Her Excellency
Ms. Yolanda Díaz Pérez, Second Vice-President and
Minister for Labour and Social Economy of Spain, to
introduce draft resolution A/77/L.60.
Ms. Díaz Pérez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): As
Second Vice-President of the Government of Spain
and Minister for Labour and the Social Economy, I am
proud to be in this Hall today at the adoption of the
first General Assembly draft resolution on the social
and solidarity economy (A/77/L.60), a draft resolution
that promotes democracy and social justice as the
backbone of the world we aspire to build. Universally
defining the concept of the social and solidarity
economy and enshrining it at the United Nations is the
result of collective work that advances the Sustainable
Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
4/6

Development and improves the tools to address the
major challenges facing humanity, mainly reducing
inequalities and protecting our planet.
The text encourages Member States and
international organizations to include the social and
solidarity economy in their national plans and framework
documents. It encourages financial institutions and
development banks to support that economic system, in
addition to requesting the Secretary-General to prepare
a report in order to revisit the issue in two years’ time.
Moving towards an economy that is more
participatory, democratic, community-based and
resilient to crises enables us to lay the foundation for
improving the lives of citizens, even when uncertainty
looms. The Government of Spain’s development of
social economy-based solutions demonstrates that it
is possible to overcome a ruthless, soulless economic
system that is predicated on cutbacks and neglecting the
most vulnerable and rooted in inequality. What is more,
the social economy has managed to disprove the selfserving cliché that countries must sacrifice the ideals
of justice and equality for the sake of their economic
development when, on the contrary, those ideals should
be at the core of our political and economic systems.
As we have seen, things can be done differently. The
social economy is therefore both our present and future,
because it proposes an inclusive economic model with
social objectives, based on internal solidarity and with
people at the centre, with the capacity for innovation,
cohesion and job creation, effortlessly linking together
labour, equality in all its expressions and democratic
values, making the United Nations ideal of human
development possible.
I speak from a very unique experience, that of our
country, Spain, where the social economy accounts for
10 per cent of the gross domestic product. That important
figure represents a solid business fabric that is prepared
for change and promotes the participation of workers in
business decisions and their access to ownership of the
means of production, while guaranteeing the continuity
of many business projects in the hands of the workers
themselves, all in a sustainable way that is close to the
communities. The social economy therefore plays an
instrumental role in the transformation of the global
economy towards a sustainable development model,
as it gives people and the communities in which they
are involved direct control in important areas such
23-10978

A/77/PV.66

18/04/2023

as agricultural production, health, industry, trade,
education, housing, energy distribution and finance.
Moreover, the social economy brings about equality
within Spain’s labour, social and economic relations. My
country is in fact a feminist economy, since its greater
flexibility and job stability also reduce pay and wage
gaps. For example, in our country, the pay gap between
men and women in the social and solidarity economy
is eight points lower than the average of the Spanish
economy overall. That is why the social economy is not
an approximate representation of the future we want,
but evidence that it is possible to build a fairer, more
sustainable and supportive world right now — the very
heart and raison d’être of the United Nations.
I would like to express my satisfaction at, and
gratitude for, the work carried out for the draft
resolution, as well as the collective intelligence that was
placed at people’s disposal to ensure their rights and the
protection of the planet. On behalf of the Government
of Spain, allow me to also commend the positive
negotiating environment in which the draft resolution
was developed. I also extend my most sincere thanks to
the facilitators, Senegal and Chile; the countries of the
support group that helped us to promote and negotiate
the draft resolution; the United Nations Inter-Agency
Working Group for the Social and Solidarity Economy,
for having believed in it for years; and the people who
every day help the social economy ensure a more
sustainable future.
As Francisco de Vitoria believed, justice is a virtue
whose aim is to achieve the common good. That is the
essence of the draft resolution we are adopting today,
which should help us to find the keys to a better, fairer
and feminist world, one with self-respect. That is our
challenge. That is the challenge of humankind. I thank
everyone for contributing to draft resolution A//77/L.60
and, in short, to a more prosperous world.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.60.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/77/L.60, entitled “Promoting the social
and solidarity economy for sustainable development”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
5/6

resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/77/L.60: Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany,
Greece, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Japan, Latvia,
Malta, Mongolia, Montenegro, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Suriname
and Uruguay.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.60?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/281).

A/77/L.60

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 18.
Agenda item 72 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft decision (A/77/L.62)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore to introduce draft decision
A/77/L.62.
Mr. Khng (Singapore): On behalf of Ambassador
Rena Lee, President of the intergovernmental conference
on an international legally binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction, I have
the honour of introducing draft decision A/77/L.62.
The conference met at its resumed fifth session
from 20 February to 4 March. At the closing of the
session, the conference decided to establish an openended informal working group tasked with ensuring
the uniformity of the terminology throughout the
text of the draft agreement that was finalized at the
session and harmonizing the versions in the six official
languages of the United Nations. The conference also
decided to resume at a later date, once the open-ended
informal working group had completed its work,
with a view to adopting the draft agreement in all six
official languages.
Draft decision A/77/L.62 is based on the decisions
of the conference, which were adopted by consensus.
23-10978

A/77/PV.66

18/04/2023

It proposes that the General Assembly request the
Secretary-General to provide the necessary support
and services to the open-ended informal working group
and to convene a further resumed fifth session of the
conference on 19 and 20 June 2023, tentatively, or on a
date to be determined in consultation with the President
of the conference, not in parallel to a plenary meeting
of the General Assembly, and to provide it with full
conference services.
My delegation hopes that the General Assembly
will adopt the draft decision without a vote.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft decision A/77/L.62, entitled
“Intergovernmental conference on an international
legally binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/77/L.62?
Draft
decision
(decision 77/556).

A/77/L.62

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 72.
Agenda item 126 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft decision (A/77/L.63)
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft decision A/77/L.63, entitled
“Modalities for the Summit of the Future: rescheduling
of the preparatory ministerial meeting”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/77/L.63?
Draft
decision
(decision 77/557).

6/6

A/77/L.63

was

adopted

The President: Allow me, at this stage, to share an
overview of what the General Assembly has mandated
for the high-level week of September 2023, following
the adoption of decision 77/557.
Monday, 18 September, will see the High-Level
Political Forum on Sustainable Development under the
auspices of the General Assembly, also known as the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Summit.
Tuesday, 19 September, will see the general debate
and the continuation of the SDG Summit.
Wednesday, 20 September, will see the general
debate, the high-level dialogue on financing for
development and the high-level meeting on pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response, which includes
a plenary segment and multi-stakeholder panels held in
parallel. The Secretary-General has informed me that
he intends to convene a climate ambition summit on
that day.
Thursday, 21 September, will see the general
debate, the ministerial meeting of the Summit of the
Future and the high-level meeting on universal health
coverage, which includes a plenary segment and
multi-stakeholder panels held in parallel.
Friday, 22 September, will see the general debate
and the high-level meeting on the fight against
tuberculosis, which includes a plenary segment and
multi-stakeholder panels held in parallel.
Saturday, 23 September will see the general debate,
which will continue into the following week along with
the high-level meeting to commemorate and promote
the International Day for the Total Elimination of
Nuclear Weapons on Tuesday, 26 September.
Let me also inform delegations that, during the
next meeting of the General Committee, we will have a
short review of this year’s high-level week, as decided
upon just now, and discuss the political logic of the
entire week.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 126.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

23-10978
