A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/121
4 February 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 82
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/51/589)]
51/121.

Effects of atomic radiation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December 1955, by which it
established the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic
Radiation, and its subsequent resolutions on the subject, including resolution
50/26 of 6 December 1995, in which, inter alia, it requested the Scientific
Committee to continue its work,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations
Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation,1
Reaffirming the desirability of the Scientific Committee continuing its
work,
Concerned about the potentially harmful effects on present and future
generations resulting from the levels of radiation to which mankind and the
environment are exposed,
Noting the views expressed by Member States at its fifty-first session
with regard to the work of the Scientific Committee,
Conscious of the continuing need to examine and compile information
about atomic and ionizing radiation and to analyse its effects on mankind and
the environment,

1
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session,
Supplement No. 46 (A/51/46).

97-76405

/...

A/RES/51/121
Page 2

1.
Commends the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of
Atomic Radiation for the valuable contribution it has been making in the
course of the past forty-one years, since its inception, to wider knowledge
and understanding of the levels, effects and risks of atomic radiation, and
for fulfilling its original mandate with scientific authority and independence
of judgement;
2.
Notes with satisfaction the completion in 1996 of a further
scientific annex by the Scientific Committee informing the scientific and
world communities of its latest evaluations of the sources and effects of
ionizing radiation on man and his environment, and calls upon the Scientific
Committee to ensure the widest possible dissemination of this scientific annex
to Member States;
3.
Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its work, including
its important activities to increase knowledge of the levels, effects and
risks of ionizing radiation from all sources;
4.
Endorses the intentions and plans of the Scientific Committee for
its future activities of scientific review and assessment on behalf of the
General Assembly;
5.
Requests the Scientific Committee to continue at its next session
the review of the important problems in the field of radiation and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-second session;
6.
Requests the United Nations Environment Programme to continue
providing support for the effective conduct of the work of the Scientific
Committee and for the dissemination of its findings to the General Assembly,
the scientific community and the public;
7.
Expresses its appreciation for the assistance rendered to the
Scientific Committee by Member States, the specialized agencies, the
International Atomic Energy Agency and non-governmental organizations, and
invites them to increase their cooperation in this field;
8.
Invites Member States, the organizations of the United Nations
system and non-governmental organizations concerned to provide further
relevant data about doses, effects and risks from various sources of
radiation, which would greatly help in the preparation of future reports of
the Scientific Committee to the General Assembly.
83rd plenary meeting
13 December 1996
