___________________
3

adopted on reports of the First Committee
··--···-·· ... _____
- - - - - - - - - - - -Resolutions
-------·-···-··-···--··-----· ·-··--·-- - - - Affirming the need for strengthening furth~r the system of collective security unoer the authority of the
United Nations,
Finding that to this end further steps could be ta~en
by States and by the United Nations in accordance with
the Charter and in conformity with the "Uniting for
peace" resolution ( 377 A ( V) ) and with resolution 503

(VI),
1. Takes note of the second report of the Collective
Measures Committee and expresses appreciation of the
constructive work done by the Committee during the
past year, particularly in the economic. iield, including
the preparation of lists of an~s, _ammumt10n and 1m1:lements of war and of strateg,.c items for considerat1011
by the Security Council or the General A;sembly in
the application of a selective embargo ;
2. Requests the Collective Measures Committee to
continue its work until the ninth session of. the General
Assembly, as directed in paragraph 4 be!ow, for. the
maintenance and strengthening of the Umted Nat10ns
collective security system ;
3. Recommends to States Members, and invites
States not Members of the United Nations:
(a) To give careful consideration to the reports of
the Collective Measures Committee;
( b) To continue and intensify their efforts to carry
out the recommendations of the "Uniting for pcacf.'"
resolution and of resolution 503 ( Vl) ;
( c) To keep the Collective Measures Com1:1itte_e cu~rently informed of the progress they are makmg m tlus
respect;
4. Directs the Collective Measures Committee :
(a) To pursue such studies as it may deem desiraule
to strengthen the capability of the United Nations to
maintain peace, taking account of the "Uniting for
peace" resolution, resolution 503 (VI) and the present
resolution ;
( b) To continue the examination of information received from States pursuant to the "Uniting for peace''
resolution, resolution 503 (VI) and the present resolution;
( c) In the light of its studies, to suggest to the
Security Council and to the General Assembly such
specific ways and means as it may deem appropriate to
encourage further preparatory action by States;
( d) To report to the Security Council and to the
General Assembly not later than the ninth session of
the Assembly.
415th plenary meeting,
17 March 1953.

704 (VII). Regulation, limitation and balanced
reduction of all armed forces and all armaments: report of the Disarmament Commission
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that:
Under the Charter of the United Nations all States
are bound to settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace
and security, and justice, are not endangered, and to

refrain in their international relations from the threat
or use of force against the territorial mlegrity or political independence of any State, or in an)'. other manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the Umted Nat10ns,
The aim ol d. sy~tern -of world-wide disarmament is
to prevent war anJ. release the world's human and economic resources for the pur;_1oscs of peace,
1. Takes note of the report.; of the Disarmament
Commission ;
.2. Reaffirms General A,,,;cmbly rcsoiuti.on 502 (VI)
of 11 January 1952 and requests the Disarmament Com-·
mission to continue its work ior the d1.evdoi.,mc.nt by
the United Nations of comprehensive and ,.o-orJinated
plans J_.lroviding for:
(a) The regulation,, limitatiun and balanceJ i:eduction of all armed forces and armaments;
lb) 'fhe elimiuatic.n anri prohibition of all major
w_eapons, including bacteriological, adaptable to mass
destruction;
( c) The effective international control of atomic
energy to ensure the prohibition of atomic weapons and
the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes only;
The whole programme to be carried out under effective
international control in such a way that no State
would have cause to fear that its security was en-dangered;

J. Requests the Cotmmssion to report to the General
Assembly and to the Security Council no later than 1
September 1953, and hopes that all the members of the
Commission will co-operate in efforts to produce constr:.1ctive proposals likely to facilitate its task.
424th plenary meeting,
8 April 1<;"53.

705 (VII). The Korean question
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its unswerving determination to spare no
efforts likely to create conditions favourable to the attainment of the purposes of peace and conciliation embodied in th•' Charter of the United Nations,
No,ing, iollowing the United Nations Command
initiative for the exchange of sick and wounded prisoners
oi war, the communication 5 by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Central People's Government of the
People's Republic of China dated 31 March 1953 to
the President of the General Assembly, and the exchange of communications6 between the United Nations
Command and the Commanders of the Chinese People's
V oluntecrs and the Korean People's Army in regard
thereto,
Confident that a just and honourable armistice in
Korea will powerfully contribute to alleviate the present
international tension,
1. N ates with deep satisfaction that an agrefment
has been signed in Korea 011 the exchange of sick and
wounded prisoners of war ;
'See Official Records of the Disarmament Commissi011, 195:?,
Special Supplement No. 1.
5 See document A/2378.
11 See

document A/2390.

.....
