26

General Assembly-Thirteenth Session

1286 (XTII). Refugees in Morocco and Tunisia
The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees,4 and in particular
chapter II,
Considering the efforts made by the United Nations
Refugee Fund to assist refugees,
Noting the action taken in 1958 by the High Commissioner on behalf of refugees from Algeria in Tunisia,
Considering that a similar problem exists in Morocco,
Recommends the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue his action on behalf of the
refugees in Tunisia on a substantial scale and to undertake similar action in Morocco.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.
1313 (XIII). Freedom of information
A

The General Assembly,
Noting that the Commission on Human Rights at its
fourteenth session requested the Economic and Social
Council and, through it, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other
specialized agencies concerned to initiate action to consider and implement the suggestions of the Committee
on Freedom of Information concer.,ing under-developed
countries wherever possible and as expeditiously as
possible, with the object of assisting them to build up
adequate media of information which could facilitate the
free flow of accurate and undistorted news and information within these countries and throughout the membership of the United Nations, 7
Noting that the Commission on Human Rights will
give further consideration at its fifteenth session to the
suggestions of the Committee on Freedom of Information and that the Economic and Social Council has requested the Commission on Human Rights to complete
its recommendations on freedom of information,
I. Expresses the hope that the Economic and Social
Council, on the basis of the analysis to be prepared by
the Secretary-General in response to Council resolutions
574 D (XIX) of 26 May 1955 and 643 (XXIII) of 25
April 1957, and taking into account recommendations
of the Commission on Human Rights to be submitted
in response to Council resolution 683 C (XXVI) of 21
July 1958, will formulate at its twenty-eighth session a
programme of concrete action and measures on the international plane which could be undertaken for the
development of information enterprises in under-developed countries, with an evaluation of the materi;;J, financial and prrfessional requirements and resources for the
implementation of this programme ;
2. Invites the Economic and Social Council to request the Commission on Human Rights to give particular attention to procedures by which constant review
of the problems of providing technical assistance to
under-developed countries in the field of information
'Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Twenty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 8 (E/3088), para. 123, resolution 6 (XIV).

may be assured, and to report regularly to the Council
on progress in this field ;
3. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization and other specialized agencies as appropriate to formulate concrete proposals to
assist in meeting the needs of less developed countries
in building up adequate media of information, and to
include an account of their efforts on this and other
aspects of freedom of information in their annual reports
to the Economic and Social Council.
788th plenary meeting,
12 December 1958.

B
The General Assembly,
Reiterating its belief in the free flow of undistorted
news and information within countries and across national frontiers as the essential basis for an accurate
and undistorted understanding of events and situations,
Recognizing however that the development of media
of information constitutes only a partial measure in ensuring freedom of information.
Recognizing further that greater freedom of communications would lessen international tension and promote mutual understanding and confidence, thereby
allowing countries and peoples more easily to u'nderstand and compose their differences,
Recommends that all Member States, as a contribution to building peace and confidence, should encourage
better mutual understanding by taking practical measures, in co-operation with the programmes of the United
Nations and its specialized agencies, to open their countries to greater freedom of communications by:
(a) Facilitating access to United Nations information programmes ;
( b) Supporting the activities of United Nations information centres;
( c) Facilitating the free flow of accurate information through all media.
788.t-h plenary meeting,
12 December 1958.
C

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the Secretary-General's report 8 on the
consultations he held with Governments pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 1189 A (XII) of 11 December 1957 concerning the draft Convention on Freedom of Information,
Bearing in mind the lengthy and heretofore inconclusive discussions which have taken place in various bodies
of the United Nations on th~ draft Convention,
Believing that a convention on freedom of information
can play an important role in guaranteeing to the peoples of States parties to it their fundamental right to
freedom of expression and of opinion, as enunciated in
article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights,
Realizing that in view of the importance of the draft
Convention it is desirable that additional opportunity be
given Member States to crystallize their views thereon,
• A/3868 and Add.I to 8.

Resolutions adopted on the _reports of the Third Committee

Z'7

The General Assembly,
Noting that the right of peoples and nations to selfdetermination as affirmed in the two draft Covenants

completed by the Commission on Human Rights10 includes "permanent sovereignty over their natural wealth
and resources",
Believing it necessary to have full information at its
disposal regarding the actual extent and character of
this sovereignty,
1. Decides to establish a Commission composed of
Afghanistan, Chile, Guatemala, the Netherlands, the
Philippines, Sweden, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Arab Republic and the United States
of America to conduct a full survey of the status of this
basic constituent of the right to self-determination, with
recommendations, where necessary, for its strengthening, and further decides that, in the conduct of the full
survey of the status of the permanent sovereignty of
peoples and nations over their natural wealth and resources, due regard shall be paid to the rights and duties
of States under international law and to the importance
of encouraging international co-operation in the economic development of under-developed countries;
2. Invites the regional economic commissions and the
specialized agencies to co-operate with the Commission
in its task;
3. Requests the Commission to report to the Economic and Social Council at its twenty-ninth session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Commission with the necessary staff and facilities.
788th plenary meeting,
12 December 1958.

• Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventh Session,
Annexes, agenda item 29, document A/ AC.42/7, annex.

10
0fficial Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Eighteenth Session, Supplement No. 7 (E/2573), annex I.

Desirous however of formulating promptly a widely
acceptable final text of the draft Convention with a view
to opening it for signature as soon as possible,
Decides:
1. To proceed, at its fourteenth session, to a discussion of the text of the draft Cmivention as formulated
by the Committee on the Draft Convention on Freedom
of Information, 9 established by the General Assembly
in its resolution 426 (V) of 14 December 1950, giving
special consideration to any new proposals that may be
made;
2. To request the Secretary-General, in the light of
the discussion in the Third Committee on this matter,
to invite the Governments of States with which he communicated pursuant to General Assembly resolution
1189 A (XII) to transmit to him any comments, observations, suggestions, proposals or amendments concerning the text of the draft Convention on Freedom of
Information and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fourteenth session.
788.t-h plenary meeting,
12 December 1958.
1314 (Xill). Recommendations concerning international respect for the right of peoples and
nations to self-determination

•

•

•

Other decisions taken by the General Assembly
on the recommendation of the Third Committee
Draft International Covenants on Human Rights ( item 32)

At its 788th plenary meeting on 12 December 1958, the General Assembly
approved the recommendation of the Third Committee11 that the Assembly, at its
fourteenth session, should give priority to the consideration of the draft International Covenants on Human Rights.
11
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 32,
document A/4045, para. 92.
