VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

child during the fortieth session of the Commission on
Human Rights, 185
I. Stresses the significance of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration of the Rights of the Child which
has directly stimulated the idea of elaborating an international convention on the rights of the child;
2. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution
1984/25, in which the Council authorized a meeting of an
open-ended working group of the Commission on Human
Rights for a period of one week prior to the forty-first session of the Commission to facilitate and speed up the completion of the work on a draft convention on the rights of
the child;
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to give
the highest priority to this question and to make every
effort at its forty-first session to complete the draft convention and to submit it, through the Economic and Social
Council, to the General Assembly at its fortieth session;
4. Invites all Member States to offer their effective contribution to the completion of the draft convention on the
rights of the child at the forty-first session of the Commission on Human Rights;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all necessary assistance to the working group to ensure its smooth
and efficient work in the fulfilment of this important task;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Question of a convention on the rights of the child".
JO 1st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/136. International Covenants on Human Rights

225

2. Expresses its appreciation to those States parties to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
that have submitted their reports to the Human Rights
Committee under article 40 of the Covenant and urges
States parties that have not yet done so to submit their
reports as speedily as possible;
3. Urges those States parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights that have been requested by the Human Rights Committee to provide additional
information to comply with that request;
4. Commends those States parties to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights that
have submitted their reports under article 16 of the Covenant and urges States that have not yet done so to submit
their reports as soon as possible;
5. Notes with satisfaction that the majority of States
parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and an increasing number of States parties to
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, have been represented by experts for the presentation of their reports, thereby assisting the Human
Rights Committee and the Economic and Social Council
in their work, and hopes that all States parties to both
Covenants will arrange such representation in future;
6. Again urges all States that have not yet done so to
become parties to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, as well as to consider
acceding to the Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
7. Invites the States parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to consider making the
declaration provided for in article 41 of the Covenant;

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/51 of 14 December 1978,
34/45 of 23 November 1979, 35/132 of 11 December
1980, 36/58 of25 November 1981, 37/191 of 18 December 1982 and 38/1 I 6 and 38/117 of 16 December 1983,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General 186 on
the status of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 187 the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, 187 and the Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 187
Noting with appreciation that, following its appeal, more
Member States have acceded to the International Covenants on Human Rights, 187
Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights
Committee in the implementation of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocol thereto,
Taking into account the useful work of the Sessional
Working Group of Governmental Experts on the Implementation of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,
Bearing in mind the important responsibilities of the
Economic and Social Council in relation to the International Covenants on Human Rights,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Human Rights Committee on its twentieth, twenty-first
and twenty-second sessions, 188 and expresses its satisfaction with the serious and constructive manner in which the
Committee is continuing to perform its functions;

8. Emphasizes the importance of the strictest compliance by States parties with their obligations under the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and, where applicable, the Optional Protocol to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Human
Rights Committee informed of the relevant activities of
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council.
the Commission on Human Rights, the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and also to transmit the annual reports of the Human Rights Committee to those
bodies;
I 0. Looks forward to the report of the SecretaryGeneral, to be submitted to the Economic and Social
Council at its first regular session of 1985, on the composition, organization and administrative arrangements of the
Sessional Working Group of Governmental Experts on the
Implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and other bodies established in accordance with existing international instruments in the field of human rights in order to facilitate the
review which the Council will undertake in accordance
with its resolution 1982/33 of 6 May 1982;
11. Welcomes the decision by the Economic and Social
Council in its resolution 1984/9 of 24 May 1984 to conduct the review at an early stage of its first regular session

185 See O/fil'ial Records o/the Econon11c and SoClal Council. 1984, Supplement No. 4 (El 1984/14 and Corr I). chap. XIII
186 A/39/46 I

18 7 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
188 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thmy-mnth Session. Supple
men/ No. 40 (A/39140 and Corr. I and 2).

226

General Assembly - Thirty-ninth Session

of 1985 to allow enough time for a full discussion of this
important matter;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session a report on the
status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
13. Again urges the Secretary-General, taking into
account the suggestions of the Human Rights Committee,
to take determined steps within existing resources to give
more publicity to the work of the Committee and, similarly, to the work of the Economic and Social Council and its
Sessional Working Group and to improve administrative
and related arrangements to enable them to carry out their
respective functions effectively under the International
Covenants on Human Rights;
14. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to expedite the publication of the official public records of the
Human Rights Committee in bound volumes, as indicated
in General Assembly resolution 37/191, starting with its
first session;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat effectively
assists the Human Rights Committee and the Economic
and Social Council in the implementation of their respective functions under the International Covenants on
Human Rights.
JO 1st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/137. Elaboration of a second optional protocol to
the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of
the death penalty
The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision 35/437 of 15 December 1980 and
its resolution 36/59 of 25 November 1981 concerning the
idea of elaborating a draft of a second optional protocol to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 189 aiming at the abolition of the death penalty,
Recalling also its resolution 37/192 of 18 December
1982, in which it requested the Commission on Human
Rights to consider the idea of elaborating a draft of a
second optional protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the
death penalty,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1984/19 of 6 March 1984 190 and the action taken by
the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities to implement that resolution, 191
Taking note also of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 192
1. Requests the Commission on Human Rights and the
Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities to consider further the idea of
elaborating a draft of a second optional protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty;
2. Invites Member States which are in a position to do
so, specialized agencies and international organizations to
189 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
l90 See Official Records oft he Economic and Social Council, 1984, Supple
ment No. 4 (E/1984/14 and Corr.I), chap. II, sect. A
l91 See E/CN.4/!985/3-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1984143. chap. XVlll. sect. A. re,
olution 1984/7.

assist the Commission and the Sub-Commission in the
consideration of this question;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the
General Assembly at its forty-second session of the consideration given to this question by the Commission and the
Sub-Commission;
4. Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its forty-second session, in the light of the action
taken by the Commission and the Sub-Commission, under
the item entitled "International Covenants on Human
Rights".
/01 st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/138. Reporting obligations of States parties to
United Nations conventions on human
rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/44 of 3 December 1982 and
38/117 of 16 December I 983,
Considering that the General Assembly, as the principal
organ of the United Nations entitled to adopt conventions
on human rights, is in the position to take an overview of
their implementation as an integrated system of substantive provisions and reporting obligations of States parties
to the various conventions,
Conscious that the fulfilment of reporting obligations
constitutes an essential element of co-operation by States
parties in contributing to the assessment of their compliance with their obligations,
Bearing in mind the report of the Secretary-General on
the reporting obligations of States parties under various
United Nations conventions on human rights, 19 •1
Having considered the report of the meeting of the
Chairmen of the Commission on Human Rights, the
Human Rights Committee, the Sessional Working Group
of Governmental Experts on the Implementation of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination held at Geneva on 16 and I 7 August
I 984,194
Concerned about the problems experienced by the
above-mentioned bodies in the functioning of the reporting procedures, including the burden which several coexisting reporting systems place upon States parties to the
conventions on human rights.
Convinced, therefore, of the need to improve the existing
reporting systems in order to resolve the problems experienced both by the bodies entrusted with the consideration
of the periodic reports of the States parties and by the
States parties to the conventions on human rights,
I. Reiterates the importance it attaches to the obligations established under international conventions, including their respective reporting systems;
2. Takes note with interest of the report of the meeting
of the Chairmen of the Commission on Human Rights, the
Human Rights Committee, the Sessional Working Group
of Governmental Experts on the Implementation of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination, which contains suggestions made by the
192 A1391535.
193 Af381393.
194 A139-484. annn
