S/PRST/2007/13

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 April 2007
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5671st meeting of the Security Council, held on 30 April 2007, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reiterates its previous resolutions and Presidential
Statements on Somalia, in particular its resolution 1744 (2007).
“The Security Council reaffirms its respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia.
“The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the renewed
fighting in Somalia, deeply deplores the loss of civilian life — condemning in
particular the indiscriminate shelling of heavily populated areas of
Mogadishu — and the humanitarian impact of the fighting, and calls upon all
parties to immediately end the hostilities and agree to a comprehensive
ceasefire.
“The Security Council emphasizes the need for strengthened efforts to
provide humanitarian relief assistance to Somalia, including assistance to the
hundreds of thousands of displaced persons, and urges Member States to
support generously such operations.
“The Security Council demands that all parties in Somalia comply fully
with international humanitarian law, protect the civilian population, and
guarantee complete, unhindered and secure access for humanitarian assistance.
It demands that the relevant authorities do all they can in this regard, in
particular to facilitate the free movement of aid and humanitarian workers
throughout Somalia and when entering or leaving Somalia. The Council also
urges the wider region to help facilitate the cross-border provision of aid to
Somalia, across land borders or via air- and sea-ports.
“The Security Council reiterates its support for the political process
outlined in the Transitional Federal Charter, which provides a framework for
reaching a lasting political solution in Somalia, including the transition to a
permanent, representative government and institutions following national
elections at the end of the transitional period.
“The Security Council notes the steps taken since the adoption of its
resolution 1744 (2007), welcomes the commitment of the Transitional Federal

07-32515 (E) 300407

*0732515*

S/PRST/2007/13

Institutions to initiate a national reconciliation process, and stresses the need
for further progress.
“The Security Council urges Somalia’s Transitional Federal Institutions
to show leadership and commitment to reach out to all components of Somali
society, and in particular to intensify their dialogue with the clans in
Mogadishu. It calls on all parties in Somalia, the region and the wider
international community to reject violence, to deny safe haven to extremist
elements, to pursue any differences they might have with the Transitional
Federal Institutions through dialogue, and to summon the political will to take
the necessary steps to allow the Transitional Federal Institutions to deliver a
sustainable, all-inclusive political process.
“The Security Council underlines the need for the Transitional Federal
Institutions to meet their responsibilities during the transitional period, with
particular regard to promoting the widest possible political dialogue across
Somalia, and reiterates its commitment to support the Transitional Federal
Institutions in those efforts. The Security Council calls on all parties in
Somalia and on Member States to provide such support.
“The Security Council calls on the Transitional Federal Institutions to
ensure that the National Reconciliation Congress is convened as soon as
possible, and is truly representative of all segments of Somali society. The
Security Council also calls on all parties in Somalia and other international
partners to work towards that end, and to ensure constructive participation in
the National Reconciliation Congress to pave the way to a sustained and allinclusive political process.
“The Security Council condemns those who threaten the early convening
of the National Reconciliation Congress. The Security Council recognizes the
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Development Programme, the International Advisory Committee, and
Member States to support the National Reconciliation Congress, and urges
Member States and partners to contribute continued technical and financial
support.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the African Union, the League of Arab States and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, to do what he can to assist in furthering ceasefire
arrangements and the political dialogue, especially in Mogadishu.
“The Security Council recalls its readiness, as set out in its resolution
1744 (2007), to consider taking measures against those who seek to prevent or
block a peaceful political process, threaten the Transitional Federal Institutions
by force, or take action that undermines stability in Somalia or the region.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to report by
mid-June on progress towards convening the National Reconciliation Congress
and the broader political dialogue, including progress towards a
comprehensive and permanent ceasefire arrangement, and on any blockages to
progress or threats to the Transitional Federal Institutions.
“The Security Council reiterates that, as set out in its resolution 1744
(2007), full and effective deployment of the African Union Mission to Somalia

2

07-32515

S/PRST/2007/13

(AMISOM) is vital. The Security Council welcomes deployments so far under
AMISOM and calls on other potential Troop Contributing Countries to deploy
as soon as possible to AMISOM. It reiterates its call for other States and
partners to provide logistical, technical and financial support to ensure the
further deployment of AMISOM. The Security Council also welcomes the
Secretary-General’s offer of planning assistance to the African Union.
“The Security Council emphasizes the contribution of AMISOM to
lasting peace and stability in Somalia, condemns any hostility towards it, and
urges all parties in Somalia and the region to support and cooperate with
AMISOM.
“The Security Council welcomes the Technical Assessment Mission sent
by the Secretary-General to Somalia and the region. It requests the SecretaryGeneral to consult the African Union and troop contributors on how to
urgently strengthen further AMISOM’s capabilities on the ground. It also
requests the Secretary-General, as suggested in his report, to immediately
begin appropriate contingency planning for a possible United Nations mission,
to be deployed if the Security Council decided to authorize such a mission.
The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to report by mid-June on
this preparatory work, progress in the reconciliation process and developments
on the ground, as well as possible scenarios for a continued international
security presence in Somalia.
“The Security Council states its intention to review the situation in
Somalia following the report described above from the Secretary-General, with
a view to determining whether the conditions are in place for deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation.”

07-32515

3
