United Nations

S/PV.5843

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5843rd meeting
Thursday, 21 February 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Arias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Panama)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Kumalo
Mr. Johnston
Mr. Khalilzad
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (S/2008/26)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-24762 (E)

*0824762*

S/PV.5843

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (S/2008/26)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Australia, Brazil, Japan, New
Zealand, the Philippines, Portugal, Slovenia and
Timor-Leste, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Santos
(Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council table.
The representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Guéhenno to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/26, which contains the report of the

2

Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste.
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, to whom I now
give the floor.
Mr. Guéhenno (spoke in French): It is a pleasure
and an honour for me to introduce the third report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), covering the period
from 21 August 2007 to 7 January 2008.
As you know, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Atul Khare, had travelled to
New York to brief the Council, but returned to TimorLeste in the wake of the tragic events of 11 February,
when President José Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister
Xanana Gusmão were attacked in Dili. Mr. Khare’s
presence and good offices during this sensitive period
in Timor-Leste were considered essential.
The incidents of 11 February in Timor-Leste
shocked the entire international community, as
conveyed in the Secretary-General’s statement that day.
I am pleased to report that since our briefing to the
Council following that event, the security situation has
remained calm in Timor-Leste. In fact, there have been
no further significant security incidents in the country.
I am relieved to report that President RamosHorta, while still hospitalized, is in stable condition
and that doctors are hopeful that he will make a full
recovery.
To ensure public order and to facilitate ongoing
security operations to apprehend the perpetrators of the
attacks of 11 February, the parliament endorsed the
decision to extend the 48-hour state of siege declared
on 11 February for an additional 10 days, until
23 February, and that could be extended still more. The
state of siege imposes restrictions on night-time
movement, a curfew from 8 p.m. to 6 a.m. and a ban on
public demonstrations. In taking those measures, the
Government and parliament have acted with restraint
and with full respect for constitutional provisions and
human rights.
In close cooperation with UNMIT, the
Government has, since the morning of 11 February,
shown leadership in carrying out and coordinating
security operations. In addition to efforts by the United
Nations police and the international security forces —

08-24762

S/PV.5843

the latter supplemented by an additional contingent of
military and police personnel — the Government of
Timor-Leste established, by Resolution No. 3/2008,
approved by the Council of Ministers on 17 February, a
joint command of the Armed Forces of Timor-Leste
(F-FDTL) and the National Police Force of TimorLeste (PNTL) to undertake security operations during
the state of siege. Based on discussions between the
Special Representative and the Government and an
exchange of letters with the Prime Minister dated
21 February, it has been agreed that those PNTL
officers who participate, for a limited period of time, in
the operations undertaken by the Joint Command
would not be under the direct supervision and
responsibility of the UNMIT Police Commissioner,
who also serves as interim PNTL general commander,
during that period.
All other elements of the supplemental policing
arrangement between the Government of Timor-Leste
and the United Nations remain unchanged. Within the
framework of the Trilateral Coordination Forum, new
mechanisms have been established to enhance
coordination between the F-FDTL, PNTL, UNMIT
police and international security forces. As of
19 February, a daily meeting between the commanders
of all four security institutions is being held. Further,
as of 18 February, two daily meetings are being held
between the UNMIT Police Commissioner and the
Commander of the international security forces within
the context of a new committee for the coordination of
international assistance.
(spoke in English)
Immediately following the attacks, Timorese
leaders from all parties came together to urge calm,
and the country has remained peaceful, including
throughout the funeral ceremonies for fugitive Alfredo
Reinado and one of his accomplices who died during
the attack on the President’s residence. The UNMIT
police and the PNTL, in coordination with the
international security forces and F-FDTL, have
remained on high security alert and have launched an
investigation into the attacks against the President and
the Prime Minister.
Before proceeding with an update on
developments since the issuance of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, I would like to share some
observations on the tragic attacks on the President and
the Prime Minister. While the full effect of these events

08-24762

is not yet known, the stability of a State cannot be
measured only in terms of the occurrence or absence of
outbreaks of violence or emergencies, but also by how
the State addresses such challenges. As conveyed in
our last briefing, it is reassuring that, following the
11 February events, the Timor-Leste Government, the
parliament, all political parties — including in the
opposition — security institutions and the population at
large responded with calm and restraint and with due
respect for the Constitution and the rule of law. What
some feared might have deteriorated into a
destabilizing crisis did not happen, with the institutions
of the State and citizens showing strong resilience. All
political leaders of the country and the general
population will hopefully continue to refrain from
politicizing these terrible events.
Of course, the 11 February incidents raise some
serious security-related issues which will need to be
addressed. Nevertheless, the course of events over the
past 10 days reinforces the importance for UNMIT, in
partnership with the Timorese, to continue focusing
efforts on the four priority areas outlined in the
Secretary-General’s report, that is, the review and
reform of the security sector, the strengthening of the
rule of law, economic and social development and the
promotion of a culture of democratic governance.
While the pressing problems of the petitioners are
not yet resolved, the group of petitioners that began
gathering in Dili two weeks ago in response to the
Government’s call to pursue discussions on the
resolution of their grievances has continued to increase
in number, reaching about 155 by mid–week, and more
are expected. In the wake of Reinado’s death, the
Government is intensifying outreach efforts to those
who had been his followers to join these discussions, in
the hope that the tragic events of 11 February might
serve as a turning point in the process.
The visit of the Security Council mission last
November and the mid-December visit of the
Secretary-General to Timor-Leste reflected the
continuing strong support of the international
community for the Timorese people, with both being
the first such visits since the restoration of the
country’s independence over five years ago. As had
been highlighted by the Security Council, the
Secretary-General emphasized that intensified efforts
to promote dialogue to defuse existing tensions and
foster greater political consensus, as well as the
strengthening of inclusive democratic processes, will

3

S/PV.5843

be essential for achieving sustainable stability and
prosperity in Timor-Leste. Both visits therefore
underscored the importance of further progress towards
implementation of the commitments made by all
parties within the context of the political party accord
of 26 May 2007. As members know, the accord
specified inclusiveness and participation as basic
principles of good governance, as well as the need to
ensure a meaningful and constructive role for the
opposition in parliament and the participation of civil
society in the political, economic and social
development process of the country.
It is promising that, since those high-level visits,
serious efforts in this direction have been undertaken
under the leadership of President Ramos-Horta, who
curtailed his official visit to Brazil by a few days to
return to Dili on 3 February.
In a 17 January meeting, President Ramos-Horta,
Prime Minister Gusmão, FRETILIN President Lu-Olo
Guterres and FRETILIN Secretary-General Alkatiri
had constructive discussions on the establishment of
possible mechanisms for promoting more inclusive
approaches for addressing the country’s pressing
problems. On 7 February, the President convened
another meeting, at his home, between the leaders of
the four parties comprising the Government coalition,
the Alliance for a Parliamentary Majority (AMP) and
FRETILIN to further discuss mechanisms for
collaboration to jointly address such pressing problems
as the internally displaced persons (IDPs), the
petitioners and the then fugitive Reinado, as well as
critical longer-term issues of security sector review and
reform and strengthening of the justice sector and of
public administration.
By all accounts, that 7 February meeting was
another positive step forward, with the parties reaching
consensus on the desirability of such a mechanism and
looking forward to further talks the following week. In
a letter to the Secretary-General on 7 February,
FRETILIN Secretary-General Mari Alkatiri positively
referred to progress made in those discussions and the
efforts of all concerned to foster an inclusive and
participatory environment to enable the country to
move forward. President Ramos-Horta himself has
played a crucial role in bringing the parties together,
and I hope that the parties will continue to come
together to keep the positive momentum going while
he is recovering. UNMIT will continue with its good
offices to facilitate that process.

4

Constructive efforts were made by the President
of the National Parliament, Fernando “La Sama” de
Araújo, to promote the establishment of an ad hoc allparty parliamentary commission to address the pressing
issues of the IDPs and the petitioners. UNMIT
supported those efforts and, while this particular
initiative has for the time being been overtaken by
events, UNMIT will continue to support all such
initiatives to enhance inter-party cooperation.
Other mechanisms established earlier have also
been utilized to promote dialogue on critical issues
facing the country, notably, the weekly bilateral
meetings of the Special Representative, respectively
with the President, the Prime Minister and the
Secretary-General of FRETILIN, as the party with the
largest number of seats in parliament; the Special
Representative’s regular meetings with the President of
the National Parliament, leaders of political parties and
civil society; and the fortnightly meetings of the HighLevel Coordination Committee and the Trilateral
Coordination Forum. At the request of FRETILIN, the
Special Representative also hosted a meeting on
security sector review and reform for the party’s
leadership on 6 February, during which agreement was
reached to hold fortnightly working-level meetings to
exchange views and contribute to the process.
As reflected by resolution 1704 (2006), the
mandated tasks of UNMIT are wide-ranging —
understandably so, given the multifaceted challenges
confronting Timor-Leste. In that connection, let me
briefly touch upon some of the key issues raised in the
Secretary-General’s report. Security sector reform is a
long-term process that must be approached in a holistic
manner, taking account of a wide range of factors.
Broad input of civil society into the security sector
reform process will contribute to a sense of public
ownership needed to support the further development
of security forces, which act in an impartial manner
with due respect for human rights. The Government-led
and United Nations-supported country-wide survey to
ascertain the views of the Timorese population on the
security sector is a vital element to ensure the
involvement of a broad range of stakeholders.
As emphasized in the Secretary-General’s report,
following the 2007 elections the UNMIT police has
devoted increasing attention to the reform and
rebuilding of the national police. With the completion
of the screening process, UNMIT police has focused
more on the professional development of individual

08-24762

S/PV.5843

PNTL officers through training and mentoring, as well
as on the institutional strengthening of the PNTL as an
impartial, professional and reliable service. I would
like to reiterate the need for police-contributing
countries to provide officers with the required expertise
in training and mentoring, including women officers,
which is also important in view of the high incidence
of gender-based violence in the country. I would also
note that the ratio of women officers within the PNTL
is four times that of the UNMIT police. Until the PNTL
has more fully developed its capacities, a continued
strong UNMIT police presence, including the four
formed police units, will be essential to ensure stability
in order to build on the gains made over the course of
the current mandate period.
On 4 February, PNTL assumed command of three
police posts in Dili under the continued supervision
and guidance of UNMIT police, who remain stationed
in those posts, though in reduced numbers. The
outcome of that pilot handover and lessons learned will
be taken into account in proceeding with the gradual
phased transfer of law enforcement responsibility to
the PNTL throughout the country. As outlined in the
Secretary-General’s report, the progress of the phased
transfer will depend in part on increasing capabilities
of individual PNTL officers through consistent and
structured mentoring processes, as well as physical
co-location. As police posts, and eventually districts,
are handed over to the PNTL, UNMIT police officers,
within the authorized strength, will be progressively
deployed to sub-districts and specialized units — such
as the Border Patrol Unit — which currently do not
benefit from their full-time presence. The expert
mission which will travel to UNMIT in late March to
conduct a thorough assessment of PNTL requirements,
as well as possible adjustments needed to UNMIT
police skill sets, will be crucial for further refining
those initiatives.
While the reform and rebuilding of the PNTL is a
process that will take some years, progress over this
year will be critical in determining the direction and
strategies to be followed over the long term. In going
forth with assistance to rebuild the PNTL, UNMIT
police efforts must be part of a larger holistic strategy
developed by the Timor-Leste Government in
coordination with the broader international community,
whose bilateral assistance will also remain essential in
the medium and long terms. As with any UNMIT
mandated tasks, the understanding and support of the

08-24762

Timorese population are an important and key element
for success. To that end, in January the UNMIT Police
Commissioner and other senior police officers
participated in a series of public outreach meetings
with civil society groups across the country.
The Timorese police service is one component of
the larger rule of law architecture that includes the
courts, the Office of the Prosecutor-General, public
defenders and the corrections system, as well as the
legal framework, all of which are in need of enhanced
international support if the increasing backlog of cases
is to be tackled and the credibility of the justice system
bolstered in the eyes of the Timorese people.
To ensure access to justice, to determine the truth,
to establish credible accountability for crimes
committed, to provide compensation for victims and to
establish proper precedents for the future are all vital
elements that remain of paramount concern. As a
positive step in that direction, UNMIT and the TimorLeste Government signed on 12 February an agreement
concerning United Nations assistance to the Office of
the Prosecutor-General to complete outstanding
investigations of the former Serious Crimes Unit.
Investigations have already begun. Despite constraints
faced by the judicial system, notable progress is also
being made in implementing the recommendations of
the Independent Special Commission of Inquiry report.
UNMIT also remains prepared to provide assistance to
the Government and Parliament regarding the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation of
Timor-Leste.
Even though UNMIT’s mandated tasks do not
directly include assistance for the further development
of the Armed Forces of Timor-Leste (F-FDTL), it will
be crucial for the cohesive functioning of the security
sector as a whole to further strengthen its institutional
capacities, policies and processes. Furthermore, the
development of cooperative relations and trust between
the PNTL and F-FDTL is vital to improve interoperationability between those security institutions, as
well as for the progressive assumption of law
enforcement responsibility by the PNTL. Sustained
international support will thus be important for the
continued efforts of the F-FDTL command, under the
leadership of Brigadier General Taur Matan Ruak, to
further develop the Armed Forces so that they can
discharge their military role appropriately for a
peacetime setting.

5

S/PV.5843

Timor-Leste faces two interlinked humanitarian
challenges: the resolution of the situation of the
remaining 100,000 IDPs throughout the country, with
30,000 in camps in Dili, and addressing longer-term
and chronic vulnerabilities that may have a direct
humanitarian impact on the overall population. The
IDP situation is a political and security concern, as
well as a humanitarian one, and largely considered as
neither short term nor easily fixed. On 12 January,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Khare
joined President Ramos-Horta, President of the
National Parliament Fernando de Araújo, Prime
Minister Gusmão and F-FDTL Commander Ruak in a
meeting with the IDPs, which was the first such
meeting with the current national leadership. Further,
on 25 January, the Prime Minister and Minister for
Social Solidarity held a meeting with IDP camp
managers. UNMIT has and will continue to actively
encourage such initiatives, as well as the appeal of the
Prime Minister to the IDPs that all people of TimorLeste need to rise above partisan politics to resolve
such critical issues facing the country.
A durable solution to the IDP situation, through
voluntary return or relocation, will require a holistic
approach that depends on a number of factors,
including, among others, an improved security
environment, a strengthened legal framework for
resolving land and property disputes, and economic
regeneration and livelihood activities. As mentioned
earlier, I am pleased that, as a first step forward in the
transition from blanket food assistance towards
targeted assistance to the vulnerable, food rations
distributed to the IDPs have been reduced as of
February by 50 per cent without any major security
incident, although just over half of the beneficiaries
have refused the reduced rations.
The chronic and longer-term vulnerabilities in the
country include its susceptibility to natural disasters.
Just this past month, parts of the country were hit by
severe storms. According to the Disaster Operations
Centre, over 700 houses were damaged or destroyed.
Those events, and a locust infestation, also caused
significant crop damage that may have implications for
food security. The United Nations and other
international partners assisted the Government in an
assessment of and response to the damage, but the
country needs to strengthen its institutional capacities
for dealing with such events. Other factors, including
chronic food insecurity, can also adversely affect the

6

humanitarian situation. The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the World Food
Programme estimate that 20 per cent of the population
is food insecure and that a further 23 per cent is highly
vulnerable to becoming food insecure.
Furthermore, rural livelihoods are fragile and
create the potential for migration to urban areas illprepared to deal with expanding populations.
Shortand
medium-term
employment
programmes continue to be desperately needed.
Despite the country’s considerable oil revenues, the
existing legislation regarding the management of the
petroleum development fund limits the amount of
resources that can flow to the State budget and does
not allow for front-loading of expenditures, as might be
required to kick-start the economy and address urgent
socio-economic issues.
In his report to the Council, the SecretaryGeneral noted that the functioning of the parliament,
the Government and other State institutions
demonstrated progress in building on the gains of the
peaceful electoral process, as well as a commitment to
restore normalcy following the 2006 crisis. The
Secretary-General also emphasized the need to address
critical political and security-related issues through
inclusive and collaborative processes, and the
importance of a meaningful and constructive role for
the opposition.
Let me say in conclusion that, confronted by the
tragic events of 11 February, the Government, the
parliament and the opposition acted in an exemplary
manner, and State institutions did indeed function
according to the constitution. That is indeed
encouraging. But the fact that Timor-Leste came so
close to a real breakdown shows how important and
urgent it is to address a number of issues: the
remaining Reinado supporters, who are under arrest
warrants; the petitioners; and the internally displaced
persons.
Those pressing issues have been unresolved since
the crisis of 2006. Each, in and of itself, should be
solvable with a concerted effort across the
political spectrum. Recent efforts led by President
Ramos-Horta — to which I have referred — to bring
together FRETILIN and the Government coalition were
promising and need to continue. Solving those
immediate issues will allow the country to give its full
attention to the core underlying socio-economic

08-24762

S/PV.5843

challenges — in particular widespread poverty and
massive youth unemployment — that, if not addressed,
will continue to threaten the political stability of
Timor-Leste
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Guéhenno for his important briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Timor-Leste.
Mr. Santos (Timor-Leste): First, allow me to
convey to the Council the regrets of Deputy Prime
Minister José Luis Guterres, who had travelled to New
York last week to attend this debate. But, as we all
know, the incidents of 11 February compelled his early
return to the country.
After the comprehensive and insightful
presentation by Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno,
and given the constraints of time, I shall read out only
part of my statement. The full text will be circulated in
the Chamber.
On behalf of the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste, allow me to express our gratitude for the
convening of emergency meeting immediately
following the attempted assassination of the President
and Prime Minister of the Republic of Timor-Leste
(see S/PV.5833). That was indeed a tragic event and an
attack against the democratically elected leaders of my
country.
Subsequent to the failed attacks, the Government
took measures to capture the perpetrators and bring
them to justice, in strict observance of our constitution
and domestic laws. The Government is fully committed
to adhering to the highest standards of human rights in
its efforts to resolve the situation. An investigation is
under way to ascertain the facts that led to the
attempted assassination of the President and the Prime
Minister.
In addition, allow me to inform the Council that
President Ramos-Horta is under excellent medical care
in Darwin, Australia, and is on the road to recovery. On
behalf of President Ramos-Horta and his family, I wish
to convey their gratitude for, and acknowledgement of,
the thousands of messages of sympathy and good
wishes they have received from all corners of the
world. In particular, I wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral, representatives of Member States, members of
the Secretariat and all others who have expressed their
solidarity and good wishes.

08-24762

We profoundly thank the Australian Government
for attending, through the International Security
Forces, to the President’s immediate medical needs in
Dili, and for providing the best medical care possible,
which promptly enabled his clinical stabilization.
Without that treatment, the outcome could have been
far more tragic for the people of Timor-Leste. We
would also like to thank the Government of Australia,
and in particular Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and
Foreign Minister Stephan Smith, for responding
immediately to our request for increased security
measures in Timor-Leste.
We extend our sincere gratitude to our good
friend Ambassador Kumalo for his leadership of the
core group on Timor-Leste. In response to a speech
delivered in February 2007 by then Prime Minister
Ramos-Horta in this very Chamber, Ambassador
Kumalo stated that Timor-Leste might not be the centre
of the universe, but that for South Africa, Timor-Leste
was indeed the centre of the world. A year later, we
know that Ambassador meant exactly what he said.
Last November, my country was honoured with a
visit by a Security Council mission, led by Ambassador
Kumalo. A few weeks later, another high-level visit
was conducted by the Secretary-General himself.
Those two visits demonstrated the continuing
commitment and support that Timor-Leste enjoys from
the United Nations and the international community
five years after the restoration of independence.
Moreover, both visits provided an ideal opportunity to
engage with local stakeholders while at the same time
experiencing at first hand developments and challenges
facing our nascent democracy. The positive impact of
the two visits is evident.
A continued United Nations presence remains
crucial for consolidating peace and security, as well as
for highlighting our collective role and responsibility
in resolving the causes of the crisis. At the same time,
we need to thwart the perception that we are becoming
too dependent upon the international community to
solve our own internal problems.
My Government expresses its profound
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2008/26), as well as to UnderSecretary-General Jean-Marie Guéhenno for his
insightful presentation. The Government of TimorLeste fully accepts and strongly supports the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s

7

S/PV.5843

report. The extension of the mandate for a year,
maintaining the same broad objectives and the current
strength, meets the needs and expectations of the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste.
As reflected in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, the root causes of the 2006 crisis in TimorLeste still need to be addressed. We agree that
Timorese leaders must put aside their political
differences and focus on resolving the manifold
challenges facing the country, including the challenges
of the internally displaced persons and petitioners. The
future of our country depends largely upon resolving
the root cause of the crisis.
The current Government took office six months
ago, with an agenda to reform and develop the country.
We have made significant advances in rebuilding our
institutions — the police and the judiciary in particular.
Although slow, that progress affirms our commitment
to rebuilding our own capacity. The United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste has been an
invaluable enabling factor. But the success or failure of
our objectives rests entirely with us, not with the
international community. Needless to say, the Council’s
ongoing support in the crucial areas of democratic
governance, socio-economic development, the rule of
law and security sector reform greatly increases our
chances.
In conclusion, in my country we differ in our
political views — which is rather normal and is a part
of our young democracy. But we are united in our
recognition of the invaluable contribution of the United
Nations and the need for its continued and sustained
presence in the country. Resolving our problems will
take time, and time is crucial for consolidating the
peace and stability achieved thus far, so that
development can replace the air of uncertainty that
many of us feel today.
Finally, allow me to express our utmost gratitude
and sincere appreciation to the men and women of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste,
under the able leadership of our friend Mr. Atul Khare,
for their dedication and sacrifices. We congratulate
them for doing such an excellent job.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
give the floor to members of the Council.
me

8

Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): Let
begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General

Guéhenno and Ambassador Santos for updating the
Council.
The United States deplores the recent attacks on
President José Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister
Xanana Gusmão by the rebel group associated with
dissident Alfredo Reinado. They constituted an
unacceptable assault on the Timorese Government.
We welcome the decision of Australia, in
response to this crisis, to send 200 additional troops to
strengthen the International Security Forces an addition
that has provided a backbone for efforts to restore and
maintain stability in the area. We also thank Australia
for its full medical and military support.
These recent attacks underscore the necessity of
achieving accountability for the 2006 crisis. That is
central to establishing law in Timor-Leste. To meet that
goal, we encourage implementation of the
recommendations of the United Nations Independent
Special Commission of Inquiry, including bringing
those responsible for crimes to justice under domestic
law.
We concur with the Secretary-General’s
recommendation of a one-year extension of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT),
as composed at present. UNMIT is playing a vital role
in ensuring and restoring stability in Timor-Leste. We
will depend on UNMIT to continue its support for the
Timorese in developing the capacity of the National
Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL), achieving
accountability for the 2006 crisis and strengthening the
justice sector in the coming year.
The recent past underscores the importance of
developing professional and effective police and
military forces under civilian control, in order to
provide the security necessary for political stability and
economic development. In that regard, we appreciate
UNMIT’s ongoing efforts to promote security sector
reform. With a view to long-term stability and growth,
we appreciate UNMIT’s efforts to develop the
effectiveness of the Timorese justice system and
encourage additional assessments of justice sector
needs.
Despite recent challenges, it will be important for
UNMIT to retain its welcome focus on the prevention
of gender-based violence and attention to the needs of
victims.

08-24762

S/PV.5843

Finally, we join the Secretary-General in calling
for reconciliation among Timorese political leaders and
parties and for coordination in addressing the
challenges facing the country. We express our
appreciation for Special Representative Khare’s efforts
to facilitate such a dialogue.
Mr. Jurica (Croatia): As members are aware,
Croatia has aligned itself with the European Union
statement on this topic. Nevertheless, we would like to
make some additional remarks.
We welcome the successful conclusion of the
democratic presidential and parliamentary elections in
2007 and reaffirm our support for the new
Government. However, we are deeply concerned about
the ongoing fragile situation, especially in the light of
last week’s events. We strongly condemn the recent
assassination attempt on Mr. José Ramos-Horta,
President of Timor-Leste, and the attack on the convoy
of Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão.
In that regard, we also have unique insight into
this matter through our engagement in the United
Nations police in East Timor. We stress that it is
important that all parties fully cooperate in the
investigations so that those responsible for this attack
can be brought immediately to justice.
This only demonstrates the importance of
continued coordination efforts among the Timorese
leadership, the political parties and civil society to
bridge existing gaps. Such efforts are crucial to
maintain stability and to strengthen democratic
governance and respect for the rule of law. We
recognize the value of coordinated work to review the
future role of the security sector, given its importance
for long-term stability.
We would also like to emphasize the significance
of establishing accountability for crimes committed
during the 1999 and 2006 crises. We welcome the
important progress in the promotion and protection of
human rights that has been achieved in a number of
areas. However, we are concerned about stillinadequate standards in combating domestic and
gender-based violence and the peaceful return of
internally displaced persons. In that regard, we
encourage the international community to assist the
Government of Timor-Leste in strengthening the
promotion and protection of human rights in the
country.

08-24762

In that connection, we would also like to express
support for the Secretary-General’s initiative to send an
expert mission to the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), which will provide
an assessment regarding possible adjustments to
UNMIT’s police component. We support the efforts of
Mr. Atul Khare, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General
for
Timor-Leste,
and
the
continuation of the Integrated Mission to build on the
progress achieved thus far. The mission’s presence is
crucial in order to encourage the East Timorese
Government to address existing challenges.
Therefore, we firmly and strongly support an
extension of UNMIT’s mandate for the next 12 months.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): First, I would
like to thank Ambassador Nelson Santos, Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste, for his statement. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Marie Guéhenno for his briefing on the situation
following the attacks on the President and the Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste, and for his introduction of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/26).
The report indicates that, in the context of the
many difficulties that they are facing in the first year of
the new Government and parliament, the people and
the public institutions of Timor-Leste have made many
efforts in their nation-building and recovery processes.
However, the report also indicates that progress is
limited: apart from that made in the performance of
parliament, the Government and other State institutions
in the areas of policymaking and political debates, little
can be found in other domains of activity.
We agree that Timor-Leste continues to face
numerous challenges, as noted by the Security Council
mission that visited the country last November. The
recent attacks targeting the President and the Prime
Minister — attacks that members of the Council have
strongly condemned — tell us only that, while there
has been overall improvement, the security situation
and the political situation remain fragile. That,
combined with the weakness of institutions and the
lack of cooperation among political leaders and parties,
makes the task of tackling, on a daily basis, pressing
problems
such
as
widespread
poverty
and
unemployment, the housing crisis, the great number of
internally displaced persons and crime even more
challenging.

9

S/PV.5843

In expressing our support for and solidarity with
the people and the Government of Timor-Leste — and
mindful of the observation of the Security Council
mission that, unless the differences among the
Timorese leaders are resolved, political uncertainty
will persist, together with the prospect of renewed
violence and bloodshed — we call upon all parties
concerned to exercise restraint and to actively engage
in peaceful dialogue to address differences, together
promoting the process of national reconciliation and
development, in the national interest of Timor-Leste
and in the interest of peace and stability in the region.
In the context of the present situation, we
consider that the continued assistance of the
international community is necessary. The visits of the
Secretary-General and the Security Council mission
have reaffirmed the commitment of the United Nations
to Timor-Leste at this critical moment. In that regard,
we commend the efforts of UNMIT and various United
Nations agencies in support of the peace and
development process in Timor-Leste over the past year
in the many fields of their activities.
At the request of the Government of Timor-Leste,
and upon the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral, Viet Nam supports an extension of UNMIT’s
existing mandate in order to enable it to accomplish its
tasks. We welcome UNMIT’s plan for a phased
handover of policing responsibilities to the National
Police Force of Timor-Leste in order to enhance the
capacity of the Timorese authorities in maintaining
security with a view to long-term stability.
Before concluding, let me once again, on behalf
of my Government, extend to President José RamosHorta our best wishes for a quick and full recovery to
allow him to resume leadership of the country at an
early date, consolidate peace and implement the
national strategy for recovery.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I would like to join
previous speakers in thanking the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie
Guéhenno, for his informative briefing, and the
Secretary-General for his report. My delegation also
deeply appreciates the important statement by the
Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste, Ambassador
Nelson Santos.
The recent news of the armed attacks against
President José Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister
Xanana Gusmão causes us profound concern and

10

pause. We hope that President Ramos-Horta makes a
swift recovery and will be able to resume his duties at
an early date.
We unreservedly condemn those attacks. They
constitute nothing less than an assault on Timor-Leste’s
democracy. We praise the quick and effective actions
taken by the leadership of Timor-Leste to prevent
escalation of this grave situation. The leaders and
people of Timor-Leste have demonstrated their wisdom
in responding to the situation by exercising restraint in
their actions in the interest of maintaining peace and
stability. These latest deplorable events underscore the
need for the continued support and engagement of the
international community.
The Security Council mission to Timor-Leste last
November and the visit by the Secretary-General
provided us with a window into the current situation
there and a lucid and candid assessment of the key
concerns and issues that the country is facing. Together
with the current report of the Secretary-General, they
provide a basis for us to recalibrate the priorities and
approaches of the United Nations Mission’s
programmes and activities in the country to better suit
the current realities and help reverse the setbacks that
have occurred there since 2006.
By far the most critical issue in the country
would appear to be restoring peace and security and
building sounder foundations for long-term stability. In
this regard, it is extremely important for the United
Nations Mission in Dili to continue, as a matter of high
priority, to support Timor-Leste in fully addressing the
unresolved root causes of the 2006 crisis, including
political divisions, weak institutions — especially the
national police and the security forces — and poverty
and unemployment, especially among the youth.
It is equally important for the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) to support
the efforts made and the approach adopted by the
Government in resolving some grave issues remaining
from the 2006 crisis that continue to contribute to the
fragility of the security situation in the country, such as
internally displaced persons, petitioners and fugitives.
We appreciate the good offices efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
enhance dialogue among the leadership and facilitate a
consensus approach in addressing the various
problems.

08-24762

S/PV.5843

We believe that with the strong determination and
untiring efforts made in a united manner by the
leadership of Timor-Leste, and with re-energized and
more focused assistance from UNMIT and other
partners, the serious challenges that the country is
facing can be overcome. It is only then that progress
made so far in the country’s State-building can be
consolidated
and
its
economic
development
reinvigorated.
In practical terms, it is important for UNMIT to
focus on supporting the Government’s programme on
short-term priorities contained in its 2008 budget.
Their effective implementation would have durable
impact on stabilization in the country. We place
importance on UNMIT’s continued role in cooperating
and coordinating with United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes and other relevant partners in order to
support the implementation of the Government’s
national recovery strategy.
Another important note is the issue of expediting
security sector reform. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s plan to gradually transfer the responsibility
for police operations from the United Nations police to
the national police of Timor-Leste and to emphasize
training and mentoring assistance from the United
Nations police.
There is a great need for UNMIT to support
national capacity-building efforts and to shore up the
ability of the Government and other State institutions
to function in their proper roles. That includes the need
to strengthen the full range of political, judicial and
economic institutions and infrastructure so that
democratic governance can thrive. As a general note,
we attach great importance to the concepts of
ownership of and leadership by the Government and
people of Timor-Leste in the planning and
implementation of United Nations assistance in this
regard. Therefore, in the light of those considerations,
Indonesia supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General for the extension of UNMIT’s
mandate for a period of 12 months.
We are pleased to inform the Council that
Indonesia and Timor-Leste continue to enjoy an
excellent bilateral relationship. We also witness
continuing superb rapport among leaders of both
countries. The Government and people of both
countries continue to deepen and expand cooperation

08-24762

on the basis of forward-looking and reconciliatory
principles.
In conclusion, we wish to reaffirm my
Government’s strong commitment to continue to assist
Timor-Leste on a bilateral basis in achieving peace,
stability, and prosperity for a democratic Timor-Leste.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Guéhenno for his briefing. Costa Rica
welcomes the improvement in the state of health of
President Ramos-Horta, a Nobel Peace Prize winner, as
was the President of Costa Rica, a situation that was
made possible by the very close friendship between
them. We hope that he will be able very soon to return
to his work in furthering the peace, stability and
development of the Timorese people.
We believe that no signs of fanaticism or violence
will stand in the way of Timor-Leste as it takes its first
steps on the path of independence. The international
community should provide the necessary support so
that that can be reality. For this reason, this debate is
particularly important because it provides us with an
opportunity not only to assess the situation in TimorLeste, but also and especially to consider the role that
is being played and should be played by the United
Nations in assisting the people and the Government of
Timor-Leste.
On the subject of national reconciliation and
democracy, the extent of the political differences
between the leaders of Timor-Leste regarding the
measures necessary to settle critical issues that the
country is facing continues to be considerable.
Nonetheless, the attitude that has been assumed by the
Revolutionary Front for an Independent East Timor
(FRETILIN) following the recent attacks must be
recognized as a sign of political and democratic
maturity.
We should channel all available energy and
resources to take advantage of the moment of political
lucidity that has been sparked by the gunshots. The
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT)
should
promote,
with
renewed
determination,
reconciliation
and
democratic
participation.
On the subject of justice, human rights and the
rule of law, the sustainability of any political
understanding depends to a large extent on the

11

S/PV.5843

effective participation of all sectors, including, in the
case of Timor-Leste, the so-called petitioners.
However, that cannot occur in a situation of impunity,
hence the special importance of implementing the
recommendations of the United Nations Independent
Special Commission of Inquiry.
The indivisibility and interdependence of human
rights, including the virtues of the rule of law, may
become mere empty words when some 40 per cent of
the population live in poverty and unemployment and a
further 10 per cent have been displaced by the internal
violence. That is why the support provided by the
international community in general and UNMIT in
particular is of such importance. It is not a matter of
creating a dependence on the international system; it is
a matter of generating national capacity. The Council
should reconsider whether the mandate and resources
of UNMIT are sufficient to facilitate and promote such
capacity-building.
Regarding peacebuilding and development, the
absence of Alfredo Reinado could either provide an
opportunity or constitute a threat in terms of the
peacebuilding process. Taking advantage of the
window of opportunity that has been opened by the
attacks is the main challenge facing the Timorese
authorities and UNMIT. Peace, justice and
development, promoted in a parallel — and not
successive — manner, are the keys to success.
In that regard, we recall that, a few weeks ago,
the Government of Timor-Leste expressed its belief
that an UNMIT presence would be needed for a further
five years, years that should be devoted in particular to
promoting stability and strengthening security, leading
up to the deployment of a mission with a peacebuilding
mandate for approximately three more years. Costa
Rica considers it proper that the Council consider that
request, once agreements have been reached regarding
the current renewal of the UNMIT mandate. We would
like the Council to conduct an analysis of the situation
that goes beyond the 12-month period for which the
mandate’s extension is currently being considered. To
that end, the Secretary-General should provide an
exhaustive report, including options for a successful
exit strategy.
Security sector reform, economic development
and democracy-building in Timor-Leste will take place
only insofar as sufficient guarantees are provided for
stability and security. Therefore, flexible and effective

12

security sector reform should continue to be a priority
for the Council. Strengthening the police and
institutions that contribute to administrating justice are
essential requirements.
The stability that has prevailed in Timor-Leste
following the attacks against its democratic institutions
and against the life of President José Ramos-Horta and
Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão are clear signs of the
progress that has already been achieved in this area and
of the effectiveness of the United Nations police, in
conjunction with the International Stabilization Force.
We are grateful to them, and to Australia in particular.
However, with a continuous view to building capacity
rather than generating dependence, we would like to
emphasize the need to expedite the training process
and to hand over full responsibility to the Timor-Leste
police.
Allow me to conclude, Mr. President, with some
thoughts that I am sure that your country, Panama, will
share with me, since our two countries are the two
members of this Council that do not have a standing
military institution. All too often, the hopes and dreams
of many generations of men and women all over the
world have been sacrificed on the basis of a misguided
concept of national security. Costa Rica wonders
whether the huge challenges to be overcome by TimorLeste on the path to building a dynamic and prosperous
democracy will be overcome or reinforced with the
proposed security sector reform, which includes a
national army as a standing institution.
Since the end of the 1990s, Indonesia has been
committed to the concept of a sovereign Timor-Leste,
with the support of the entire international community.
Costa Rica wonders whether we can truly justify the
need for a military focus for the security of TimorLeste. Are the security challenges faced by the people
of Timor-Leste of an internal or external nature? What
is the most effective and efficient way of dealing with
them? How best can we contribute to peace and
stability in the region?
Like Timor-Leste, Costa Rica is a small country,
and we have decided that our security will not depend
on military strength, which would be small in any case,
given our economic limitations. Rather, we chose to
focus on building democracy and improving the quality
of life of our people and promoting respect for the rule
of law and human rights. We feel that that is a wise
option that Timor-Leste might consider following, and

08-24762

S/PV.5843

we respectfully encourage the Council to consider that
alternative.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
We
thank
Under-Secretary-General
Russian):
Jean-Marie Guéhenno for his substantive briefing on
the latest developments in Timor-Leste and for
introducing the report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) (S/2008/26). We also listened
very carefully to the assessments contained in the
statement by the Permanent Representative of
Timor-Leste.
Against the backdrop of a gradual improvement
in the security situation, the attacks against the
President and Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, which
took place in Dili on 11 February were a dangerous
challenge to the legal authority and to the peace
process. We firmly condemn those attacks. Those who
planned and perpetrated them must be brought to trial.
We would like to wish a speedy recovery to
President Ramos-Horta, whom we deeply respect and
whose authority is internationally acknowledged.
We are pleased to note that, despite these
unprecedented crimes, the country’s leadership has
demonstrated political responsibility, restraint and
professionalism and has been able to keep the situation
under control. Great credit for maintaining security and
law and order goes to UNMIT and the International
Security Forces.
The events of 11 February were a direct outcome
of the crisis of May 2006. Promptly eradicating the
causes and consequences of this crisis, specifically the
problems of the petitioners and the internally displaced
persons, would make it possible for Timor-Leste to
move towards constructing a democratic society.
We support the core conclusions and
recommendations contained the report of the SecretaryGeneral. We believe that the mandate of UNMIT
should be extended for one more year. We believe that
the efforts of UNMIT should be aimed above all at
training a robust and professional national police force,
which would then be able gradually to take on primary
responsibility for independently maintaining law and
order in that country.
International support to Timor-Leste is also
needed to help strengthen State institutions, the legal
system and economic and social development. In the

08-24762

current situation, it is particularly important to advance
the process of national reconciliation in Timor-Leste
and to promote dialogue and cooperation among all
political forces in the country. The Russian Federation
will continue to support the people and the
Government of Timor-Leste in their efforts to build a
stable and democratic society in their young State.
Mr. Johnston (United Kingdom): We thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guéhenno for his
comprehensive briefing on the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2008/26) and Ambassador Santos for giving
us so concisely his country’s crucial perspective on
recent events and on the future.
I would like to begin by associating my
delegation with the statement to be delivered later in
our debate by the representative of Slovenia on behalf
of the European Union.
I would like to join colleagues in condemning the
attacks on President Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister
Gusmão of 11 February. As the Council has made clear,
there can be no justification for acts such as those. We
expect that the law enforcement authorities will be able
to bring those responsible to justice and that stability
will thus be maintained in East Timor.
We are encouraged by the Secretariat’s
assessment that the Timorese State institutions and the
opposition have met the challenge posed by those
attacks and have responded, as Mr. Guéhenno stated, in
keeping with their constitutional and human rights
obligations. We commend the people of East Timor for
remaining calm and steadfast in such difficult times for
their young democracy, and we thank the International
Stabilization Force, and particularly the Australian
leadership of that force, for coming so swiftly to the
assistance of the legitimate Government of East Timor
and for reinforcing its presence on the ground to help
bolster the security situation. My Government joins
others in wishing Mr. Ramos-Horta a full and swift
recovery. We are encouraged by what the Ambassador
and the Under-Secretary-General said this morning in
that regard.
As others have said, these attacks underline the
fact that the security situation and the wider situation
in East Timor remain fragile, volatile and vulnerable to
setbacks. So it is for the people of the country to do
everything in their power to ensure the sustained
positive trend in terms of politics, security and

13

S/PV.5843

sustainable economic and social development. For my
Government, that means three things.
First, efforts should continue building a shared
vision by the Timorese Government and the opposition,
and the civil society more generally, of what kind of
country Timor-Leste should be, including by building
on the multiparty discussions referred to by the UnderSecretary-General earlier.
Secondly, there needs to be a determined effort
by the State institutions, with international support, to
build capacity and deliver reform, particularly in the
security and justice sectors. We look forward to
receiving the findings of the expert mission to be
dispatched by the Secretary-General with the aim of
carrying out a thorough assessment, in particular in the
field of policing.
Thirdly, a commitment by the Timorese
Government is needed to the full implementation of the
2008 budget now agreed by the parliament of TimorLeste.
This Council of the United Nations and the wider
international community are committed to help. We
heard in this Chamber over the past year, and again this
morning, a consistent message from the representatives
of Timor-Leste that the Security Council should
continue to provide them with support, including
through the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), over the years ahead.
We are very sympathetic to this message, and it is
for this reason that we support the extension of the
UNMIT mandate by 12 months. We think that Special
Representative Khare and his team continue to do an
excellent job delivering on their mandate, and we
welcome and commend South Africa’s leadership of
this issue in the Council.
At the same time, we also remain mindful of an
underlying principle, which is a point that Ambassador
Santos also made this morning. That is, the goal of the
international community should be to help the people
of Timor-Leste stand on their own feet. We therefore
think we need a forward-looking and proactive
approach that seeks to move beyond stabilization and
into sustainable, national-led peacebuilding as soon as
we responsibly can.
We therefore hope that in future reports, the
Secretary-General and his team will be able to develop
a medium-term strategy, with appropriate benchmarks

14

aimed at achieving this end state, and that, of course, in
close and continuous consultation with the Government
of Timor-Leste.
Mr. Mantovani (Italy): At the outset, I wish to
warmly thank Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno for
his briefing. The reasons that keep the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Timorese leaders away from New York are well
understood.
Nevertheless, I would like to convey, through the
Under-Secretary-General, our full support to the
Special Representative for his efforts and to
Ambassador Santos, whom I also thank for his
intervention. We also convey our most sincere wishes
to President Ramos-Horta for a quick and full recovery
and a swift resumption of his functions.
Italy fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Slovenia on behalf of the European Union.
The attacks of 11 February in Dili, which we
have strongly condemned, must serve as a warning and
as a lesson. The warning is not to take for granted,
after the successful completion of the electoral cycle,
that the democratic progress of the country has reached
the point of no return and will face no further
obstacles. The lesson is to carefully consider the
requests of the Timorese authorities for a sustained
commitment by the United Nations in the current
configuration.
Many of the findings of the Security Council
mission and of the report of the Secretary-General have
been substantiated by the unfolding of the latest events.
I refer here to the need to address the root causes of the
2006 crisis, to the importance of a cooperative and
substantive political dialogue among all political
stakeholders and to the urgency of a thorough review
of the security sector arrangements, all with the
required assistance of the international community.
These must remain the main focus areas for the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT),
which is operating effectively and deserves our
strongest support. The complementary action of the
international security forces is also to be commended.
We strongly hope that the latest developments
will instil a new sense of urgency in the processes of
political reconciliation and State-building. We learned
that in the aftermath of the 11 February attacks the

08-24762

S/PV.5843

reactions of the legitimate institutions, and of the
opposition, were exemplary. We also welcome the
readiness of the Government of Timor-Leste to accept
the additional assistance that the international
community, and its neighbours in particular, have
immediately offered at this crucial stage.
At the same time, we must bear in mind that
national ownership and participation in regional
processes remain the only long-term recipes for
sustainability. No form of international support can
replace the genuine will of the Timorese leaders and
people to pursue stability and development, in close
cooperation with their neighbours. Obviously, this
consideration does not preclude the need for sustained
international assistance in the foreseeable future, in a
spirit of interdependence, rather than one of
dependence, with the ultimate goal being full selfreliance.
For its part, Italy, along with its European Union
partners, has constantly supported the young Timorese
democracy at all stages of its genesis and development.
During the recent visit to Rome of President RamosHorta, additional projects were considered with the
Italian authorities in the areas of parliamentary
support, human resources development and cultural
and linguistic cooperation.
In this spirit of friendship, Italy is also ready to
support the extension for 12 months of the mandate of
UNMIT. I would like to praise UNMIT, in particular
for providing a bright example in terms of gender
mainstreaming in its activities and reporting.
Finally, I would like to highlight once again that
the failure to address impunity for past crimes is the
worst enemy of peace and stabilization, as shown by
the latest events. It is therefore imperative to ensure
justice and accountability for the events of 1999 and
2006, as provided for in relevant Security Council
resolutions.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno for his briefing. I also
wish to thank the Permanent Representative of TimorLeste, Ambassador Santos, for his statement.
China strongly condemns the recent attacks by
the rebels on President Ramos-Horta and Prime
Minister Gusmão of Timor-Leste. We wish President
Ramos-Horta a speedy recovery. We also hope that the

08-24762

Timorese people will keep calm, exercise restraint and
do all they can to maintain stability in the country.
Over the past few months, the United Nations has
closely followed the situation in Timor-Leste. The
Security Council mission and the Secretary-General
visited Timor-Leste. The Security Council has also
held many in-depth discussions on the situation in that
country. Following the attacks, the Security Council
immediately issued a presidential statement. All of this
fully demonstrates the support of the international
community to the process of peacebuilding and
reconstruction in Timor-Leste.
During last December’s open debate (see
S/PV.5801), China stated its position on the situation in
Timor-Leste in a comprehensive manner. Here, I wish
to emphasize the following points.
First, the leaders of the various Timorese factions
should achieve reconciliation through dialogue and
address the security problem. The recent attacks have
shown that the security situation in the country remains
fragile. Apart from the problem of the Military Police
Commander, Reinado, the problems of the internally
displaced persons and the petitioners pose a threat to
the peace and stability in Timor-Leste.
Effectively coping with the security problem,
especially in these trying times, requires that the
Government, with all its factions, especially
FRETILIN, should put behind their past grievances and
cooperate fully with each other. China appreciates the
fact that, following the attacks, FRETILIN swiftly
issued a statement condemning them and calling on the
Timorese people to remain calm. We hope that the
various Timorese factions will put national stability
and the people’s interests first and, through dialogue
and exchanges of view, increase their mutual trust,
overcome their differences, help their people to view
the common situation rationally, and seek to address all
differences peacefully. The United Nations should
continue to play a constructive role in promoting the
reconciliation process in the country.
Secondly, maintaining peace and stability in
Timor-Leste also requires the joint efforts of the armed
forces, the police, the international security forces and
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT). China appreciates the efforts of the
international security forces and UNMIT to maintain
security in Timor-Leste, but the recent attacks have
sounded an alarm for the international community. We

15

S/PV.5843

have seen that gaps remain in the security and
protection work being done in Timor-Leste.
China supports the Security Council’s extension
of UNMIT’s mandate. In the next phase, the security
forces of Timor-Leste, the international security forces
and UNMIT should remain highly vigilant and, while
maintaining public security, also strengthen protection
for the country’s prominent figures. At the same time,
those three forces should also keep communications
open between them and cooperate with each other so as
to optimize their respective advantages.
Thirdly, the long-term stability of Timor-Leste
requires the implementation of the Government’s
working plan and a significant contribution to the
development of the country’s economy. The
Government of Timor-Leste has already formulated
this year’s budget, as well as a work plan. We hope to
see their gradual implementation and, through
economic development, the continued improvement of
the livelihoods of the people and a reduction in
poverty, especially through increased job opportunities,
particularly among young people, so as to eliminate the
root causes of social instability. In improving the
people’s livelihoods and standards of living, attention
must be paid to promoting development in the various
social sectors and to fostering and increasing the
people’s self-confidence. The international community
should provide every possible assistance in support of
the efforts of the Timorese Government.
Fourthly, we should take the future tasks and
composition of UNMIT into consideration in an
integrated manner. As a large portion of the Timorese
police are still in the identification, verification and
reappointment phase, the peacekeeping personnel of
the United Nations remain on the front line of
enforcement in some areas. It is clear both from the
Security Council’s mission and from the SecretaryGeneral’s report that certain Government officials and
other people remain concerned in that regard.
It is imperative for a variety of reasons gradually
to transfer policing responsibilities to the national
police of Timor-Leste. While continuing to undertake
its policing responsibilities and tasks to ensure public
security in Timor-Leste, the United Nations should also
help the national police to strengthen its policing
capabilities. The United Nations police may wish as a
next step to consider refocusing its work on training
and sharing its experience with the national police.

16

Following a comprehensive consideration of the
rational allocation of United Nations peacekeeping
resources, the composition of UNMIT may also be
adjusted accordingly.
As a member of the Asia-Pacific family, China
has closely followed the situation in Timor-Leste and
sincerely hopes that, with the full assistance of the
international community, Timor-Leste will maintain its
peace and stability and start down the road to
development and national prosperity. China will, to the
extent possible, maintain its assistance to Timor-Leste.
Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): I wish to express my deep gratitude to
Mr. Guéhenno for his detailed briefing on the latest
developments in Timor-Leste. I also commend the
efforts of the Secretary-General and thank him for the
information provided in his report.
I
also
thank
Mr.
Santos,
Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste to the United Nations,
for his statement, as well as our South African
colleague for the critical role his country has played
and for its efforts to draw up a draft resolution on
extending the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).
The report of the Secretary-General refers to
progress made in terms of security in Timor-Leste,
although the situation remains tenuous, as evidenced
by the attacks on the President and the Prime Minister.
The attacks sought to harm its immediate victims and
the country as a whole, which had only just begun to
restore calm and stability following last year’s
elections. Libya therefore reiterates its firm
condemnation of the attacks on the President and Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste. We pray to God for President
Ramos-Horta’s speedy recovery.
My country shares the Secretary-General’s view
that the national police force of Timor-Leste requires
further support in training and capacity-development if
it is to fully shoulder its responsibilities for restoring
order, which is under ongoing threat. The Timorese
authorities need to develop a comprehensive approach
to reforming the security sector in cooperation with
UNMIT. That issue is of the highest priority and
requires their full attention. We hope that the measures
recently taken by the Government in that area, to
which Mr. Guéhenno referred, will strengthen security
and mark a positive step in that direction.

08-24762

S/PV.5843

The Parliament and Government of Timor-Leste
worked to ensure the success of last year’s elections
and the establishment of democratic institutions. While
duty-bound to commend those efforts, we remain
concerned about the remaining differences because
there has been no cooperation between the heads of the
political parties, preventing the establishment of an
agreed approach to such pending matters as the issue of
internally displaced persons and the petitioners of the
Timorese armed forces, among others. We therefore
call on all Timorese parties to find common ground for
launching a dialogue and reconciling so as to overcome
the aforementioned differences. I would also like to
welcome Mr. Guéhenno’s observation that the reaction
of all parties and political groups to those deplorable
attacks was in full respect for State institutions and for
the constitution.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/26)
referred to several issues that must be addressed:
poverty, continuing unemployment and socio-economic
problems. There is also a need to improve coordination
among security institutions, strengthen the legal
framework and operational capacities and exert full
control over all forces on the ground. We therefore call
on the United Nations and UNMIT to cooperate with
local authorities in order to achieve those goals.
We very much appreciate the observations
contained in the Secretary-General’s report. We, of
course, agree with him that efforts must be intensified
in order to bolster dialogue, restore calm, ease
tensions, bring about national reconciliation,
strengthen national institutions and achieve national
reconciliation. We also endorse his recommendation
that UNMIT’s mandate be extended for a further
12 months.
Last but not least, we commend the efforts of
Mr. Atul Khare and UNMIT to build up Timor-Leste’s
national political, economic and security institutions.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
We too would like to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno
for the very thorough and enlightening briefing he has
given us on the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) (S/2008/26). We also thank our friend the
Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste for his
enlightening and very informative statement.
The history of the people of Timor-Leste, their
struggle for independence and their current admirable

08-24762

efforts to fully regain their sovereignty are an example
to us all. They deserve the unwavering support of the
international community in helping the country to build
its institutions and advance its development. Any
obstacle or attempt intended to jeopardize that desire to
assume responsibility cannot be tolerated. It is for that
reason that the recent attacks against President José
Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão
prompted unanimous international indignation and
condemnation. In that connection, we cannot fail to
commend the action taken by the Government of
Australia, which promptly came to the assistance of the
legitimate Government of Timor-Leste.
We welcome the notable progress made by
Timor-Leste and its firm commitment to building a
democratic future, as illustrated by the very successful
holding of the recent presidential and legislative
elections. That clearly demonstrates a spirit of
tolerance, understanding and reconciliation. We hope
that that spirit will prevail throughout the entire
country in order to promote genuine national
reconciliation, including as regards the issue of the
petitioners.
We also welcome the Government’s drafting and
the Parliament’s adoption of a development programme
as part of the 2008 budget. That will make it possible
to address the crucial challenges of security and the
situation of internally displaced persons. There are
other equally important issues on the agenda, such as
the building of a strong national economy, national
reconciliation and strengthening security and the rule
of law. Nevertheless, one of the main challenges that
the Government must urgently address is, in our view
and as noted in the report of the Secretary-General, that
of combating unemployment, which undermines the
future of young people and which can also lead to
migration from the countryside. Without jobs and real
prospects for the future, there is a significant risk that
young people will face dangers and difficulties in life.
Those dangers must be avoided, as they could lead to
demands and troubles of all sorts. Whatever the
difficulties, priority should be accorded to that issue.
Burkina Faso welcomes the Government’s
signing of an agreement aimed at coordinating national
resources and international assistance to promote the
country’s development. Timor-Leste’s donors and
partners, especially the countries of the region, should
therefore firmly support the Government’s programme
in order that it can be fully implemented. It is also

17

S/PV.5843

important to ensure that the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework has the same
support.
Governance is a crucial issue for an emerging
democracy such as Timor-Leste. We have every
confidence that UNMIT and the United Nations system
can support and strengthen the republic’s institutions,
leading to the establishment of genuine democracy
based on the rule of law. The risk of instability and the
fragility of the political process, which are still real,
justify the continued presence of UNMIT to maintain
public order and provide support for the justice sector.
However, my delegation recognizes that restructuring
and appropriate training of the Timorese national
police — which must also be depoliticized so that it
can assume full — is more necessary than ever. We
therefore welcome the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral to assess the needs of the national police, with
a view to a gradual transfer of competencies. It goes
without saying that Burkina Faso supports the renewal
of UNMIT’s mandate.
Lastly, we would like to thank Ambassador
Dumisani Kumalo for the role his country has played
in the core group on Timor-Leste.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I too would like to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno
for his briefing on the situation in Timor-Leste, which
the Security Council has followed with particular
attention since the attacks against President José
Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão
10 days ago. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Nelson Santos, Permanent Representative of TimorLeste, for his statement.
We were very shocked to learn about the terrorist
attacks against the head of State and the Prime
Minister, which were aimed at destabilizing the
country and undermining the Government’s recovery
efforts. France once again condemns those attacks
against the legitimate and democratically elected
authorities of Timor-Leste. At the same time, we
commend the constructive response to those
developments by Timorese political officials, both in
the majority and the opposition. In contrast to what
occurred in the spring of 2006, Timorese institutions
have continued to function in an environment of
legality and cooperation, regularly including the
opposition.

18

My delegation also welcomes the very positive
role played by neighbouring countries, especially
Indonesia and Australia, whose speedy response
provided support to the Timorese authorities and
crucially helped to maintain stability in that country.
As has been mentioned here, that support included vital
medical assistance for President Ramos-Horta. We
welcome
the
encouraging
signs
regarding
developments in his medical condition. France hopes
for his speedy and complete recovery.
The events of 11 February serve once again to
remind us of the importance of combating impunity for
past crimes, both those of 1999 and those of the spring
of 2006, as a condition for lasting reconciliation. In
that connection, we reaffirm our support for the efforts
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (UNMIT) to assist the Prosecutor-General of
Timor-Leste. Those efforts are fully in line with the
mandate given to the mission by the Security Council.
Finally, we believe that in the current
circumstances, it is more necessary than ever before to
maintain an international security presence in TimorLeste. The reassuring presence of UNMIT and of the
international security forces is an essential element for
stability in the country and for the strengthening of its
institutions. In that regard, my delegation would like to
express once again its appreciation for the work carried
out by Mr. Atul Khare, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste. I should also like
to join preceding speakers in commending Ambassador
Kumalo of South Africa for his efforts on Timor-Leste
in the Security Council.
Thus, France supports a 12-month extension of
UNMIT’s mandate. The mandate should be part of a
medium-term consolidation strategy formulated by the
Secretary-General with a view to gradual Timorese
ownership of tasks currently being performed by
UNMIT. In that context, my country will continue to
support the international community’s efforts to
achieve development and stability in Timor-Leste.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s debate on the
situation in Timor-Leste. We also thank His Excellency
Ambassador Nelson Santos, Permanent Representative
of Timor-Leste, for his informative statement on the
situation in his country.
We had hoped to hear directly today from Prime
Minister Xanana Gusmão via video link, but in the end

08-24762

S/PV.5843

that was not possible. We register our disappointment
that we could not do so. But we are very grateful that
Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, has given us a
comprehensive presentation on the latest events in
Timor-Leste and, in particular, on the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/26).
My delegation is also very appreciative of the
dedicated efforts of the men and women of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
and the entire United Nations team in support of the
people and the Government of Timor-Leste, under the
leadership of Mr. Atul Khare.
I also want to thank you, Mr. President, for
accepting the request of the core group countries that
have been supporting Timor-Leste outside the Council
to come and join in the debate on this issue today. I
think the fact that we have seen representatives of
countries outside the Council come here to present
their views to us on the situation in Timor-Leste, as
they will do later, is an indication that the future of
Timor-Leste matters not only to us, but also to the
United Nations community as a whole. We thank you
for having opened the door for others to participate
here.
Like other delegations, we were shocked to learn
recently that President Ramos-Horta and Prime
Minister Gusmão were attacked on 11 February. We
wish President Ramos-Horta a full recovery so that he
can continue to lead his country on its path to
consolidate democracy and stability. South Africa
would like to reiterate its condemnation of those
attacks in the strongest possible terms. We further
applaud the Security Council for its swift response to
that heinous act, not only by convening emergency
consultations, but also by adopting a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2008/5), which sent the word out
that the Council is watching the events in Timor-Leste.
We also wish to commend Timor-Leste’s
neighbouring countries. Timor-Leste has been blessed
with neighbours that have been there to assist,
especially in its greatest time of need. Those countries
include Australia and New Zealand, Malaysia,
Indonesia, Singapore and others, which reacted when
these events happened. We particularly wish to thank
Australia, which immediately released security forces
that went to assist Timor-Leste in its great hour of
need. We also wish in particular to recall the very

08-24762

strong political statement by the Government of
Indonesia, which also sent out the message that the
attack on the democratic institutions of Timor-Leste
would not be acceptable at all.
The recent report of the Secretary-General on
Timor-Leste is a source of both hope and challenge. On
the one hand, it describes a series of significant strides
achieved, including the successful holding of
presidential and parliamentary elections, the formation
of a democratic Government and the general
improvement of the security situation in Timor-Leste.
On the other hand, the report also highlights, as it
should, some of the key political, security and socioeconomic challenges facing Timor-Leste, including the
issue of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and the
lack of capacity in key Government institutions.
In paragraph 3 of his report, the SecretaryGeneral correctly notes:
“The performance of the Parliament,
Government and other State institutions in TimorLeste reflected progress in policymaking and
active political debate within democratically
sanctioned arenas”.
Despite the persisting differences among political
leaders and parties in Timor-Leste, we are confident
that they will overcome their differences, work
together to address priority needs and cooperate on the
need to move their country forward.
As Mr. Guéhenno reported, the ongoing dialogue
among the leaders of various political parties in TimorLeste, under the leadership of President Ramos-Horta, is
a great step indeed for the future of Timor-Leste. We
reaffirm our support for the continued efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
promote dialogue and reconciliation among parties in
Timor-Leste through inclusive and collaborative
processes. We hope that the meetings of the High-level
Coordination Committee and the Trilateral Coordination
Forum will produce much-needed dialogue and progress
on the key priorities of the country.
As we have stated before, the problems of TimorLeste — particularly those related to IDPs or the
so-called petitioners — cannot be solved by only one
party; they can be addressed successfully only by all
Timorese, working together collectively.
My delegation welcomes the improvement in the
overall security situation in Timor-Leste, owing to the

19

S/PV.5843

collective efforts of the national police force of TimorLeste, UNMIT and other stakeholders. Notwithstanding
that progress, the South African delegation believes that
reform of the security sector remains urgent and
indispensable. Security sector reform should be owned
and led by the Government of Timor-Leste and should
be supported by the international community.
In that regard, the task of rebuilding the national
police force of Timor-Leste remains crucial and is in
the interest of achieving long-term stability in the
country. My delegation welcomes the considerable
progress achieved in the screening and mentoring
process for the national police. South Africa welcomes
the Secretary-General’s intention to send an expert
mission to UNMIT in the first quarter of 2008 to
conduct a thorough assessment of the requirements of
the national police, as well as possible adjustments to
UNMIT in order to improve police skills.
In paragraph 61 of his report, the SecretaryGeneral correctly stresses: “With the manifold
challenges ahead, this is a critical moment for the
United Nations to reaffirm its continued commitment
to Timor-Leste”. We, too, believe that the continued
presence of the United Nations in Timor-Leste is
essential to address the multifaceted challenges facing
the country, including political, institutional and
security aspects.
We wish to thank the Council for having agreed
to extend the mandate of UNMIT for a period of
12 months in order to work in partnership with the
Government of Timor-Leste to strengthen stability,
promote democratic governance and political dialogue
and foster national and social cohesion. UNMIT’s
commitment to Timor-Leste was illustrated in the
successful organization and conclusion of presidential
and parliamentary elections in the country. Now the
hard work remains: the country has to rebuild and
strengthen its own democracy.
Nevertheless, further efforts are needed to focus
UNMIT’s supportive role on other post-electoral
priority areas, including the strengthening of capacities
in the judicial system, support for strengthening
security institutions and support for dialogue and
reconciliation. Equally important, bilateral and
international support would prove invaluable in
capacity-building and in the strengthening of various
sectors of the State.

20

In view of the factors I have just mentioned and
the continued need for Timor-Leste to count on the
support of the international community, in particular
the United Nations system, at this critical stage of its
nation-building process, South Africa strongly supports
the Secretary-General’s proposal. We again wish to
thank the Council for having accepted that the mandate
of UNMIT should be extended for a further 12 months
at the present composition and strength. We also call
upon the broader international community to stay the
course in Timor-Leste.
In conclusion, we encourage the Government, the
political parties and the people of Timor-Leste to
utilize the support and presence of UNMIT. As I have
reminded the people of Timor-Leste, UNMIT’s stay is
not endless. So they must use it to the best of their
ability now. I am glad that the Council has made it
available to them for the next 12 months. We hope that
UNMIT can be there to strengthen democracy and to
help the people of Timor-Leste.
Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
would like first of all to express my gratitude to UnderSecretary-General Jean-Marie Guéhenno and to our
colleague the Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste
for their clear briefings.
I would also like to state that my delegation fully
endorses the statement that will be made shortly by my
Slovenian colleague on behalf of the European Union.
With an eye to the effectiveness of our work, I
will read only part of the text of my statement; copies
of the full text have been distributed.
At this difficult time for Timor-Leste, my
delegation would like to express its full support to it in
restoring stability. We would also like to pay tribute to
President José Ramos-Horta, who has sought by all
means to bring about a negotiated solution. We wish
him a speedy recovery.
Belgium welcomes the fact that, despite this
attack against men who embody the democratically
elected institutions, the Timorese institutions have
continued to operate and provide continuity. In the
past, we have repeatedly underscored how important it
is that the parties present a united front against the
challenges the country is facing. The position of the
parliament and of the opposition is, in this context, to
be welcomed. We welcome the 14 February joint
statement by the heads of all of the political parties, in

08-24762

S/PV.5843

which they condemned together the attacks of
11 February and agreed that the perpetrators must be
arrested and tried.
Last week’s attacks are a tragic illustration of
how essential it is that the recommendations of the
United Nations Independent Special Commission of
Inquiry on the events of 2006 be effectively
implemented. Impunity is not a solution. It is most
praiseworthy that the Timor-Leste authorities sought to
achieve the surrender of Alfredo Reinado and of his
group. Unfortunately, the path of negotiations failed.
Everything must be done to bring about the arrest and
trial of those responsible for crimes of the past. The
fight against impunity is a prerequisite for bringing
about reconciliation and sustainable peace. With
respect to last week’s attacks also, justice must follow
its course.
Other consequences of the 2006 crisis persist;
they call for resolute action from the Government and
for the full support of the international community. The
plight of the petitioners was on the verge of being
resolved. We fully encourage the Government of
Timor-Leste to continue the negotiations that had
begun.
Another of those consequences is the high
number of displaced persons; they represent more than
10 per cent of the population of the country. Beyond
the material considerations, their return to their home
villages is closely tied to a sense of security and justice
with respect to the 2006 crisis.
But we should not focus solely on the
consequences of the 2006 crisis. To avoid any further
risk, the causes of the crisis must also be resolved. One
of those causes, as we know, lies in the weakness of the
institutions, in particular the security sector.
In this framework, the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) needs to continue
with training and monitoring the national police, while
continuing to maintain law and order. We welcome the
fact that the transfer of responsibilities in this area
from UNMIT to the national police has already begun
in a number of neighbourhoods in Dili. Furthermore,
we encourage the Government to make full use of
UNMIT’s expertise with respect to comprehensive
security sector review.
The diversity and multiplicity of the challenges
that the country faces call for renewed commitment by

08-24762

the United Nations. Here, Belgium fully supports the
extension of UNMIT’s mandate for a period of
12 months. We have every confidence that this
renewed presence will be able — and here I quote the
Secretary-General and paraphrase our colleague from
Timor-Leste — “to support Timorese-owned solutions”
(S/2008/26, para. 61).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Panama.
I would like to begin by thanking UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno for his briefing. My
thanks go also to the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), represented by
Mr. Atul Khare, for its efforts, and to South Africa for
its interest, reflected in a variety of actions. The
concern and endeavours of Australia, Indonesia and
other countries of the region during these difficult
times for Timor-Leste are also to be acknowledged.
Today, we recognize the progress made by TimorLeste and UNMIT in 2007. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2008/26) highlights, among other things,
the holding of elections, the security sector reform and
the building of democratic institutions. We could list
other areas of progress.
However, despite the calm that has prevailed in
Timor-Leste following the recent attacks against two
high representatives of the legitimate institutions, the
attacks show that a long road remains to be travelled to
address and remedy the causes of the conflict. We note,
furthermore, that in recent years the members of the
Council have acknowledged the wide range of
activities required to achieve these ends, many of
which do not fall within the traditional concept of
peacekeeping. This is a good time to recognize that
fact. The Charter of the United Nations lays down, as
one the Organization’s purposes, the maintenance of
international peace and security and grants to the
Security Council the prime responsibility for that
function. At the time, the immediate concern of the
authors of the Charter was disputes between States. In
the post-war world that goal of maintaining peace
meant peace between States.
However, a constitutive charter — and the United
Nations Charter is one — should develop in keeping
with the needs of the times, or it ceases to be a living
document and may well become a dead letter. The
Charter should, moreover, be interpreted as a whole. Its

21

S/PV.5843

principles include protection of human rights and
promotion of development. The concepts of peace and
security should therefore be interpreted as something
more than just the absence of war or armed conflict.

Council for its ongoing support for that country. Today
I wish to particularly mention the lead role being
played by South Africa, by Ambassador Kumalo
especially.

The experience of Timor-Leste is an example of
the importance of this conceptual evolution as regards
peacekeeping. UNMIT is not the first time that the
United Nations has sought to tackle problems in that
region. Today, more than ever, it is clear that the
priorities of UNMIT’s future mandate should include
not just the maintenance of peace and security but also
should attend to political, institutional, humanitarian,
human rights and sustainability aspects, because
without them, peace and security will remain elusive.
Consolidating dialogue and reconciliation, deepening
reform of the justice and security sectors, resolving the
problem of internally displaced persons and promoting
economic development are among the various factors
that must be dealt with.

On behalf of my country, I want to again thank
the staff of and contributors to the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) in the
field and Special Representative Khare and UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno and his team here at the
head office for the leadership they provide. I also want
to express my appreciation for the statement today by
my friend Ambassador Nelson Santos, on behalf of
Timor-Leste.

In that context, allow me to support and echo the
statements of Ambassador Urbina of Costa Rica on the
need to build capacity and not dependence. He warned
in particular about the need to strengthen the armed
forces in Timor-Leste as a matter requiring very careful
consideration. The experience of Panama and Costa
Rica runs counter to such a trend.
Lastly, allow me to repeat that this Council
should demonstrate its commitment to Timor-Leste
through efforts to deal with problems and projects in a
cross-cutting manner. In the various areas of its
mandate it should be both flexible and robust and
should present clear goals, sufficient to allow the
Secretariat, as our executive body, to draft clear,
verifiable and immediate goals and eventually to
prepare procedures for an orderly and successful
withdrawal.
I cannot end without expressing our recognition
of the irreplaceable leadership work carried out by
President Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Xanana
Gusmão and expressing our hopes for a speedy
recovery to President Ramos-Horta.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now call on the representative of Australia.
Mr. Hill (Australia): Australia welcomes the
opportunity to participate once again in the Security
Council’s deliberations on Timor-Leste. We thank the

22

Australia deplores the shocking attacks on
President Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Gusmão on
11 February. The actions of the perpetrators represent a
terrible attack on the democratically elected leadership
of one of Australia’s nearest neighbours and underscore
the continued fragility of the security situation in
Timor-Leste. Our thoughts and hopes are with
President Ramos-Horta for his ongoing recovery and
return to good health.
At the same time, Australia congratulates the
Government of Timor-Leste for its careful and
measured approach to the events of 11 February, which
helped to ensure that the situation remained calm in the
immediate aftermath. We call upon the people of
Timor-Leste to continue to embrace peace in these
difficult times.
As the Prime Minister of Australia, the
Honourable Kevin Rudd MP, has made clear, Australia
is a steadfast friend and neighbour of Timor-Leste and
will continue to be at the forefront of international
efforts to assist it to become a stable and more
prosperous nation. During a visit to Dili on
15 February, the Prime Minister made clear Australia’s
commitment to continue to stand shoulder to shoulder
with Timor-Leste and to contribute enhanced assistance
to help provide security and much-needed longer-term
development.
We are supporting Timor-Leste’s security directly
through our leadership of the international security
forces, as well as our contribution of police to the
United Nations police. In meeting that security
responsibility, I want to acknowledge the cooperation
we received from UNMIT and other international
partners. I also want in particular to express our

08-24762

S/PV.5843

appreciation to New Zealand for its continuing
contribution to the international security forces.
As was stated earlier, at the request of the TimorLeste Government, Australia is providing additional
Australian military and police assistance to support
Timor-Leste in response to the events of 11 February.
Australia is also discussing with Timor-Leste a longterm bilateral approach to strengthening Timor-Leste’s
own security institutions, and we look forward to
liaising closely with the United Nations and other
donors in that regard.
As recognized by Ambassador Santos today, the
Government and people of Timor-Leste must take the
primary responsibility for the development of a stable
and more prosperous nation, including through
political and economic reform, development of the
private sector and provision of health services,
education and housing. Australia acknowledges the
continuing commitment of Timor-Leste’s leaders to
addressing those challenges, which Prime Minister
Gusmão has been quick to reaffirm in the wake of the
events of 11 February. Political reconciliation and
support for democratic processes by all political
leaders and others in Timor-Leste will be fundamental
to a secure and prosperous future. That is a challenge
we hope UNMIT can continue to address, although
ultimately it is a responsibility for the leaders and
people of Timor-Leste. Australia recognizes the
important contribution made by UNMIT to supporting
democratic reform and political consolidation in
Timor-Leste.
The events of 11 February emphasize how
important it is for Timor-Leste to continue to work to
strengthen its justice system as a basis for long-term
stability. Any perceptions of impunity for those who
commit crimes threaten to undermine the Timorese
people’s confidence in their justice system. Australia
welcomes the efforts of the United Nations and other
donors to strengthen Timor-Leste’s justice system and
supports the Secretary-General’s recommendation for
continued endeavours in that vital area.
Tackling the challenges of underdevelopment will
be central to stabilizing Timor-Leste’s political and
security environment. During his visit to Dili on
15 February,
the
Australian
Prime
Minister
foreshadowed that Australia was looking to provide
additional support to help Timor-Leste tackle high
levels of unemployment, particularly among youth.

08-24762

Finally, as a key donor to Timor-Leste and
mindful of the broad and complex range of
development cooperation taking place, Australia looks
forward to continuing to work in partnership with the
Government of Timor-Leste and closely with other
donors to ensure a carefully coordinated approach.
It is especially important that the international
community, led by the United Nations, continues to
support Timor-Leste at this time. Australia welcomes
the Secretary-General’s report on UNMIT, which
recommends a 12-month mandate extension with a
continuation of current police levels. A 12-month
extension of UNMIT’s mandate will provide valuable
continuity, certainty and security for Timor-Leste.
Importantly, the next 12 months will provide a valuable
opportunity for Timor-Leste to implement its hard
decisions on the road to reform while it has the support
of UNMIT and the international community.
This will be a critical year for the Government of
Timor-Leste to move ahead to address the challenges
and advance the political, social and economic reforms
to which it is committed. Australia is committed to
continuing its strong support for Timor-Leste during
this difficult but important transition.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Davide (Philippines): The Philippine
delegation commends you, Mr. President, for
convening this open meeting to deliberate on the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2008/26) concerning
developments
in
Timor-Leste
and
on
the
recommendations contained therein. We congratulate
Panama on a successful presidency of the Council. My
delegation also wishes to thank the Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste for his profound
statement and Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guéhenno for his clear presentation of the report of the
Secretary-General.
The Philippines joins other Member States in
condemning in the strongest possible terms the attacks
on the President and the Prime Minister of Timor-Leste
on 11 February 2008. Designed to destabilize the
country, the attacks were inimical to the interests of
Timor-Leste and its people and affected the gains that
have been achieved thus far in Timor-Leste’s journey
towards democracy along the path of justice, freedom,
progress and stability. We are relieved that, despite this
serious threat, Timor-Leste has remained calm and that

23

S/PV.5843

the dastardly act did not achieve its desired objective.
We commend the efforts of the Government of TimorLeste, the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (UNMIT) and the International Security Forces
in preserving and maintaining peace and order in the
country.
This unfortunate incident also underscores the
need for continued engagement by the international
community, particularly by the United Nations, in
promoting peace, order and stability in Timor-Leste.
UNMIT has been performing very well in the
execution of its mandate; it should not be made to
cease carrying out its mandate. It must be pointed out
that all Timorese interlocutors conveyed both to the
Security Council mission that visited Timor-Leste last
year and to the Secretary-General their desire for
UNMIT to remain in the country. Complacency and a
false sense of security must not be allowed to diminish
the need for UNMIT. The gains earlier achieved under
United Nations auspices could have been maintained if
the mission had not been prematurely drawn down a
few years ago. The continuation of UNMIT is
necessary to preserve the gains as well as to support
Timor-Leste in addressing the challenges that lie
ahead. Thus, the Philippines supports the extension of
the mandate of UNMIT for at least 12 months at the
current authorized levels. This 12-month extended
mandate will provide continuity and stability for the
mission and will remove the anxieties to which the
people of Timor-Leste are exposed every time a
mandate is reviewed for a short period of time.
Moreover, the 12-month extension would also provide
troop contributors with adequate and sufficient time to
plan ahead in their deployments.
The Philippines will continue to support TimorLeste’s nation-building efforts. It will endeavour to
improve Philippine troop contributions to UNMIT,
quantitatively and qualitatively, as the situation of the
Philippines allows. As mentioned before, the
Philippines has participated in all United Nations
missions in Timor-Leste from the beginning. The
Philippines is currently the largest contributor of
individual police officers to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and most of those individual
police officers are in the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste, which is the largest police-led
peacekeeping operation the Philippines currently takes
part in.

24

Aside from peacekeeping, the Philippines is also
working with other donors in the area of capacitybuilding, particularly in human resources development.
The Philippines remains ready to explore other areas of
assistance in order to strengthen Timor-Leste’s
capacities and institutions. We urge the international
community to do likewise.
As we proceed to contemplate the next phase of
Timor-Leste’s nation-building efforts, the Philippines
wishes to highlight the following points raised in the
Secretary-General’s report.
First, the Philippines fully recognizes that the
security sector is crucial for the long-term stability of
the country. The events of April and May 2006 and of
this month attest to the need to address problems in this
area. In view of this, the Philippines supports the
continuation of work to comprehensively review the
future role and needs of the security sector within the
framework of the three-tier coordination structure
established in August 2007, which is jointly led by the
President, the parliament and the Prime Minister. The
Philippines also supports UNMIT efforts to strengthen
the Timor-Leste police.
Secondly, the Philippines acknowledges that
socio-economic concerns, particularly poverty and
unemployment, continue to be major causes of
instability in Timor-Leste. It therefore welcomes the
commitment of the Government of Timor-Leste to
address these concerns, as indicated in its 2008 budget.
It hopes that United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and international financial institutions will
work closely with the Government of Timor-Leste in
supporting the implementation of that budget.
Thirdly, the Philippines continues to encourage
dialogue among the political leaders to achieve
national reconciliation and political stability. It is only
through the fostering of political consensus that
differences are resolved without violence and that
cooperation is engendered.
Fourthly, the Philippines strongly stresses the
importance of Timor-Leste’s ownership of the whole
process. The international community should take the
views, aspirations and sentiments of the Government
and the people of Timor-Leste into consideration in any
decision to be taken about their country. The visits of
the Security Council mission in November and of the
Secretary-General in December are commendable

08-24762

S/PV.5843

components of the consultation process. Visits of that
nature should be encouraged.
In conclusion, the Philippines continues to assert
and maintain that Timor-Leste is still one of the best
examples of a successful enterprise made possible
through the combined cooperative efforts of the United
Nations, regional players and other partners. This
success must be nurtured and preserved through the
continuing vigilance and support of the international
community.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I call now on
the representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Ukraine, align themselves with
this declaration.
First of all, let me thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate. I would like also to thank
Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno for his briefing as
well for his frank assessment of the situation. The
European Union highly appreciates the valuable work
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (UNMIT) and in particular that of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for TimorLeste, Mr. Atul Khare. I wish further to thank the
Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste for his
statement today.
The European Union is following the situation in
Timor-Leste with deep concern. The EU firmly
condemns the assassination attempt on Timor-Leste’s
President, José Ramos-Horta, and the attack on the
convoy of Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão. Those
actions only strengthen the EU’s firm determination to
support Timor-Leste’s democratically elected leaders,
its institutions and its sustainable development in order
to protect its future.
There can be no doubt that the perpetrators of the
attacks of 11 February aimed at the core of the
legitimate institutions of Timor-Leste and sought to
create a highly volatile security situation that would
endanger the achievements that Timor-Leste has made
since its independence. It is encouraging and therefore

08-24762

a sign of progress in Timor-Leste’s post-conflict
transition that the Government, the parliament and
major political parties, including the opposition
leadership, responded appropriately to that crisis and
fulfilled their constitutional obligations. It is vital that
Government and opposition stay in close dialogue and
that all Timorese set aside any differences and work
together to address the challenges the country faces
and to create a stable and prosperous future for all the
people of Timor-Leste.
The situation further underlines the importance of
the continued supporting role performed by UNMIT,
and the United Nations police contingent in particular.
The EU also commends the efforts of The International
Stabilisation Force, including its swift action to
provide emergency treatment to President RamosHorta.
As the report of the Secretary-General underlines,
some progress has been observed in terms of a
functioning parliament and other State institutions, but
many critical challenges remain, as a number of the
root causes of the May 2006 crisis have not been fully
addressed. Those include political divisions; weak
institutions,
particularly
the
security
forces;
widespread poverty and unemployment, which is
especially high among the youth; and the key issue of
internally displaced persons.
In his report the Secretary-General mentions
positively the role the international community has
played in supporting Timor-Leste. For its part, the
European Union is determined to continue its active
support to Timor-Leste in facing those critical
challenges, notably through European Community
assistance of over €200 million of ongoing
commitments. The imminent upgrade of our presence
in Dili through a fully fledged European Community
delegation is another sign of the determination of the
European Union.
The European Union supports in particular the
continued work on a review of the future role and the
needs of the security sector and, given the sector’s
importance for long-term stability, encourages the
Government, in close cooperation with UNMIT and the
relevant donors, to implement the security sector
reform plan.
The EU stresses the importance of ongoing
efforts to reach accountability and justice for the events
of 1999 and April and May 2006, and calls upon the

25

S/PV.5843

Government of Timor-Leste to implement the
recommendations of the Special Commission of
Inquiry report.
The European Union fully supports the extension
of the UNMIT mandate for a further 12 months, as
recommended in the report of the Secretary-General.
Such an extension would help ensure continuity in
stabilizing the country further.
While Timor-Leste’s transition is continuing on
the right path, the situation will remain fragile and
volatile if specific challenges are left unaddressed.
There are immediate challenges to face: bringing the
perpetrators of the 11 February attacks to justice;
resolving the petitioners issue; ensuring reconciliation,
accountability and justice for the victims of past
violence, notably for the events of 1999 and the crisis
of 2006; and alleviating the situation faced by
internally displaced persons. There are longer-term
challenges: for the Timorese leadership to agree on a
shared vision of the way ahead; and to build the
capacity of Timorese governance institutions, including
in budget performance, poverty alleviation and jobs
creation.
Ultimately, success in Timor-Leste is for the
people of Timor-Leste to achieve. The European
Union, along with the United Nations and other
international partners, stands ready to assist the
Timorese Government and its people in the critical
challenges they face in building the capacity of State
institutions, in order to further consolidate peace and
democracy in Timor-Leste.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Banks (New Zealand): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the situation in Timor-Leste,
Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno for his briefing
and Ambassador Santos for his statement this morning.
I join others in expressing New Zealand’s deep concern
at the recent attacks in Timor-Leste on the President
and the Prime Minister. We wish President RamosHorta a quick and full recovery.
We commend the people, Government and
parliament of Timor-Leste, the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and the
International Stabilisation Force (ISF) for their initial
responses to the attacks. We emphasize the importance
of continued close cooperation between the

26

Government, UNMIT and the ISF over security
operations, in accordance with established procedures.
Thankfully, Timor-Leste’s two democratically elected
leaders survived the attacks, but the attacks have
underscored how fragile Timor-Leste continues to be
and how easily recent progress could have been
undone.
New
Zealand
strongly
supports
the
recommendation by the Secretary-General to renew the
mandate of UNMIT for a further 12 months. It is
important for the United Nations to demonstrate its
sustained commitment to Timor-Leste, both for
practical reasons and for the reassuring message this
will send to the people of Timor-Leste. New Zealand
contributes personnel to both UNMIT and the ISF, and
we will continue to do so.
New Zealand welcomes the progress that has
been made by the Government of Timor-Leste, in
particular the successful conduct of national elections.
We commend the efforts of UNMIT in assisting TimorLeste towards those achievements. We recognize,
however, as others have today, that a number of serious
issues remain unresolved, including the future of the
security forces, the internally displaced persons
situation, Reinado’s supporters and the petitioners.
Furthermore, Timor-Leste will need the long-term
support of the international community to overcome
the challenges of poverty, unemployment and fragile
institutions.
New Zealand supports maintaining police
numbers at current levels because we recognize that,
while there has been improvement in the overall
situation, it does remain fragile. The presence of the
United Nations police is an important deterrent to a
return to violence. UNMIT needs the capacity to fulfil
its two primary roles: to provide security, and, at the
same time, to support the durable reform and
rebuilding of the police force through capacitybuilding and training. Both roles are equally important
to future stability in Timor-Leste. Close attention is
needed to the skills sets of United Nations police
officers and the way in which those officers’ skills are
utilized. New Zealand hopes that the upcoming visit by
the Police Adviser of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations will help in identifying ways to strengthen
the United Nations police, including reviewing the
process for the handover of police posts to the National
Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL) to ensure that
PNTL is fully ready to assume those responsibilities.

08-24762

S/PV.5843

New Zealand continues to believe that security
sector reform is essential for ensuring long-term
stability in Timor-Leste. UNMIT has a critical
supporting role to play. New Zealand strongly
encourages UNMIT to step up its efforts to engage
with Timor-Leste to find a suitable approach to
supporting them in institutionalizing and strengthening
Timor-Leste’s security forces. A single coherent plan
that all stakeholders are committed to would help to
ensure a sound and enduring outcome to that process.
There are many other areas in which UNMIT and
the international community need to assist Timor-Leste
to help the young country stand on its own.
Strengthening the justice sector is a high priority.
Every effort needs to be made to counter perceptions of
impunity. In that regard, it is important that all the
recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry into
the events of April and May 2006 are fully
implemented.
Addressing the multifaceted challenges of
underdevelopment and poverty must also be pursued in
parallel with those other efforts. New Zealand will
continue to assist through its bilateral and multilateral
programmes.
New Zealand stands ready as a regional partner
and friend of Timor-Leste. We continue to offer our
support and encouragement to the leaders and people
of Timor-Leste and to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Atul Khare, and the UNMIT team.
New Zealand remains committed to working with the
international community in assisting Timor-Leste. We
thank the Security Council for its ongoing support and
for the leadership of South Africa in that respect.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): Japan strongly condemns
the recent attacks on President José Ramos-Horta and
Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão, which sought to
obstruct Timor-Leste’s nation-building processes
through violence. Resorting to violence is
unacceptable. We wish President Ramos-Horta a
speedy recovery. I also take this opportunity to thank
Special Representative Mr. Atul Khare and his team in
the field for their dedication in the difficult conditions.
Since the Security Council extended the mandate
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (UNMIT) last year, Timor-Leste conducted two

08-24762

elections successfully and the parliament completed its
first budgetary process through constructive dialogue
among all parties. It was gratifying to observe the
country recovering from the setback of the 2006 crisis
and moving steadily towards democratic governance.
Therefore, that makes it all the more regrettable
to witness the unlawful attacks on the democratically
elected leaders of the Government. At the same time, it
is highly commendable that the Government responded
promptly to the emerging situation in an effective
manner, in accordance with the constitution, and that
the people remained calm and maintained public order.
This is clear evidence that the efforts for nationbuilding have made solid progress.
The report of the Secretary-General points out
that there are areas for improvement in order to realize
sustainable stability. And, as last Monday’s incidents
indicate, the situation in Timor-Leste is still fragile.
Timor-Leste requires continued support on the part of
the international community, and UNMIT plays the
primary and indispensable role in this. Therefore,
Japan supports a decision by the Security Council to
extend the mandate of UNMIT for another 12 months.
Rebuilding a professional national police force is
an essential step towards restoring confidence in the
Government. We are pleased that UNMIT has
successfully completed the screening process for all
registered officers. The Government and UNMIT have
begun discussing the possibility of a phased transfer of
police responsibility to the National Police Force of
Timor-Leste (PNTL).
We commend the readiness of the PNTL to
assume more responsibility for the security of their
own country. The transfer of responsibility, of course,
has to be carried out after careful evaluation of the
PNTL’s level of capability and of the trust of the
people and the community. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s intention to send an expert mission to
UNMIT to assess the requirements of the PNTL and
possible necessary adjustments to the composition of
UNMIT.
Japan is committed to supporting every effort for
peacebuilding and development in Timor-Leste. Japan
attaches great importance to advancing international
efforts to support peacebuilding activities in postconflict countries. This commitment was reaffirmed in
the recent statement by Prime Minister Fukuda and by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Koumura. They

27

S/PV.5843

both emphasized that Japan must play a responsible
role in the international community as a peacefostering nation, and expressed the hope that Japan will
become a focal point for the world to gather knowledge
and experience in peacebuilding and to train
peacebuilding professionals.
It is for this reason that Japan is extending
support for peacebuilding efforts around the world and
has launched a pilot programme to train peacebuilding
experts in Japan and other Asian countries. Japan will
continue to make the utmost efforts in fulfilling its
responsibility as the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
The consolidation of peace entails steady
economic recovery and development. Peacebuilding
challenges should be tackled in a holistic manner.
While we support the extension of the UNMIT
mandate, it is essential to always keep in mind the
importance of the peacebuilding element in TimorLeste.
In order for Timor-Leste’s recovery to be more
successful, the donor base will have to be broadened so
that the country can benefit from a wide range of
international support. In particular, we should put high
priority on creating job opportunities for young people
and on promoting the economic activities of the private
sector.
Japan has stood by the Government and the
people of Timor-Leste and will continue to do so and to
demonstrate solidarity and support for the country’s
efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr.
Salgueiro
(Portugal):
Thank
you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guéhenno for his very comprehensive assessment and
his extremely accurate analysis of the situation in
Timor-Leste. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Nelson Santos for his presentation and to thank
Ambassador Kumalo for his keen interest and helpful
leadership on matters related to Timor-Leste.
Portugal concurs with the statement which the
representative of Slovenia has just made on behalf of
the European Union.

Allow me, first of all, to reiterate our
condemnation of the attacks against President José
Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão and
to express our best wishes for the prompt recovery of
the President of Timor-Leste. The recent events
illustrate once again, and in a dramatic way, the
vulnerability of Timor-Leste. However, despite these
regrettable actions, the situation throughout the
country, for the time being, remains quiet.
We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Atul Khare, and all the staff of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) for their tireless and invaluable dedication to
the overall security and stability of the country.
Effective action should be taken to capture the
perpetrators of the 11 February attacks. At the same
time, a thorough investigation of the events is urgently
required.
In the current circumstances, we encourage the
Government, the political parties and the people of
Timor-Leste to redouble their efforts to consolidate
democratic governance and the rule of law. Political
consensus is essential for resolving a number of key
issues. The situation of the estimated 100,000
internally displaced persons (IDPs) is one of those
issues. We reiterate that it is essential to ensure the
return of the IDPs and their resettlement in their
original communities. Furthermore, it is important that
the situation of the nearly 600 petitioners of the TimorLeste defence force be resolved in a peaceful manner.
We also believe that justice is a key element for
long-lasting national reconciliation. That is the reason
why Portugal strongly supports the ongoing efforts to
obtain accountability for the events of 1999 and of
April and May 2006, along the lines recommended in
the report of the Independent Special Commission of
Inquiry.
Portugal has a consistent standing bilateral
commitment towards Timor-Leste and is a leading
donor in a large spectrum of areas, including
governance, public administration, justice, education
and security sector reform. Additionally, we are
strongly committed to UNMIT, contributing with a
formed police unit from the Portuguese gendarmerie,
and we actively support the mandate of UNMIT in all
areas.
Since August 2006, UNMIT, in partnership with
the Government of Timor-Leste, has sought to foster

28

08-24762

S/PV.5843

stability, promote democratic governance, political
dialogue and social cohesion. It is in this context that I
think it is worth noting that the presidential and
parliamentary elections held in 2007 were steps in the
right direction in the process of consolidating
democratic institutions in Timor-Leste.
Rebuilding the National Police of Timor-Leste, in
particular continuing the screening and mentoring
processes, is an important factor that can contribute to
the long-awaited normalization to which the people of
Timor-Leste aspire. In the meantime, a continued
UNMIT police presence is needed to ensure law
enforcement until the National Police is fully
reconstituted.
Therefore we welcome the Secretary-General’s
intention to send an expert mission to UNMIT in the
near future in order to conduct a thorough assessment
of the capabilities of the National Police and to suggest
possible adjustments to the UNMIT police component.
The continued presence of the United Nations in
Timor-Leste is essential in helping to address the
challenges facing that country, in full respect for
Timorese choices. Portugal strongly supports the
extension of UNMIT’s mandate for a further 12-month
period, in order that the work for the consolidation of
peace, democracy and development in Timor-Leste can
be adequately sustained.
The Chairman (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me start by addressing
to Ambassador Nelson Santos our continued pledge of
solidarity and support.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Marie Guéhenno for his comprehensive
presentation on the situation in Timor-Leste and Mr.
Atul Khare and his staff for their dedication in
assisting the Timorese Government.
To Ambassador Kumalo, we extend our
appreciation for his leadership in conducting the work
of the core group.
Brazil strongly condemned the attacks against
President José Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister
Xanana Gusmão on 11 February. President Lula has
conveyed his heartfelt wishes for a swift and full
recovery to President Ramos-Horta, and today I
reiterate those wishes.

08-24762

The attacks on the heads of State and
Government of Timor-Leste represent an assault on the
democratic institutions of the country. Brazil rejects all
forms of violence as a method to settle political
differences and reaffirms that only through democracy
and dialogue can true reconciliation be achieved. We
are confident that the Timorese Government, with the
valuable assistance of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), will succeed in
maintaining public order and stability in the country.
The exemplary manner in which the institutions and
the people of Timor-Leste responded to the events of
11 February are praiseworthy.
The United Nations has been playing a pivotal
role in the reconstruction of Timor-Leste by providing
assistance in several key sensitive sectors, including
security. We believe that the United Nations should
continue its work in Timor-Leste as long as its
presence is required by the Timorese Government in
order to consolidate a democratic State and a selfsustaining society. In that regard, Brazil fully agrees
with the recommendation made by the SecretaryGeneral that the mandate of UNMIT be extended for
one year.
In spite of the many challenges that Timor-Leste
still faces, important progress has been made in many
areas, such as strengthening democracy and human
rights. As mentioned by Mr. Guéhenno and
Ambassador Nelson Santos, recent efforts conducted
by President Ramos-Horta to promote reconciliation
and ensure an inclusive participatory environment are
of crucial importance and should be pursued further.
We commend the advances made in rebuilding
Timorese institutions, especially the police and the
judiciary. UNMIT has been able to perform the
mandated task of ensuring law enforcement, while also
increasing efforts to support the training and
institutional development of the national police. As the
events of 11 February may suggest, however, further
efforts may be necessary in order to ensure general
public security.
Many pressing issues remain. The plight of the
100,000 internally displaced people that have to be
integrated into society constitutes a serious
humanitarian challenge. It also represents a political
and security concern. That issue requires immediate
attention and a coordinated effort involving national
actions as well as international support.

29

S/PV.5843

Brazil is fully committed to Timor-Leste’s longterm development and stability. The two countries, Brazil
and Timor-Leste, have strong ties that go beyond a
common language. With over a dozen bilateral
cooperation programmes currently in force, Brazil has
been assisting Timor-Leste in such areas as education,
justice and security. President Ramos-Horta and members
of his cabinet, including Minister Zacarias da Costa, paid
an official visit to Brazil on 30 January. On that occasion,
both heads of State reiterated the shared goals of
intensified cooperation between the two countries. One
concrete example is the planned training programme for
Timorese prosecutors; another relevant initiative is the
establishment of a working group to elaborate a draft
military penal process code and military penal code for
Timor-Leste. During President Ramos-Horta’s visit,
Brazil also announced a new phase of the training course
for the military police in Timor-Leste. A third interesting
project that combines security and social development is
highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report. The two
Governments signed a memorandum of understanding by
which vocational training will be provided at Becora
Prison. It will help inmates to develop trade skills that
may prove important to their reintegration into society.
The establishment of a training centre for prison staff is
also envisaged.
The Brazilian Government believes that long-term
stability in Timor-Leste requires a sound and
comprehensive development programme. As underlined
by the Secretary-General, there are high expectations in
the Timorese population that solutions will be found to
numerous challenges facing the country, including
poverty, unemployment and other socio-economic
problems. Brazil is determined to be part of a vigorous
collective effort, bilaterally and through UNMIT, to assist
the Timorese in overcoming such challenges.

30

The President (spoke in Spanish): I call on
Mr. Guéhenno to respond to the questions posed.
Mr. Guéhenno: At this late hour, I just wish first
to place on record the gratitude of the United Nations
for the strong commitment of the international
community to Timor-Leste, which has been so much in
evidence during this meeting.
We greatly appreciate
the support of the Security Council. We greatly
appreciate the support of the neighbours and of all
those nations that have spoken this morning and that
are so critical to the provision of security as well as
development aid to Timor-Leste.
I noted during this meeting how many speakers
stressed the importance of political dialogue and
consensus in Timor-Leste. Indeed, that dialogue was
spearheaded by President Ramos-Horta himself during
those meetings of 17 January and 7 February that I
mentioned in my briefing. Such political dialogue
really is the foundation for the solution both of the
short-term issues that we have discussed this morning,
such as the internally displaced persons, the petitioners
and the fugitives, and of the longer-term challenges,
such as security sector reform, the strengthening of the
judiciary, and also, of course, as many speakers have
stressed, the socio-economic challenges facing TimorLeste. It is therefore very encouraging to see such a
strong consensus here on what is needed in TimorLeste to continue our partnership with that country.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

08-24762
