United Nations

S/PV.5099

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

5099

th meeting
Monday, 13 December 2004, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Baali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Algeria)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Adechi
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Muñoz
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Akram
Mr. Baja
Mr. Dumitru
Mr. Denisov
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Danforth

Agenda
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 30 of resolution
1546 (2004) (S/2004/959)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-64307 (E)

*0464307*

S/PV.5099

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 30 of resolution 1546 (2004)
(S/2004/959)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, its is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sumaida’ie
(Iraq), took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultation, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Ashraf Qazi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Qazi to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
30 of resolution 1546 (2004) (S/2004/959).
At this meeting the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Ashraf Qazi, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Iraq, and Mr. John
Danforth, representative of the United States, on behalf
of the multinational force.

2

Mr. Qazi: The report before you is the second
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution
1546 (2004), paragraph 30. I trust that you will find it
to be in large part self-explanatory. I will therefore
confine myself to a few remarks.
The forthcoming election represents a test of the
new political order and of the transition process in
Iraq. The Iraqi people have yet to be given the
opportunity to assert their political rights through the
ballot box. While there is clearly a widespread desire
among Iraqis to participate in the elections, some
important segments of the population still feel
alienated or excluded from the political transition.
The overall security situation remained difficult
during the reporting period. Violence of all types,
much of it extreme in its brutality and indiscriminate in
nature, has disrupted a significant portion of the
country. Daily reports of insurgent, terrorist and
criminal activities and of military and security
operations graphically illustrate the fragility of the
situation. The chief victims are, as always, the civilian
population.
From our contacts with almost all sectors of Iraqi
society, we are convinced that violence is abhorrent to
the overwhelming majority of the Iraqi people. They
demand a way out of this situation through the
establishment of a government that demonstrably
enjoys the assent of the majority of the population.
This desire to find political solutions to political
problems is by and large shared by all Iraqis, with the
exception of a few irreconcilable extremists. The vast
majority, including those who have so far chosen to
remain outside the political process, understand that
the long-term consequences of violence seldom if ever
meet expectations and are most often very counterproductive to the achievement of desired goals.
Over the past three months, the United Nations
has actively continued its efforts to engage in dialogue
with a wide spectrum of Iraqi opinion, including those
outside the political mainstream, with the aim of
understanding their needs and aspirations and
encouraging them to enter the political process.
Equally, we have continued to encourage those parties
that comprise the Iraqi Interim Government to intensify
their efforts to reach out to the widest possible range of
Iraqi opinion, since an inclusive process is the best
guarantee of a successful transition.

S/PV.5099

My colleagues and I have tried to impress upon
all our interlocutors that the forthcoming elections
must provide a platform for the expression of all
shades of Iraqi political opinion and allow for the
adequate representation of Iraqis of all backgrounds,
whether ethnic or religious, or members of civil society
and independents. To its credit, the Interim
Government has made efforts to reach out to alienated
elements and is continuing to do so. It needs every
encouragement to increase its efforts in this direction;
the success of the transition depends to a great extent
on them.
Because the future Transitional National
Assembly will also be the constituent assembly, it must
be seen as sufficiently representative by all
constituents of the Iraqi polity. Equally, for those
opposition elements who claim to have a substantial
base of political support, there can be no better
opportunity to demonstrate that support than by
participating in the forthcoming elections. Accordingly,
there is no alternative to an inclusive and successful
national election.
Free and fair elections conducted by an
independent electoral commission have so far not been
part of Iraqi political life. This is why it is so important
that, despite the challenging security environment,
Iraqis make every effort to avail themselves of this
opportunity to participate in the forthcoming elections.
Those who choose to opt out of or seek to undermine
such a transforming process do neither themselves nor
their country any favour. The self-restraint and
accommodation exhibited with regard to certain
opposition groups, and their subsequent decision to
eschew violence and participate in the political
process, show that peaceful political alternatives are
always available.
At the same time, it is a fact that political opinion
remains very polarized. Along with the general
insistence that elections be held as scheduled by the
Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq (IECI),
there have been calls from some quarters for the
boycott of elections. Others have called for the
postponement of elections to allow time and
reconciliation efforts to heal the wounds of recent
events. It is imperative that every effort be made to
promote dialogue, compromise and reconciliation
among all Iraqis in order to bring about a more secure
environment. Otherwise, there is a real danger that the

political transition process will be impeded, rather than
facilitated.
A successful transition will also be facilitated
through
sustained
regional
and
international
engagement with the Iraqi Interim Government and
with representatives of the spectrum of Iraqi civil and
political opinion. The Sharm El Sheikh Conference in
late November brought together key regional and
international actors, and the subsequent meeting of
regional interior ministers in Tehran built on the
consensus reached at Sharm El Sheik. The Sharm El
Sheik and Tehran communiqués should help to bring
about a regional environment conducive to Iraq’s
transition. Political outreach efforts inside Iraq, as well
as growing regional cooperation with respect to Iraq,
offer the best prospect for an improved political and
security environment and a successful transition in
Iraq.
I am optimistic that the Interim Government and
the people of Iraq are willing and able to successfully
negotiate the transition to a united, democratic and
prosperous Iraq. Despite its current problems, Iraq
possesses the human and material capital to rebuild
itself. Moreover, the support of the international
community to Iraq’s political and economic
reconstruction was again reaffirmed in October at the
Tokyo meeting of the International Reconstruction
Fund Facility. The Paris Club has decided to
significantly reduce Iraq’s external debt burden, and it
is hoped that other creditor nations will follow suit.
Substantial resources have been used to mitigate
emergency and rehabilitation needs, as well as to
support the work of the Independent Electoral
Commission of Iraq. Additional economic support can
be expected as Iraq succeeds in advancing its political
transition.
The potential of Iraq remains its surest hope of
success. That is why the United Nations is in Iraq,
despite many constraints. We are and shall remain
sensitive to the expectations that Iraqi people have of
the United Nations. We are determined not to
disappoint those expectations and aware of the
important role the United Nations has in facilitating a
transition process that answers to the aspirations of
Iraqi people.
The next year will see many challenges and
opportunities: the election of a Transitional National
Assembly, a constitutional referendum and a general

3

S/PV.5099

election under the new constitution. It will be all the
more important to have wider and deeper consensus in
the international community, particularly in this
Council, in support of the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and UNAMI to implement our mandate under
resolution 1546 (2004) to the fullest extent possible, as
circumstances permit.
With the Council’s support, the Secretary-General
and I remain committed to doing our utmost to help
promote peace, stability and development in a united
Iraq.
Mr. Danforth (United States of America): Today,
I will provide the Security Council with an update on
the situation in Iraq, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1546 (2004). This oral report will
summarize the more detailed written report that we are
releasing today.
First, on behalf of the multinational force, I thank
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
for their report which we found to be thorough and
encouraging. Also, I express thanks to the members of
the United Nations team working on the Iraqi elections.
While the security situation in Iraq remains difficult,
the increase in United Nations staff and support is
essential to Iraq’s political transition process. The
United Nations presence is critically important to
successful elections next 30 January and beyond, and
to economic development and reconstruction.
The multinational force consists of over 150,000
troops and support personnel from over 30 countries. It
remains in place at the invitation of the Iraqi
Government with the goal of contributing to security
and stability and of assisting the Iraqis in building a
democracy. The force, in conjunction with the Iraqi
Government and international and national nongovernmental organizations, provides extensive
humanitarian assistance and highly specialized
reconstruction resources. And, of course, the force
works aggressively to isolate and neutralize those who
threaten the security of the Iraqi people. Members of
the force continue to work bravely and tirelessly
alongside their Iraqi counterparts to combat terrorism,
destroy weapons that threaten Iraq’s stability, gather
intelligence and wage combat operations against
insurgents and terrorists. While the opponents of peace
and security are tenacious, the multinational force has
made progress in creating conditions that will allow for
free and fair elections and a transition to democracy.

4

Multinational
force
units
devoted
to
reconstruction and public welfare repair bridges, ports,
roads and railroads. They construct and repair schools,
hospitals, post offices and other public buildings
throughout Iraq. They provide medical treatment and
vaccinations for civilians. Multinational force units
devoted to security have continued to dispose of
thousands of tons of ammunition and mines that could
otherwise be used by insurgents to destabilize the
Government.
Resolution 1546 (2004) welcomes ongoing
efforts by the Interim Iraqi Government to develop its
own security forces. The multinational force is helping
to build this capability through the recruiting, training,
equipping and mentoring of Iraqi security forces. The
Iraqi security forces — which include the police,
border enforcement, army, national guard, intervention
force, special operations force, air force and coastal
defence force — currently number roughly 116,240
trained and equipped people, almost three times the
number of troops from the last reporting period. While
the trends are positive, much work remains before
Iraq’s forces can take full responsibility for the
country’s security.
Until Iraqi forces are fully trained and operational
and insurgents cease terrorizing the country, security
will remain a serious concern. In the months since our
last report to the Council, we have witnessed
significant attacks against the multinational force and
the Iraqi people with small arms and rocket-propelled
grenades, mortars and explosive devices. Insurgents
have attacked Iraqis who work for their Government,
as well as workers from outside the country, in efforts
to disrupt the rebuilding of the country.
The multinational force understands United
Nations concerns about the safety of its brave and
dedicated people and is committed to providing
security for the growing United Nations staff in Iraq.
As we provide that security, we urge the United
Nations to put additional personnel on the ground.
Additional United Nations support is essential to the
future of Iraq, and especially to the success of next
month’s elections.
Resolution 1546 (2004) authorized a distinct
entity to provide security for United Nations personnel
in Iraq. In its absence, United States troops have done
that work. We are encouraged that several
Governments have recently confirmed their intent to

S/PV.5099

contribute to the distinct security entity authorized by
the resolution, and we are hopeful that the group will
be operational by January 2005, in time for the
elections. Also, the United Nations is taking important
steps to provide for its own security by including a
substantial formed guard unit and personal security
details for its personnel. Security for the United
Nations in Iraq will be a key issue for some time, and
we urge donors in the strongest possible terms to step
forward with donations of forces and finances.
It is with great hope that we anticipate Iraq’s
elections on 30 January. The elections will be not the
end of a process, but rather a beginning — an
important step in the development of a democratic
nation. With perseverance and a steadfast commitment
to the effort, and with a strong partnership of the Iraqi
people, the multinational force and the United Nations,
a free and democratic Iraq will emerge from the
tyranny and terrorism that have plagued the country for
so long. That day will be a great one for Iraq, for the
United Nations and for the world.
A longer, written version of this report will be
provided for circulation as a document of the Council.
Mr. Sumaida’ie (Iraq): I wish to thank the
Council for granting my request to address it today. I
note with satisfaction that this is the second time in a
row that Iraq has been invited to speak at an open
briefing on its current affairs. That is both natural and
fair. I look forward to continuing to be at the disposal
of the Council whenever it deliberates matters
concerning Iraq. Such dialogue is helpful and will not
fail to be productive.
The Secretary-General has presented to the
Council a comprehensive report on the situation in Iraq
and on the United Nations involvement in it. On the
whole, it represents a fair evaluation and contains a
welcome reaffirmation of values and goals set out in
resolution 1546 (2004) and, more recently, by the
international conference on Iraq held in Sharm
el-Sheikh. Whilst we agree with most of the report,
there are parts which require some reflection and
comment.
Few issues now before Iraq loom larger than the
upcoming elections set for 30 January 2005. The
Transitional Administrative Law sets out a process
designed to lead to a system of democratic Government
with checks and balances such as Iraq has not
previously known. The elections are a key step in that

process. The raison d’être of the Iraqi Interim
Government is to guide Iraq through that stage of the
political process and to ensure the holding of elections.
In the next stage an Iraqi transitional Government will
draft a permanent Constitution and oversee the next
elections, which, pursuant to that Constitution, are to
be held by 15 December 2005, with the new
Government assuming office by the end of 2005. That
is an ambitious schedule, but Iraqis need, and
overwhelmingly desire, a legitimate Government and a
return to normalcy as soon as possible.
My Government is obviously fully aware of, and
preoccupied with, the current security situation. But we
believe that we have a legal and political obligation to
the people of Iraq — an obligation that we intend to
discharge and, to the extent possible, to do so on time.
In that the Transitional Administrative Law and
resolution 1546 (2004) stipulate the timetable for
elections and the great majority of the people of Iraq
want and expect them to take place as planned, to
postpone them might be seen as giving in to the
terrorists, whose goal is to wreck the political process
and prevent elections from ever taking place.
The Secretary-General’s report refers to those
who have called for a boycott of elections. It also
states:
“While a number of parties and other entities
have announced their support for the elections to
be held as scheduled, others have announced that
they might boycott the elections. This underlines
the urgent need to promote consensus on this
important issue within the broader framework of
the challenge of national reconciliation.”
(S/2004/959, para. 10)
Reading that, one might get the impression that
those who are calling for a boycott of the elections are
as numerous as those who want to participate. That is
far from being the case. Moreover, if by the word
“consensus” we mean unanimity, then we are setting
ourselves an impossible task. Having said that, we are
fully aware of the need for national reconciliation,
which will be pursued vigorously. There are indeed
some groups and individuals who have arrogated to
themselves the right to speak on behalf of whole
communities within Iraq. Yet, there is no reason to
suppose that they speak for any sizeable contingent of
Iraqis. They are, of course, entitled to their views. As
long as they do not resort to violence to enforce them,

5

S/PV.5099

they are encouraged and welcomed to take part in the
political process.
There is no reason to believe that those calling
for a boycott will be heeded by any sizeable segment
of Iraq’s population. Boycotts have failed in other
countries transitioning to democracy. Iraq is unlikely to
be an exception in that regard. Given the opportunity,
Iraqis will turn out in large numbers to participate in
the first free elections of their lives.
Any risk to the election and its credibility and
inclusiveness is likely to come not so much from a
boycott but from the campaign of violence and
intimidation that is being directed at the general
population in order to thwart the election. The
Government is doing its utmost to combat that and to
reduce the effects of that campaign of terror to a
minimum, while safeguarding the rights of all citizens
to express their will freely. In that we shall need
continued help from all concerned; and we shall need,
and insist upon, help from our neighbours.
The report of the Secretary-General notes that the
security situation in Iraq has deteriorated in some
places, although it also notes that there is relative calm
in most areas of Iraq. It indirectly criticizes the use of
force to dislodge terrorists from Fallujah. Yet it offers
no alternative that has not already been tried for
months, to no avail. The report takes note of, and
commends the Interim Government of Iraq for, efforts
to reach out to, and engage, groups willing to talk. But,
despite all such efforts, we have witnessed increased
audacity and brutality in the targeting of Iraqi children,
women and men for wholesale massacre. The Interim
Government of Iraq concluded that those responsible
for those atrocities were not interested in negotiating
and that those who were in dialogue with the
Government were incapable of delivering an end to
violence. The strategy of the Interim Government of
Iraq therefore had to be to deprive terrorists intent on
destroying the transition process of any safe haven in
Iraq. No responsible Government could do anything
else.
The discoveries made in Fallujah during recent
military actions vindicate the Interim Government of
Iraq. We found in Fallujah no less than 203 major
weapons caches, 11 factories for improvised explosive
devices and three slaughterhouses for captives and
hostages. Is the Government supposed to stand by
while the inhabitants of Fallujah, foreign aid workers

6

and the rest of the people in Iraq are terrorized and
murdered? Without law and order there can be no
Government, and without Government only chaos and
more misery can ensue. I have here a map showing the
locations of all the places to which I have referred. We
can make available detailed photographs of those finds
to anyone interested in them.
The encouraging result of its intervention in
Najaf earlier this year provides further vindication of
the Interim Government of Iraq’s firm policy. Much to
the relief of the inhabitants of Najaf and Sadr City,
general calm now exists and reconstruction
programmes are in place that involve the communities
themselves. The report itself provides evidence of that.
Using large-scale military force in any city
cannot be a preferred option by any responsible or
compassionate Government. It becomes a duty,
however, if it is the only way to save a whole nation
from greater suffering and to secure its future.
With regard to the United Nations participation in
assisting us to prepare for elections, we welcome the
Secretary-General’s decision to increase the number of
elections workers in Iraq. But the increased numbers
are still not enough, and we are concerned that that
shortfall might adversely affect our preparedness for
elections. We wonder how it is that the United Nations
can play the leading role mandated by resolution 1546
(2004) if it remains largely insulated from the people.
The phrase “as circumstances permit” should not
become a mantra, repeated to justify insufficient
presence on the ground in Iraq.
The Secretary-General’s report is quite candid
about the fact that much of the work of the Special
Representative occurs within the confines of the
international zone or remotely, in foreign capitals,
rather than where it is needed, namely, throughout Iraq.
The preferred mode of interaction with Iraqi officials
seems too often to be video-conferencing or telephone
calls from outside Iraq — or, indeed, through letters
that inevitably find their way to the press. We believe
that not only elections preparations but also vital
humanitarian and developmental work can be greatly
enhanced through direct contacts in Iraq between
United Nations officials and their counterparts in the
Interim Government of Iraq and in the provinces.
Despite the relative peace and stability there, there is
even a dearth of United Nations workers in northern
and southern Iraq. It is hoped that steps will be taken

S/PV.5099

urgently to build up the United Nations presence in
those regions of Iraq. This is an area in which progress
should be possible quite quickly. We also urge a quick
replacement for former Deputy Special Representative
and Humanitarian Coordinator, Mr. Ross Mountain.
The Interim Government of Iraq commends
Special Representative Ashraf Qazi for his efforts,
given the constraints within which he works.
No one can forget the tragic and heroic sacrifice
of United Nations workers on 19 August 2003. Yet, in
the limited time we have left before elections, it is
critical for the United Nations to bolster its presence
and intensify its activities in Iraq.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that we agree
generally with the report of the Secretary-General. We
greatly appreciate all the efforts made by him and his

colleagues to help Iraq. The Secretary-General’s report
states that
“A mutually reinforcing dynamic between a
credible political process and an improving
security situation offers the best hope for
achieving the goal of a stable, durable and
democratic transition.” (ibid., para. 8)
We totally concur, and we would add a third
factor, namely, resuscitating the economy. In all this,
help from the United Nations and the international
community is indispensable.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I should now like to invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

7
