S/PV.8100

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8100th meeting

Tuesday, 14 November 2017, 11.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cardi/Mr. Lambertini. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Clay
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2017/911)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-38015 (E)
*1738015*

S/PV.8100

Kosovo

The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2017/911)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite Ms. Vlora
Çitaku to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/911, the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tanin.
Mr. Tanin: At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and Italy on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I am happy to
join this meeting today.
The most recent reporting period is well covered in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/911) that we are
reviewing today. In addition, I will brief the Council on
recent significant developments that have taken place
since the end of the reporting period.
On 19 October, municipal elections were conducted
throughout Kosovo — the second Kosovo-wide local
elections since the agreement of 19 April 2013 on the
principles of the normalization of relations between
2/22

14/11/2017

Belgrade and Pristina. It was therefore the second time
that the four Kosovo Serb-majority municipalities in
northern Kosovo had participated in such elections.
Those elections saw a strong turnout, particularly in the
Serb-majority areas throughout Kosovo. They provided
the population of Kosovo the opportunity to select their
most immediate leaders and thus to express their views
on their political priorities, as well as the performance
and the delivery of the major competing parties. More
than 7,000 candidates competed across Kosovo.
A significant increase in Serb participation occurred
in the Serb-majority municipalities. The average
turnout in those municipalities was 43.4 per cent, which
can be compared with around 38 per cent in 2013. In the
four northern municipalities, the difference was even
more pronounced: a turnout of 44 per cent compared
with 24 per cent turnout in 2013. The European Union
(EU) deployed some 100 observers across Kosovo on
election day while the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe facilitated the voting in the
northern municipalities. Both organizations praised the
generally peaceful and orderly conduct of the elections.
However, the EU observers also stressed that, in the
Kosovo Serb-majority municipalities, the campaign
was affected by restricted competition and intimidation.
As I reported in August (see S/PV.8025), the
multiple election processes this year in Kosovo
produced a period in which few decisions could be
undertaken with the necessary authority in Pristina.
With the runoffs for mayoral elections scheduled for
19 November and the electoral process now nearing
completion, I am hopeful that this will soon change.
Some signs warrant cautious optimism. On 31 October,
the new Assembly of Kosovo, passed a second reading
of the Kosovo budget, despite the narrow majority
held by the Government. The Serb caucus and the
cabinet of the Prime Minister collaborated to achieve
that result. Meanwhile, we see signs of movement on
other particularly important social and economic issues
that have repeatedly been delayed during the lengthy
elections period.
This leaves the question of what lies ahead. During
the past three months, I have had the opportunity to share
views on the situation with a variety of interlocutors, in
Pristina, in Belgrade and more widely. I would like to
underline the fact that all sides generally share the view
that the state of affairs between Belgrade and Pristina
has the potential to evolve beyond the unfortunate longstanding impasse.
17-38015

14/11/2017

Kosovo

On 24 October, 40 new judges and 13 new State
prosecutors from the Serb community were sworn
into office in Kosovo — a significant step in the
implementation of the first EU-facilitated agreement.
These judicial officials will work as part of a unitary
Kosovo justice system, and staffing and logistical
arrangements are also under way, with support from all
the international presences in Kosovo, including from
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). The parties are to be commended
for moving this forward. The judicial area had lagged
notably behind other implementation achievements,
such as police integration and implementation of
technical steps in the telecommunications and
utilities spheres.
However, it is equally important to note that overall,
the implementation of agreements achieved in 2013,
and even earlier, continue, at best, to be sporadic and
variable. Within the framework of the EU-facilitated
dialogue, technical implementation needs more
meaningful commitment from both sides. The most
obvious gap continues to be the lack of progress
towards the implementation of the agreed association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities.
Considerable headway has already been made,
and the EU-facilitated dialogue in Brussels remains
crucial as a core element in a wider process. Alongside
that endeavour, the European Union’s Berlin process,
addressing the future enlargement potential of the
European Union, has also progressed. Having begun at
a 2014 Western Balkans summit, it has been followed
by meetings in 2015 in Vienna, 2016 in Paris and 2017
in Trieste. Its strength lies in the inevitable conclusion
that economic growth, peace and prosperity depend on
the quality of relations among neighbours, the creation
of a beneficial space of connectivity and the prospects
for multifaceted interaction. My own discussions with
leaders in Belgrade, Pristina and Tirana have convinced
me that each of these important centres shares the same
understanding of that principle.
In relation to the Belgrade-Pristina political
dialogue, which has suffered from a long hiatus, what
I can say today is that both sides are well aware of
its importance and its potential during the coming
year. To that effect, informal consultations with
European Union facilitators have taken place over
several months, most importantly with the EU High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
Ms. Federica Mogherini.

S/PV. 8100

Signs of political will and commitment to move
forward seem increasingly evident. Populations are
understandably frustrated by the lack of opportunities
brought on by unresolved political mistrust and
tensions. With the end of the election cycle, the time
for action now moves ahead of the time for excuses.
In many practical areas, political bickering and the
failure to fully implement technical agreements place
unacceptable burdens on the population. As one
example, excessive administrative obstacles continue
to discourage travel and commerce, despite agreements
which purported to alleviate such impediments.
Allow me to offer another example, which has
arisen during the past few days. In accordance with its
mandate, UNMIK has continued to do everything within
its authorized powers to support the implementation of
the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA),
which UNMIK signed on behalf of Kosovo in 2006. In
practice, Pristina representatives working on CEFTA
issues attend all CEFTA meetings. UNMIK’s basic
participation has always been in accordance with legal
statutes. Despite these facts, some actors have recently
sought to repoliticize, through public rhetoric, those
otherwise highly practical, functional and beneficial
arrangements. Permit me, in this forum, to be very
clear. UNMIK participation continues strictly to
the extent required by CEFTA members to ensure
its functionality, which in turn supports economic
opportunity throughout the region. UNMIK will
equally support any agreement reached by CEFTA
Members which would allow them to work effectively
together. In our view such arrangements are best
achieved through discussions among those concerned,
not through the media.
I have previously taken note here and commended
President Vučić’s initiative for internal dialogue on
Serbia’s stance towards the Kosovo issue. I have also
taken note that Prime Minister Edi Rama in Tirana
has stated that such internal examinations will not be
lost in Tirana or Pristina either. These forward-looking
positions do a real service to the people, as they seek
to address the facts head on. Despite the many looming
global challenges, leaders in the European Union have
also made focused engagement in the region a priority.
All parties now need to play their part as well. That is
the thesis upon which the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue
rests. It is important that the potential for embarking
on a sustainable peace process not be hindered by
inflexibility or simple inaction.

17-380153/22

S/PV.8100

Kosovo

While dialogue and other diplomatic initiatives
can provide a new basis for peacebuilding, serious
work to address pressing and immediate issues also
needs urgent attention in Pristina. The much-needed
provision of economic and employment opportunities,
the need to counter public corruption and ensure public
accountability at all levels and, perhaps above all,
fighting organized criminality are crucial objectives.
Our mission in Kosovo is to work primarily at the
grass-roots level to support the impulse of people to
pursue the benefits of cooperation and reconciliation.
We apply the funds available to us to support groundlevel initiatives that shape the future and perspective of
the post-conflict generation in Kosovo. Talent knows no
boundaries of gender, ethnicity or political affiliation.
We find energy within this new Government, which
is already taking new steps to work in a multi-ethnic
partnership. We find it in region-wide initiatives to
remove the scourge of political interference in the
delivery of justice and the rule of law. We find it in the
bold initiatives being undertaken by all to fundamentally
examine the issues that will allow the Western Balkans
to continue to advance their European aspirations.
Our attention has also been focused on issues
that require more emphasis and are essential for
reconciliation and the rebuilding of trust. Those include
initiatives to engage women in the political process, help
bring attention to the untold stories of those targeted
during the time of conflict, promote the role of youth
in peace and security, and do more to resolve the cases
of many persons who are still missing from the war.
We stand in open partnership with all Governments
to address those issues. Likewise, we recognize the
immense challenges of ensuring the freedom of cultural
and religious identity in the fight against extreme and
close-minded views, which are a threat and plague not
only in our area, but throughout the world at present.
UNMIK continues to play its role in working
towards a closer partnership with all international
presences on the ground and with all actors engaged,
particularly at a time when we are witnessing new
dynamics emerging in the region. The final objective of
the Mission remains clear. With the Council’s support,
we will achieve sustained peace and the opportunities
it provides to individuals to fulfil their aspirations and
their potential.
The President: I thank Mr. Tanin for his briefing.
4/22

14/11/2017

I now give the floor to Mr. Dačić.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation
provided by the delegation): I would like to thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres and his Special Representative,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for their submission of the report
before us (S/2017/911) and their overall engagement in
the realization of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
under resolution 1244 (1999). I also thank the President
and members of the Security Council for recognizing the
importance of the continued review and consideration
of the issue.
UNMIK’s presence in Kosovo and Metohija
in an undiminished scope and under an unchanged
mandate as a guarantor of the status neutrality of the
international presence is of paramount importance to
promoting security and stability and to building trust
between the communities of Kosovo and Metohija.
Strengthening its financial and human resources will
enable the international community to comprehensively
and sustainably assess and address the problems
and challenges facing the Serbian and non-Albanian
populations every day.
The political situation, given its sensitivity in
Kosovo and Metohija, has a major impact on building
trust and confidence among its communities. Therefore,
UNMIK’s undiminished presence ensures the necessary
security and provides guarantees and impetus to
Serbs and non-Albanians to involve themselevs in the
processes initiated by the Brussels Agreement, without
fear for their future or the future of their families.
The fact that 18 years after the arrival of the
international presence in the province, some 200,000
internally displaced persons (IDPs) who were forced to
flee Kosovo and Metohija continue to live in Serbia,
outside the province, is a powerful argument that
UNMIK’s scope should not be changed. Sustainable
return has been achieved by only 1.9 per cent of IDPs,
and I am sure that the Secretary-General will agree that
that is one of the key questions that UNMIK should
accentuate in the future. I would also point out, however,
that the number of IDPs in Kosovo and Metohija cited
in the report does not adequately reflect the magnitude
of the problem and does not call for the commensurate
attention of the Mission.
A number of structural shortcomings in the
institutional and judiciary systems of Kosovo and
Metohija are noted in the report. Those shortcomings
17-38015

14/11/2017

Kosovo

have
negative
consequences
for
vulnerable
communities, primarily regarding the protection of the
rights of the Serbs and other non-Albanians in the south
of the province and the rights of returnees, as well as
the process of reconciliation among communities.
The negligible number of returnees is due to the
failure to bring to justice offenders who have incited
racial, ethnic and religious hatred and intolerance,
ongoing institutional discrimination against Serbs, and
ethnically motivated restriction measures, including
arbitrary arrests. In particular, instances of arrests
executed on the basis of trumped-up charges in the
south of the province testify to the general physical and
legal insecurity. Such measures seek to enable usurpers
to take possession of property by illegal means.
The report of the Secretary-General should therefore
accord attention in a separate section to the violation of
human rights and freedoms of the returnees to southern
Kosovo and Metohija. UNMIK must invest additional
efforts in strengthening all its capacities in order to
ensure the necessary level of protection of the human
rights and freedoms of internally displaced persons,
and to create optimum conditions for sustainable
returns, including through the restitution of property
or, put simply, the guarantee of property rights.
The report notes that no progress has been made
with regard to the implementation of the ruling of
the Kosovo Constitutional Court, confirming the
ownership by the Visoki Dečani monastery of the
surrounding land. The monastery, which features on
the UNESCO World Heritage List, was founded in
the first half of the fourteenth century by the Serbian
King Stefan Dečanski. It has been vandalized many
times in the past, including by adherents of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. The report also draws
attention to other disputes related to the property of the
Serbian Orthodox Church. Those issues provide ample
evidence of the importance of the protection of Serbian
historical, cultural and religious heritage that is part of
the invaluable heritage of Europe and the world.
The international community should also make
additional efforts to establish a society in Kosovo and
Metohija in which the rule of law is respected, in which
conditions are created for effective, impartial and
credible trials of war criminals, and in which the fate
of missing persons is clarified, thereby contributing to
the process of reconciliation among communities. As
the legal framework for prosecuting perpetrators of war
crimes in the Specialist Chambers has now been fully

S/PV. 8100

put in place, we expect that those suspected of carrying
out crimes against Serbs and other non-Albanians in
Kosovo and Metohija will be indicted and tried.
Serbia continues to be firmly committed to dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, facilitated by the
European Union. Despite the many doubts, secondguessing and challenges encountered on the way, Serbia
has demonstrated great resolve to find compromise
solutions, which are not always simple or easy to
come by. That constructive approach is evinced by the
implementation by our side of a number of obligations
assumed in the dialogue, including the recent integration
of judges and prosecutors into the judicial framework
of the province. Serbia’s commitment to resolving all
outstanding issues peacefully and through dialogue is
motivated first and foremost by its strong conviction
that there is no alternative to such an approach and that
only within a status-neutral framework is it possible to
contribute to regional peace, security and stability, as
well as to the region’s progress towards integration into
the European family of nations.
Our responsible approach has also been reaffirmed
by the bold political decision of the representatives
of the Serbian list to enter Ramush Haradinaj’s
Government after the parliamentary elections. The
decision once again confirmed the political unity of the
Serbs of Kosovo and Metohija and the perpetuation of
the constructive policy of protecting their status and
interests. Explaining their decision, the representatives
stated that the conditions in which they decided
to participate in the Government of Kosovo were
very clear. They pointed to the need to protect the
interests of Serbs and their central demands for the
establishment of the association/community of Serbmajority municipalities, the protection of property and
the guaranteed return of IDPs.
Regrettably, the efforts made by Serbia to find
realistic, status-neutral and mutually acceptable
solutions through compromise have not been
reciprocated by the other side, particularly with respect
to implementing the agreements that have been reached
thus far. Let me point out in that connection that, even
four and a half years after the obligation to establish
the community of Serbian municipalities was assumed
as the key part of the first agreement of principles
governing the normalization of relations, no progress
has been registered in its implementation. Surprisingly,
no mention is made of that fact in the report. For us, the
establishment of the association/community of Serb-

17-380155/22

S/PV.8100

Kosovo

majority municipalities is the most important question
and a cornerstone of the protection of the interests of
the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija.
I take this opportunity to call on the representatives
of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in
Pristina to demonstrate goodwill and commitment to
dialogue and to proceed to establish the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities without
delay — in other words, to implement the obligations
they have assumed and carry out the most important
element of the Brussels agreements of 2013, which
was signed by me in my capacity as Prime Minister of
Serbia, by Catherine Ashton on behalf of the European
Union, and by former Prime Minister Hashim Thaçi.
This confirms the credibility of the statement made
by Ramush Haradinaj, to the effect that there is no
alternative to dialogue and that direct talks must occur
between peoples and not the political elites.
The stalemate in the dialogue accounted for
the emergence of a whole range of problems in the
implementation of the agreements. Pristina continues
to violate the provisions of the agreement on official
visits and without a valid reason banned entry into
Kosovo and Metohija to Serbia’s Minister of Education,
Science and Technological Development, Mr. Mladen
Šarčević, and the Director of the Office for Kosovo and
Metohija Marko Ðjurić. In addition, the problems in the
sphere of freedom of movement and integrated border
management continue. Internally displaced persons
are treated inadequately by being requested to provide
additional personal data, while their passports, issued
by the Coordination Directorate of the Ministry of the
Interior of the Republic of Serbia, are not recognized
when they attempt to enter the province.
Motivated by a desire to find a lasting solution to
the question of Kosovo and Metohija, the President of
Serbia Aleksandar Vučić has called on the citizens of
Serbia to embark on an internal dialogue, which was
institutionalized by the establishment of a working
group. A long-term solution is a precondition of
Serbia’s progress and that of the entire region. We need
a serious, responsible and forward-looking approach in
our relations with Pristina, and we are ready to offer
a soluton that would contribute to regional stability,
political cooperation and economic prosperity. Rather
than be a cause of new divisions, misunderstanding and
conflicts, it will provide an opportunity for a historic
agreement with the Albanian community of Kosovo
and Metohija.
6/22

14/11/2017

I therefore take this opportunity to call on Security
Council members and Pristina’s representatives to
make a joint effort to focus on substantive issues and
on the quest for a lasting and sustainable solution for
Kosovo and Metohija rather than on technical aspects,
such as the dynamic and format of Security Council
meetings. Calls to change the long-standing modality
of informing the Security Council and States Members
of the United Nations about this important issue, at a
time when we are trying to find a lasting solution for
this problem, can only create new divisions within the
Council and deepen the differences between Belgrade
and Pristina. They counterintuitive and not conducive
to the creation of a constructive atmosphere for the
continuation of dialogue.
Serbia’s efforts are aimed at protecting, in a
legitimate way, its national and State interests and at
asserting the authority of international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and resolution 1244 (1999), which
guarantee Serbia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Any attempt to resolve any issue in Belgrade-Pristina
relations unilaterally is unacceptable and may negatively
affect the implementation of obligations assumed in the
dialogue. In that context, I stress the disapproval of my
country and of the international community of efforts
to establish a Kosovo armed force. Such unilateral acts
by Pristina are fraught with the potential to destabilize
the security situation in the region and threaten the
process of normalizing relations between Belgrade
and Pristina.
At the same time, Pristina’s efforts to promote its
unilateral declaration of independence by applying
for membership in international organizations and,
by the same token, of politicizing their work have
been denounced by many countries, including some
that have recognized the unilateral declaration of
independence. I take this opportunity to thank them
for standing firm in the defence of international law
in order to emphasize that the only right thing to do
in this international context is to discourage Pristina
from seeking admission to international organizations
and to focus on a good-faith dialogue as the only way
to resolve all issues. It is also worth mentioning in that
connection that recent events have shown that States
can and do backtrack and renounce their recognition
of Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of independence. Sao
Tome and Principe and Suriname have proved that it
is possible.
17-38015

14/11/2017

Kosovo

Before I conclude, let me take this opportunity to
recall that Serbia has warned for the past 10 years of
the danger of unilateral acts and drawn attention to the
fact that recognition of Kosovo’s unilateral declaration
of independence may open a Pandora’s box of many
other separatist and secessionist movements around the
world. Regrettably, we have seen this happen of late.
Serbia condemns each and every attempt to declare
independence unilaterally in the strongest terms and
unequivocally supports the principle of the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of all States.
In conclusion, I express special thanks to States
that have not recognized the unilateral declaration of
independence of Kosovo for their principled position
and their respect for resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Çitaku.
Ms. Çitaku: As always, I am honoured to be here
in the Council on behalf of the Republic of Kosovo,
although, I must admit, I fear we are not showing the
Chamber the respect it deserves when we come here
every three months, taking members’ valuable time, to
stage a theatre for purely domestic consumption. The
intention is to somehow artificially instil the idea that
the status of Kosovo is not resolved, and that Kosovo
is akin to a war zone where minorities are expelled
and persecuted.
That is simply not true. Furthermore, that is
offensive not only to us Kosovars but, frankly speaking,
to the United Nations and its agencies, which have put
so much effort into reviving Kosovo in the immediate
aftermath of the terrible war of 1999. Hundreds of
thousands of refugees and hundreds of thousands of
internally displaced persons returned to their homes to
find everything in ashes. But we had much more than
only hope and determination; we had the help of the
United Nations, and for that we will be forever grateful.
Therefore, for us, this Chamber is too important and
too valuable to see it being misused in a projection
of images that do not match reality. Our northern
neighbour insists on projecting an alternative universe
where time has not moved a second since the 1990s.
Kosovo is free and independent, and that will never
change. A steep price was paid for it. On that cold day
in February 2008, we knew that our struggles would
continue and that there would be twists and turns. But
the clock of history is not going backwards. Regardless
of the difficulties, we will never give up our aspiration to

S/PV. 8100

make Kosovo an equal member of the family of the free
nations of the world. We are not asking for shortcuts;
we are just asking for fair treatment. We believe that
it is fair to ask for the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to be redefined to match the reality on the ground.
UNMIK is not a peacekeeping mission, Kosovo is at
peace and there is no conflict to be contained or civilians
to be protected. UNMIK is not an administrative
mission; Kosovo has its institutions. Did its mandate
not expire more than a decade ago? Although the main
purpose of the Council has been to maintain stability
in Kosovo, the Council has not pronounced itself since
2008, when we gained our independence. Instead, it
prefers to continue with routine reporting and keeps
a Mission that reinvents its mandate without any real
need, when we should be talking about downsizing and
withdrawing the United Nations Mission in Kosovo in
the light of the situation on the ground.
In less than six months, Kosovo organized both
national and local elections. The turnout was especially
high in the Serb-majority areas. The new Government,
with Mr. Ramush Haradinaj as Prime Minister, was
voted in on 9 September. It is important to note that
according to international observers, both electoral
processes met the highest international standards,
with the exception of few Serb-majority areas where
the local population was subjected to different kinds
of pressure and intimidation to vote in a certain
way. Often, Belgrade officials were responsible for
such intimidations. In fact, I can say that the only
Government that exercises pressure on the local Serbs
is the one that sits in Belgrade.
Yes, there is discrimination against minorities in
Kosovo, but it is of a positive nature. Kosovo institutions
have gone to great lengths to accommodate the rights
of non-majority communities. In today’s Government,
the Serbian community is represented by one Deputy
Prime Minister, three Ministers and six Deputy
Ministers. As the saying goes, we have put our money
where our mouth is. Between 2008 and 2017 alone, the
Kosovo Government has spent over €51 million for the
repatriation and reintegration of minority communities
in Kosovo; that is a public record.
However, I must reiterate that the claim that
200,000 Serbs were displaced from Kosovo after the
war is factually incorrect. If that had been the case,
there would be no single Serb living in Kosovo today.

17-380157/22

S/PV.8100

Kosovo

According to the census organized in 1991 by the thenYugoslav authorities, the number of Serbs living in
Kosovo was 194,000. Unfortunately, to date we still do
not know the accurate number of the Serbs living in
Kosovo. That is because when the Kosovo institutions
organized a census in 2011, the Government of Serbia
unleashed a very aggressive campaign to discourage
the participation of the Serb community. The smear
campaign went so far as to label registration for the
census as an act of betrayal. For us, it is not about
numbers. Even if just one Kosovo Serb cannot return,
that is one too many for us.
At the same time, we must also remember that not
all Serbs that fled Kosovo after the war were actually
citizens of Kosovo. When the war erupted in Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, entire neighbourhoods were
built in several locations in Kosovo to accommodate
Serbs who used to live in those parts of the former
Yugoslavia. Some decided to stay in Kosovo, as was
the case of the Marević family, which came to Kosovo
in July 1995. One member of that family was a minister
of the local Government in the previous Government of
the Republic of Kosovo.
In addition, in line with our Constitution, dual
citizenship is allowed. Kosovo Serbs who are also
citizens of Serbia have a constitutional right to vote in
the Serbian parliamentary and presidential elections.
In the absence of a Serbian embassy in Kosovo, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
mission administers the process. According to data
from the last two rounds of elections, 106,094 voters in
Kosovo were eligible to vote. Obviously, the numbers do
not match up. Either the Serbian Election Commission
inflated the number of Serbian voters in Kosovo or
the number of Serbian displaced persons is inflated.
We will get the full picture only when we organize the
next census, and we will spare no effort to create better
living conditions for all Serbs who decide to return.
It is regrettable that at a time when we should
be concluding the dialogue with Serbia, its political
representatives persist with their hatred and unacceptable
declarations, followed by all sorts of attempts to rewrite
history, including by choosing war criminals, such as
General Ljubiša Diković, who committed war crimes in
Kosovo, to teach cadets at the military academy. What
is a man who is responsible and convicted for the death
of thousands, including children, the rape of thousands
of women and the deportation of hundreds of thousands
8/22

14/11/2017

going to teach young Serbians today? In the words of
the Human Rights Watch official Fred Abrahams,
“this is a dangerous refusal of the truth about the
war. It is the same as if we were to appoint a thief
to protect our banks”.
Again, I do not mention this because I want to
talk about the past; I am raising this point because I
simply see no way to build peace and reconciliation
if we deny the truth or bury it. Furthermore, if our
neighbour declares victory because we are not able
to join INTERPOL this year, it is not only wrong, but
also irresponsible. We all know that the challenges we
and the rest of the world face are borderless, and that
they can be won only if we share information and work
together. From terrorism to cyberthreats, we cannot
win by excluding Kosovo and declaring that a victory.
Quite the opposite is true.
Again, we are not giving up. I believe that Kosovo
will soon secure its place within all the relevant
international bodies, in coordination with our partners.
That would not be a victory of Kosovo over Serbia; it
would only be a just victory over the unjust, and the
right and smart thing for the international community’s
investments for peace and stability in the region. The
host country of this year’s meeting of the INTERPOL
General Assembly did not allow members of the
Kosovo delegation to obtain visas, which was another
unnecessary obstacle that our shaped final decision to
withdraw our application this year.
Meanwhile, in Kosovo just yesterday, five members
of the non-majority communities — Serbs — were
promoted to higher officer ranks in the Kosovo security
forces. As President Thaçi stated during the promotion
ceremony, “once again the Kosovo security forces show
that it is a force in the service of all citizens of Kosovo
and in every corner of Kosovo”. Kosovo’s army will be
exactly the same — a modern, defensive army that will
reflect Kosovo’s desire to join the Euro-Atlantic family.
We will do our utmost to make that process as inclusive
and consensual as possible, but no one will have veto
power over it.
Furthermore, after many years of unnecessary
delays, we can now say that Kosovo’s Constitution and
Kosovo’s laws can now be applied throughout Kosovo’s
territory, since 40 new judges and 13 new prosecutors
from northern Kosovo took an oath of office on
24 October. That is important not only in constitutional
terms but because, after many years of being denied
17-38015

14/11/2017

Kosovo

S/PV. 8100

justice, Serbs living in northern Kosovo will finally
start receiving the services that they deserve from their
own State.

not only at peace with itself but also prosperous and
at peace with its neighbours. That is a dream worth
fighting for.

I want to assure everyone here that Kosovo remains
strongly committed to dialogue with Serbia, and I
reaffirm that we will implement all the agreements
reached in Brussels, in line with our Constitution. It is
true that our electoral processes have caused us some
delays, but our commitment remains. We know better
than anyone what happens when we stop talking to each
other, even if we disagree. However, we do not want
a farce, or a process conducted merely for the sake of
obtaining compliments or favours for anyone. We want
a genuine process that will lead to the full normalization
of relations between the two States.

The President: I now give the floor to the members
of the Security Council.

I would like to add that Kosovo’s independence
is not a product of a secessionist movement but of the
dissolution by consensus of the former Yugoslavia.
We had borders long before we had statehood. Besides
that, there was international intervention in Kosovo
to stop ethnic cleansing. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission was deployed in Kosovo,
and President Martti Ahtisaari was appointed by the
Secretary-General to head a United Nations-led process,
proposing an initially supervised independence for
Kosovo. The International Court of Justice then issued
a ruling clearly stating that Kosovo had not broken or
violated any international law, and that its case was sui
generis. Any attempt to draw a parallel between Kosovo
and other situations around the globe will fail.
As we approach the tenth anniversary of our
independence, we have a lot to be proud of. Just
last week, for example, the World Bank announced
that Kosovo is among the top 10 global economies
displaying the most notable improvement in carrying
out business reforms. Nonetheless, we are fully aware
that we have much more to do in order to meet the
rightful expectations of all people in Kosovo. They
deserve better education, better health care and more
opportunities to prosper. Our young people deserve
that as they make us increasingly proud every day with
their selfless dedication and accomplishments. With
little or no institutional support, our young women and
men are becoming shining examples and inspirations.
They have taken Kosovo to the Olympics, bringing
home gold medals from competitions ranging from
mathematics to judo and raising our flag in places
where politics still cannot land. We owe it to them and
to future generations to leave behind a Kosovo that is

Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to thank
Mr. Tanin, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his informative briefing and continued
service. I also appreciate the statements made by First
Deputy Prime Minister Dačić and Ambassador Çitaku.
As an Ambassador to the United Nations residing
in New York, I have one important lesson in mind when
attending any Security Council meeting, which is that
we should conduct discussions based on the realities on
the ground and, when appropriate, call for measures
to be taken. The Council should always pay attention
to developments on the ground. One such is that the
local elections held throughout Kosovo were conducted
in a fairly peaceful manner, including in areas with
Serb majorities, despite some challenges, and that the
new Government of Kosovo, formed in September,
is embarking on a smooth political administration
transition. Another is that Kosovo has long faced a
number of challenges, including the need to create jobs,
expand foreign direct investment, normalize relations
with Serbia and demarcate its border with Montenegro.
The Government therefore has no time to waste in
squarely facing those challenges.
Another important reality is that the risk of
violence in Kosovo is far lower than in other regions on
our agenda, such as the Middle East and Africa. Since
its establishment in 1999, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has
greatly contributed to the development of self-governing
democratic institutions and ensuring the conditions for
peaceful and normal lives for the citizens of Kosovo.
Today Kosovo has its own Constitution, democratic
Government and parliament. UNMIK is undeniably a
success story for the Security Council.
At the same time, the Council has the responsibility
for determining UNMIK’s future. The Mission must
be reviewed so that we can assess which functions
and mandates it alone can provide. We must address
UNMIK’s possible duplication of the rule-of-law
activities of the European Union (EU) and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
and consider a physical reduction of UNMIK personnel.
In addition, an adjustment to the briefing cycle is long

17-380159/22

S/PV.8100

Kosovo

overdue. A half-year cycle or longer is more than
sufficient. Japan very much hopes that the Council
will discuss UNMIK’s future functions and make the
necessary decisions calmly.
Of course, while almost 10 years have passed
since Kosovo gained its independence, the realities in
Kosovo are far from rosy. The crucial issues include
reconciliation between Kosovo’s Albanian and Serb
communities, which is far from complete, and the
normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia.
In that connection, Japan welcomes the oath taken by
Serb judges and prosecutors and their integration into
Kosovo’s justice system last month, in accordance
with the agreement between the two leaders in the
EU-facilitated dialogue in August. The Government of
Kosovo must now accelerate the establishment of the
long-awaited association/community of Serb-majority
municipalities in order to honour the 2013 agreement
on the subject with Serbia.
Regarding the relations between the two sides,
Japan appreciates President Vučić’s recent remarks on
his commitment to a final resolution of the conflict, and
we have taken note of the commencement last month
of an internal dialogue. The environment for dialogue
between the two sides on their status has been gradually
improving, thanks in part to the call by President Thaçi
of Kosovo for an internal dialogue as well. Japan hopes
very much that with the assistance of the EU, the two
sides will succeed in normalizing their relations in the
near future through high-level, serious dialogue, while
promoting tolerance and refraining from provocative
ethnic rhetoric.
In conclusion, Japan is confident that Kosovo
will achieve reconciliation among its ethnic groups
under democratic governance, and sustained economic
growth by exploiting its abundant natural resources and
facilitating a predictable business environment. Japan
fully supports Kosovo’s efforts to that end, as well as
its aspirations for European integration.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and the
Ambassador of Kosovo for their briefings.
France welcomed Kosovo’s formation of a new
Government on 9 September in the wake of the
legislative elections, which were held on 11 June and
monitored by a large number of international observers.
10/22

14/11/2017

The establishment of new institutions is an essential
step in enabling Kosovo — which France fully supports
in both its national capacity and as a member of the
European Union (EU) — to meet its challenges and the
needs of the Kosovan people. The municipal elections
are now taking place, and the first round, held on
22 October, was an overall success. We hope that the
second round will also go well, free from attempts at
intimidation, particularly in the Serbian municipalities,
as the European Union Election Observation Mission
has highlighted.
France supports the new Prime Minister’s desire
for reform, particularly in the area of economic
development and its corollary of job creation, as well as
improving health care and the education system. We also
welcome the unanimous ratification on 4 October of the
agreement between Kosovo and the European Union
on the disbursement of financial assistance from the
EU. Kosovo’s political and economic institutions have
been consolidated in recent years, and that significant
progress, particularly on the security and economy
fronts, is reason to continue adjusting the work of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo and coordinating it with the other international
stakeholders in Kosovo. Changing nothing is not
acceptable, considering that it is our responsibility, as
members of the Security Council, to ensure that United
Nations resources are fully adapted to the situation
on the ground. Kosovo no longer needs peacekeeping
efforts per se, so we should therefore review how we are
spending those resources.
France firmly believes that the future of Kosovo
will be shaped by the political dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina conducted under the auspices of
the European Union, which has been very clear about
this. For both Serbia and Kosovo, rapprochement with
Europe is conditional on normalizing relations between
the two countries. In that respect, it is important
that the parties show good faith and a willingness to
engage with each other at the highest level. The recent
meetings of the Presidents of both countries convened
by Ms. Mogherini, the High Representative of the
European Union, at which both sides emphasized their
willingness to resume the dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade, are positive signs in that regard. We have
also noted with interest the initiative of President Vučić
to launch an internal dialogue on Kosovo in Serbia.
Beyond the declarations of intent, from now on
we expect that all the agreements reached in 2013
17-38015

14/11/2017

Kosovo

S/PV. 8100

and 2015 will be effectively implemented as soon as
possible, so that meaningful progress can be made in
fully normalizing relations between the two parties.
In that regard, we welcome the integration of Serbian
staff into Kosovo’s judicial system that took place on
24 October. France fully supports the mediation efforts
led by the European Union and its High Representative,
Ms. Mogherini. We urge the Kosovo and Serbian
authorities to step up their efforts to produce concrete
results in that regard. Each side must do its part by
adopting a constructive attitude and refraining from
any provocations that could jeopardize the stability
of the region. We also stress the importance of efforts
to promote reconciliation and closer ties within and
between communities.

function. Despite the periodic meetings held in Brussels
by the EU in which senior officials from both sides take
part and which are intended to show that the format is
still strong, no work is being done on substantive issues
and there are no prospects of reviving the dialogue. It
is telling that the executive structures in Pristina that
previously provided technical support for the talks have
been dismantled. We took note of the idea expressed
by President Vučić of Serbia at the trilateral meeting
in Brussels on 31 August with regard to launching a
discussion of the long-term prospects for relations
between Serbs and Albanians and ways to resolve them
on a sustainable basis. We have heard no response to
that initiative from either the Kosovo-Albanian side or
the EU mediators.

In conclusion, further efforts to consolidate the
rule of law in Kosovo must remain a priority. That is
a particularly firm European demand and one that we
support. Whether this issue is one of administrative
capacity-building, justice or of combating corruption
and organized crime, much remains to be done. Fighting
radicalization in all its forms must also continue to be a
priority. We therefore commend Kosovo’s unconditional
commitment to this issue, both at the local level and in
the international coalition against Da’esh.

We believe that the formation of a so-called
Government in Kosovo in September is a clear
illustration of the degree to which the situation has
deteriorated and the extent of the radicalization in the
province. The choice for the majority was between
Ramush Haradinaj, who has been implicated in war
crimes, and the ultranationalist Albin Kurti, who
advocates the establishment of a greater Albania.
That only emphasizes the fact that Kosovo is not
only not a fully fledged State but that it is a source of
instability with the potential to lead to a relapse into
ethno-religious conflict in the Balkans and the collapse
of the entire regional security system.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and we share
his serious concerns about the status quo in Kosovo.
We thank Special Representative Tanin and his team
for their efforts and objective briefing on the activities
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), which make it clear that there are
persistent, deep-rooted problems in the province that
require urgent resolution as well as monitoring by the
international community.
We do not share Ms. Çitaku’s optimistic, rosy
assessments. Incidentally, I would like to let her know
that while it is kind and even touching to hear her
concerns about the time at our disposal, she need not
worry about that. I would like to say to her that she
does not need to worry about our time — the time of the
Security Council — as we indeed do have much to say
about what is going on in the province. Unfortunately,
we have been compelled to conclude that the process of
settling the situation in Kosovo has utterly stagnated.
The dialogue between Belgrade and Kosovo under
European Union (EU) auspices has essentially ceased to

We are compelled to note the lack of progress in
the relations between Belgrade and Pristina. The EUled dialogue has for many months been at a conceptual
dead end. Clearly, the parties view its essence and its
ultimate aims in different ways. That is first of all the
result of the biased mediation of Brussels, encouraging
the Kosovo Albanian leadership to take hostile steps
that are poisoning the atmosphere of the dialogue and
undermining mutual trust. The European partners are
playing into the hands of the Kosovo Albanians by
attempting to shift the blame onto the Kosovo Serbs
for the slow pace of implementation of the agreements
that have been reached. However, a key item in those
agreements is the one on establishing an association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities, which
Pristina has been cynically sabotaging since April 2013.
We trust that following the conclusion of the
second round of municipal elections, scheduled for
19 November, the Kosovo Albanian authorities will
no longer have any pretext for dragging their feet in
dealing with these protracted issues. The pace of

17-3801511/22

S/PV.8100

Kosovo

the process of the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons to the province is as slow as ever, as
is the work of clarifying the fate of missing persons. It
is clear that individuals of non-Albanian ethnicity fear
for their safety and see no possibility of resolving their
property-related issues.
The oppression of the Serbian Orthodox Church
persists. Despite the decisions of every Kosovo
authority, including judicial ones, affirming the
property rights of Visoki Dečani with respect to its
adjacent land — which, I would like to recall here,
is a UNESCO World Heritage site that is listed as
threatened — the leadership of the municipality has not
complied with them. What kind of trust can there be in
Kosovan justice after that, especially given the backlog
of court cases — approximately 350,000 — mentioned
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/911)?
The fact is that the project known as the Republic of
Kosovo is clearly not working.
Another area where no progress has been made
is the investigation into the war crimes committed by
the Kosovo Liberation Army. It remains unclear when
the Specialist Chambers in The Hague will begin to
function. Nor should we forget that the basis for the
establishing that court was the report of the Special
Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights of
the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe,
Mr. Dick Marty, which accused certain present-day
Kosovo Albanian politicians of involvement in the
illegal trafficking of human organs and other extremely
grave crimes. This is a very serious issue that a lot of
people do not want to remember. All legal obstacles
to the commencement of the court’s work have been
overcome, and we trust that initial charges will be
brought shortly.
Another difficult topic concerns forcing the issue
of the transformation of the Kosovo security forces into
a full-fledged armed force, in spite of the positions of
both Belgrade and the Kosovo Serbs, an idea that the
authorities in Pristina have cherished for a number of
years, with attempts being made to give it a pseudolegal basis. In our view, the real issue is completely
different. It is crucial to understand that in and of itself,
this undertaking represents a breach of international
law, since it runs counter to resolution 1244 (1999),
which provided for the presence of a force in the
province exclusively on the basis of a Council mandate,
specifically the Kosovo Force, which is currently
largely composed of NATO member State contingents.
12/22

14/11/2017

Moreover, such a step would be extremely reckless in
terms of security both in the region and in Europe as
a whole.
The presence in the Balkans of a new force
component in the form of the so-called Kosovo armed
forces would fly in the face of the Florence agreement,
annexed to the Dayton agreement, designed to support
regional stability with support from the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. It would seem that
a military body not under the control of the country’s
authorities has appeared on the territory of one of the
signatories to the Florence agreement, Serbia.
The importance of countering the proliferation
of Islamic radicalism and terrorism in Kosovo is still
extremely urgent. We are troubled by the fact that the
province is being used for the recruitment of fighters
involved in hostilities in the Middle East on the side of
the extremists and for staging terrorist attacks in other
countries. With respect to the rule of law and safety
and security in Kosovo, we would draw the Council’s
attention to the guilty verdict recently handed down
by a court in Skopje against a large group of Kosovars
who participated in a terrorist raid in Kumanovo on
9 and 10 May 2015. We would note that questions about
who in Kosovo was behind the attack and why the
international presence was unable to prevent it, not to
mention that questions about eliminating such hotbeds
of tension remain unresolved.
We were dismayed by the claims from Pristina
relating to the allegedly politicized verdict of the
Macedonian court and assertions about monetary
assistance to the families of the condemned. Given the
upcoming rout of the Islamic State and the predicted
return to the Balkans of a number of a foreign terrorist
fighters to the region, including Kosovars, such an
approach to counter-terrorism issues is, at the very
least, ambiguous.
Despite the multitude of domestic issues it
faces, Kosovo portrays itself as an active player on
the national stage and is striving to join the greatest
possible number of multilateral structures. We continue
to consider that illegitimate, since from an international
legal standpoint the province’s representation at that
level is through UNMIK. Moreover, the modalities
for Kosovo’s participation in regional bodies, through
the so-called Kosovo asterisk formula, based on a
footnote, have been established within the framework
of the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue. The European
17-38015

14/11/2017

S/PV. 8100

Kosovo

Union, as a conscientious mediator, must ensure
compliance with these resolutions in negotiations held
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 64/298, of
September 2010.
The artificial nature of Kosovan statehood is
reflected in the Republika Srpska’s recent reference to
the sovereignty of the Republic of Kosovo. This attests
to a gradual acknowledgement of the damaging nature
of decisions, often taken under external pressure, on
the acknowledgement of the independence of territorial
bodies that unilaterally secede in breach of international
law. Under these conditions, we deem untimely and
counterproductive talks about a reduction of staffing
and budgetary parameters of UNMIK. The situation in
the province is such that no decision of this sort can be
taken, and, incidentally, it must be acknowledged that
in essence the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
has been virtually non-existent.
For this reason, we must reject requirements to draw
down or close the Mission. Instead we must commence
constructive work in cooperation with this important
United Nations operation. Let us recall that the Mission
has been working with minimal resources. However,
it plays a key role in Kosovo affairs and remains a
critical tool for international oversight. It deals with
issues relating to the normalization of the situation, in
line with resolution 1244 (1999), which remains fully
in force.
In the light of the aforementioned, we see no
justification for any revision of the practice of quarterly
reports to the Security Council about the situation in
Kosovo. As has been reflected in today’s discussion,
this issue continues to require close international
oversight and attention.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I want to start by thanking
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tanin, for his briefing and also express appreciation
for the interventions this morning by First Deputy
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Dačić, as well as
by Ambassador Çitaku.
We welcome the formation, since the Council last
considered this agenda item, of a new government in
Kosovo. We now encourage all political actors, both
inside and outside of the government, to engage in
constructive dialogue and to continue implementation
of the reforms necessary to strengthen the rule of
law and the fight against corruption and to stimulate

Kosovo’s
economic
development
employment opportunities.

and

create

We deem positive the fact that the first round of
the municipal and mayoral elections in October was
genuinely competitive and peaceful in most parts
of Kosovo. However, we regret that there were cases of
threatening behaviour and intimidation in certain Serbmajority municipalities in the run-up to the elections.
The future of both Serbia and Kosovo lies within
the European Union (EU). In order to achieve their
European perspective, the normalization of relations
between the two countries is essential. Regional
cooperation and good neighbourly relations are pivotal
for a stable, peaceful and prosperous Western Balkans.
In that regard, it is crucial that all political leaders
in the region refrain from provocative actions and
statements. It is essential that the status issue does not
hamper Kosovo’s European perspective or prevent its
membership in international organizations. We welcome
the resumption of the EU-facilitated dialogue, which
provides an important contribution to the normalization
of relations between Kosovo and Serbia. Pristina and
Belgrade must now intensify efforts to implement
their respective parts of the agreements reached. In
that regard, we welcome the recent integration of Serb
judges into the Kosovo justice system as a most positive
development. It is critical that parallel structures
in Serb-majority areas be dismantled, and that the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
be established in a way that strengthens links between
Kosovo-Serb citizens and the Pristina Government, and
increases public trust in dialogue.
The United Nations and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo have made an
invaluable contribution to the progress made in Kosovo
since the end of the conflict. Building on that progress
to establish a truly peaceful and prosperous Kosovo,
including by engaging women and youth, will require
the constant vigilance and unwavering commitment
by all political leaders. The EU integration process,
including through the support of European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo, provides the framework to
deal with remaining challenges. By continuing to work
towards Kosovo’s European perspective, Kosovo’s
leaders can deliver on the expectations of their people
for a better future.
In that light, we remain interested in receiving
Special Representative Tanin’s views on possible

17-3801513/22

S/PV.8100

Kosovo

prospects of further downsizing the Mission’s structure,
size and tasks, as well as the possibility of adjusting the
reporting and briefing period from three to six months,
which is something we would support.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir
Tanin, for his briefing and his presentation of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/911).
I also thank First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić,
and Ms. Vlora Çitaku for their statements, and the
Italian presidency for convening this open meeting.
Uruguay advocates for the respect of the principle
of sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia, as
well as for compliance with resolution 1244 (1999). In
the same vein, it advocates for political dialogue and
constructive approaches that can lead to solutions that
promote progress and stability in the region. As my
delegation has indicated on previous occasions, I would
like to point out that, as a country that has traditionally
championed diplomacy and the peaceful resolution of
disputes, Uruguay considers the European Union (EU)facilitated dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade
essential. In that regard, we express our full support for
that process.
With regard to the events of the past several
months, we urge the political leaders to promptly
resume the Belgrade-Pristina political dialogue and
compliance with the agreements already reached.
The dialogue’s hiatus and delays in implementing
international agreements are a source of tensions
and distrust between the neighbouring countries.
Moving forward the commitments already made will
contribute to achieving stability at the international
and national levels, and improving the living conditions
and development of individuals so that they can reach
their full potential. We firmly believe in the path that
leads to reconciliation, and we way we must continue
working in that direction. The renewal of the dialogue
would be laudable.
I would like to dwell on several aspects related to
human rights that we believe are essential to achieving
reconciliation among the various communities
living in Kosovar territory, namely, the protection of
cultural property, mutual respect for the communities’
14/22

14/11/2017

differences and setting up conditions that will allow for
the return of internally displaced persons.
Respect for the culture and religious beliefs
of each community, as well as policies aimed at
protecting minorities, are fundamental for achieving
reconciliation and peaceful coexistence, and will
contribute to the return of internally displaced persons
who, according to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, numbered 16,418
as of September. Addressing the issue of internally
displaced persons will be necessary so as to achieve
post-conflict reconciliation. We appreciate the round
table held in Geneva in August as a follow-up to the
issue of missing persons. Progress must be made in that
area as time and the age of those involved are working
against achieving an outcome. The families of missing
persons have the right to the truth and justice. It is an
urgent and basic matter of humanitarian law.
Respect for each community, its culture and
religious beliefs, as well as policies aimed at protecting
minorities, are essential to consolidating peace. Truth,
justice, reconciliation, security, equal rights, guarantees
and inclusive processes constitute the foundation for
sustainable peace. We appreciate the work that UNMIK
is carrying out on the ground, the European Union as
a facilitator of the dialogue, and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe as a cooperating
partner, and acknowledge the work of all the relevant
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of
all, allow me thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) for the clarity of his presentation
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/911). I
would also like to welcome the presence of First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and Ambassador
Çitaku, to whose statements we have listened attentively.
My delegation welcomes the coordinated efforts of
the various political parties which, with the support of
the Kosovo Serb bloc in the Assembly, resulted in the
election of an Assembly bureau and the establishment
of a New Government, thereby ending the monthslong political stalemate. Those developments, as
well as the holding of free and transparent municipal
elections with the wide participation of the Serbian
municipalities in the north, represent, in our view,
17-38015

14/11/2017

Kosovo

S/PV. 8100

significant and praiseworthy progress. We therefore
encourage Kosovo’s political stakeholders, on the
one hand, to continue their work in maintaining a
peaceful political climate, on which the effectiveness
of the Belgrade-Pristina political dialogue largely
depends, and, on the other hand, Serbian authorities to
strengthen their commitment within a constructive and
calm dialogue with Pristina.

In conclusion, my delegation would like once again
to pay merited tribute to the Special Representative of
Secretary-General for his wise stewardship of UNMIK,
while also expressing appreciation to the International
Security Force in Kosovo, EULEX, the European
Union itself, and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe for their valuable contributions
to building a peaceful and prosperous society in Kosovo.

Moreover, my delegation takes this opportunity to
welcome the progress made thus far by the two parties
in the framework of that dialogue under the auspices
of the European Union (EU) to which they must fully
commit in a constructive spirit, with the knowledge that
it remains the only viable way to normalize relations.

Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin
for his briefing. I also wabt to thank Ambassador Çitaku
and Minister Dačić for their participation.

In the judicial area, the integration and swearing-in
of 40 judges and 13 Serbian prosecutors from northern
Kosovo before President Thaçi, is contributing
to bringing communities together and promoting
peace. Equally encouraging was the high-level
meeting organized by Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, held in Brussels on
31 August, at which the Presidents of Serbia and Kosovo
participated and committed to resuming the dialogue at
the highest level under the auspices of the EU, while
focusing on the implementation of agreements already
concluded within that framework.
The issue of missing persons must remain a priority.
It requires that the leaders of both parties show robust
political will to provide families that have been waiting
for a long time with answers.
I welcome the ongoing efforts of the security forces
aimed at countering violent extremism in Kosovo as
well as the constructive avities carried out within the
framework of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX), which contribute to strengthening
the achievements made in the fields of defence, the rule
of law, human rights, and the fight against terrorism
and organized crime. Likewise, we welcome UNMIK’s
activities in promoting reconciliation, transitional
justice, human rights and support for the process of
normalizating relations between Belgrade and Pristina.
Senegal would like to reiterate its unreserved
support for the joint United Nations-European Union
programme to strengthen inter-community trust
through the protection of cultural heritage. In that
regard, we advocate for greater cooperation in terms of
information exchange.

We congratulate Kosovo on formulating a
new Government following free, fair and peaceful
democratic elections in June, which clearly
demonstrates Kosovo’s democratic maturity. We also
welcome the successful local elections that Kosovo held
on 22 October, which is further evidence of Kosovo’s
continuing progress. We urge Kosovo’s newly elected
leaders to use their mandates wisely to advance the
welfare of all of Kosovo’s communities and to maintain
progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration. We also
welcome recent advancements in the Kosovo-Serbia
dialogue with a successful integration of Kosovo Serb
judges, prosecutors and administrative staff into the
Kosovo judiciary.
We greatly appreciate the European Union’s
contributions as facilitator of the Brussels dialogue.
We reiterate our support for the dialogue and encourage
leaders in both Belgrade and Pristina to continue efforts
to reach agreement on normalization.
As we have repeatedly said in this Chamber, the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) has long ago fulfilled its mandate in
Kosovo. There is no doubt that over the years the Mission
has successfully helped Kosovo build multi-ethnic
democratic institutions that uphold the rule of law and
respect human rights. The United Nations should be
proud of these accomplishments and this success story.
But it is now time for the Mission to make a
transition. United Nations resources must be directed
towards more critical issues. In that regard, we firmly
believe that the Security Council should consider
UNMIK in a format that will allow us to discuss in
detail proposals to improve the Mission and to bring
its resources in line with any needs on the ground.
The current format has not allowed us as a Council to
seriously evaluate and assess the Mission and its future.

17-3801515/22

S/PV.8100

Kosovo

We also reiterate our call on the Council to adjust
the reporting and briefing period for UNMIK. The
Mission’s reporting and briefing period should change
from three months to six months or even longer.
During the last briefing, in August (see S/PV.8025),
we recommended that, in his next report, the SecretaryGeneral provide an assessment of possible budget and
staff reductions with a focus on reducing redundancy
(see S/PV.8025). We reiterate our recommendation for
such a report.
Finally, we continue to strongly support full
international recognition of Kosovo and Kosovo’s
membership in all relevant international organizations,
including the United Nations and INTERPOL. We
encourage States Members of the United Nations that
have not yet done so to join the more than 110 United
Nations Members that have already recognized Kosovo
as an independent State.
Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin for his
briefing. I would also like to welcome Deputy Prime
Minister Dačić and Ambassador Çitaku to the Security
Council and thank both of them for their constructive
statements this morning.
It has been three months since the Council last met
to discuss the situation in Kosovo. As the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/911) makes clear, it is been
a comparatively quiet period, one that does not warrant
the Council’s attention so soon after our last meeting on
the subject (see S/PV.8025).
Since we last met, we have seen the welcome
formation of a new Government and a National
Assembly. As the United Kingdom’s Minister of State
for Europe, Sir Alan Duncan, made clear on his visit
to Pristina the last week, the United Kingdom remains
fully committed to working with Kosovo on a broad
range of issues, including strengthening the rule of
law, addressing weaknesses in the justice system
and fighting organized crime. We also welcome the
Government’s commitments to addressing profoundly
complicated legacy issues, including missing persons
and sexual violence. Kosovo will have the United
Kingdom’s support in these efforts. We recognize that
for Kosovo to look to the future, it must first come to
terms with the past.
Over the past quarter, we have also seen broadly
free and fair municipal elections across the vast
16/22

14/11/2017

majority of Kosovo, which is a welcome step following
the free and fair elections in June. We were, however,
concerned that the coordinated passive intimidation
within Kosovo Serb majority areas directed against
candidates competing against the Srpska list. This
behaviour has no place in Kosovo or indeed any other
country striving to join the European Union (EU).
This goal of membership in the EU is shared by
both Serbia and Kosovo, and I would like to emphasize
the need for normalization of relations between
these two countries to help reach this goal. The EUsponsored dialogue is an essential part of these efforts.
Both parties have an equally important role to play in
making the dialogue work, and I urge both parties in
the Chamber today to redouble our efforts to implement
dialogue agreements so as to reach their shared goal.
Because it is Brussels and not the Security Council
that is the forum of the future for Kosovo and Serbia,
constructive exchanges in Brussels, such as those
between Presidents Vučić and Thaçi, should echo
louder than exchanges in this Chamber.
We of course welcome the years of service that
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) has provided in Kosovo, and we are
grateful to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for all of his efforts. But just as Kosovo must
come to terms with the past, so must UNMIK. The
United Nations needs to recognize that Kosovo today
is not the same country as it was when UNMIK first
arrived. Put simply, UNMIK’s operating environment
has changed and on current trend, will continue to
keep changing for the better. We therefore need to see
a full and effective transition from UNMIK to Kosovar
institutions or other international organizations that
have taken over historical UNMIK roles, including on
missing persons. This is a time for UNMIK to be doing
less, not more.
To aid this effort, we want to see a leaner, more
efficient UNMIK, one with a stronger focus on
established and agreed priorities. This is a call we
have made numerous times alongside others in this
Chamber, and we are disappointed not to see options
for reconfiguring UNMIK presented in the latest report
of the Secretary General.
I would like to close by reiterating the United
Kingdom’s long-standing position that is past time
for the Security Council to meet less frequently on
this issue. The number of issues on our agenda only
17-38015

14/11/2017

Kosovo

continues to grow. We must focus our time and attention
on genuine threats to international peace and security.
All of us in this Chamber should be thankful that the
situation in Kosovo no longer falls into this category.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Ambassador Tanin, for
his comprehensive briefing on the latest developments
in Kosovo. We also welcome the presence of the Serbian
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Dačić, and thank him for
his statement. We also thank Ambassador Çitaku for
her statement.
Our position on the issue at the hand has always
been anchored in our commitment to contributing to
peace between the parties. We reaffirm our support for
the peaceful and amicable resolution of all outstanding
issues between Belgrade and Pristina, in accordance
with the Brussels Agreement.
We also welcome the ongoing efforts of the
European Union in facilitating the dialogue between
Serbia and Kosovo. We have been encouraged by the
renewed commitment of the leaders of both sides in the
reporting period to undertake a new phase of dialogue
to normalize their relations. In that regard, we take note
of the resumption of the European Union-facilitated
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina at the
presidential level in Brussels and in New York. We
also welcome the agreement they reached on the final
steps for the full implementation of the agreement on
the judiciary.
Nonetheless, we understand from the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/911) that, despite progress
in implementing the judiciary agreement, important
gaps remain, and it is our hope that they will be filled
soon — particularly the lack of progress on some of
the key provisions of the EU-facilitated agreement,
including, inter alia, on the establishment of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
in Kosovo, which continues to be a social concern.
It is our hope that the new leadership in both Belgrade
and Pristina will continue to engage in dialogue and
maintain the momentum in a positive and constructive
spirit with a view to addressing outstanding issues and
disagreements through peaceful means. That demands
that both sides refrain from actions and statements that
could cause ethnic discord and that they exert in-State

S/PV. 8100

efforts to create an atmosphere of trust and confidence
conducive to dialogue.
Ethiopia fully supports the work that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) has been undertaking to discharge its
mandates in line with resolution 1244 (1999). Its
engagement with municipal authorities and community
representatives in support of the efforts to protect the
rights of communities and to promote inter-community
reconciliation and trust-building is commendable, as
are the efforts by Kosovo authorities to implement
measures aimed at preventing violent extremism
and radicalization by constructively engaging youth
and women.
It is our hope that UNMIK will continue to promote
political dialogue, strengthen community reconciliation
and ensure security and stability in Kosovo and in the
region. We also recognize the significant role of the
European Union on matters concerning Kosovo, and
we commend the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force for their valuable
contributions in the areas of rule of law and security.
In conclusion, I wish to state that security and
stability in Kosovo and the region will ultimately be
ensured when there is political will and resolve from
both parties. We once again encourage both to remain
committed to dialogue and negotiation with a view to
finding a mutually acceptable solution.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Mr. Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, for his briefing. China
welcomes Mr. Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, to the Chamber
to addresses the Council. I also listened very carefully
by the statement made by Ms. Çitaku.
Currently, the security situation in the Kosovo
region is relatively stable, although complex factors
remain. China welcomes the resumption of high-level
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina since August.
We hope that the two sides will remain committed to the
general direction of a political settlement, continue to
implement existing agreements and gradually increase
mutual trust so as to create favourable conditions for
the final peaceful settlement of differences.
For ethnic communities in Kosovo, reconciliation
and peaceful coexistence serve the fundamental interest
of all and meet the need of Kosovo and countries in

17-3801517/22

S/PV.8100

Kosovo

the region to develop and prosper. China hopes that the
relevant parties will always put the well-being of their
people first, effectively protect the legitimate rights and
interests of all communities in Kosovo, refrain from
actions and rhetoric that might escalate the situation
and safeguard the peace, development and stability of
the Balkans.
Resolution 1244 (1999) provides an important legal
foundation for resolving the question of Kosovo. All
parties should observe the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and seek, through
dialogue and negotiations, a solution that is acceptable
to all parties within the framework of relevant Security
Council resolutions. China respects the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Serbia. We understand
the country’s legitimate concern on the question of
Kosovo and commend its efforts to strive for a political
settlement. The Security Council should maintain
its attention on the question of Kosovo and remain
committed to promoting its proper settlement.
China supports the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), under
the leadership of Special Representative Tanin, in
discharging its duties in accordance with its mandates
and working together with all parties constructively.
We hope that UNMIK, the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force will work
together in close collaboration to play a constructive
and positive role in helping to gradually improve the
situation on the ground and achieve early settlement of
the Kosovo issue.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his informative
briefing. We also thank the First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Ambassador
Ivica Dačić, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku for their statements.
Bolivia reiterates its call for compliance with
resolution 1244 (1999), including full respect for the
territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence
of the Republic of Serbia. In that understanding, and
in accordance with that resolution, Bolivia believes it
important that the parties abide by the commitments
entered into during the negotiations held under the
auspices of the European Union. We urge them to
work within that framework towards a peaceful
18/22

14/11/2017

solution through dialogue and in compliance with the
obligation to negotiate, in line with the provisions of
international law.
In that connection, Bolivia encourages the parties
to comply with the provisions set out over four years ago
in the Brussels Agreement on the establishment of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
in order to ensure that the security and human rights of
the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija are upheld. We ask
the Special Representative to report on the progress of
that agreement, which we consider essential to achieve
a peaceful long-term settlement.
Bolivia appreciates the efforts made by the
European Union and commends the mediation efforts
of the High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to get the the parties
to agree on the final steps for the full implementation of
the judicial agreement, which demonstrates willingness
to move forward in the implementation of existing
agreements. In that way, the dialogue facilitated by the
European Union is conducive to fostering mutual trust
between the parties.
We also commend the initiative of President Vučić
of Serbia to launch an internal dialogue on the question
of Kosovo. Likewise, we commend and recognize
his efforts to coordinate the institutionalization of
the dialogue process and to form a working group
comprising members of the Government, the opposition,
civil society and religious institutions.
Bolivia appreciates the work carried out by
UNMIK, in line with its mandate in the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999). We encourage them to continue
working to build trust between the parties, make use
of their good offices to mitigate tensions, use peaceful
means to seek mutually acceptable solutions and
promote political dialogue and respect for human rights
in safeguarding peace, in line with the Charter of the
United Nations.
Bolivia praises the work of UNMIK, which it
continues through collaboration with the municipal
authorities and the representatives of the community
of Kosovo to protect the rights of communities,
promote
intercommunity
reconciliation,
create
confidence-building measures and facilitate the return
of internally displaced persons. We also hail their efforts
to encourage the adoption of normative regulations
for the establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. In that connection, Bolivia welcomes the
17-38015

14/11/2017

Kosovo

convening of the conference financed by UNMIK on
the difficulties of identifying human remains, as well
as the production of the documentary Something Still
Missing to commemorate the International Day of the
Victims of Enforced Disappearances.
We praise the Secretary-General’s establishment
of a trust fund to carry out community assistance
projects to benefit the minority communities of Roma,
Ashkali and Egyptian peoples who were victims of
lead poisoning as a result of their transfer to camps for
internally displaced persons in northern Kosovo. We
encourage Member States to contribute to that fund.
Finally, we urge political leaders to exercise
prudence in their public statements regarding the
special court for Kosovo — the Kosovo Specialist
Chambers — and to refrain from making statements
that contain bellicose or inflammatory rhetoric. Bolivia
considers the rule of law and its impartial application
essential to combat impunity. Those responsible for
committing war crimes must take responsibility for
their actions, regardless of their condition. The victims
deserve justice.
Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his briefing. I am also grateful
to His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku for
their briefings.
I am pleased to underline that the overall
security situation in Kosovo during the reporting
period remained stable and that Kosovo’s institutions
managed to maintain a peaceful environment in a
complex political landscape. We also witnessed some
progress in the normalization of the relations between
Belgrade and Pristina, due to the continuous efforts
of the European Union (EU) to intensify the political
dialogue between the parties. That means that despite
a number of existing challenges, Belgrade and Pristina
are moving in the right direction and taking important
steps to strengthen peace and stability in the region.
It also proves that we need to resume discussions on
the role of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in the current
circumstances and on actions by the Security Council
that are needed to advance political dialogue, achieve
long-due reconciliation and rebuild trust between
communities. In the light of the general trend at

S/PV. 8100

present, Ukraine supports the idea of extending the
reporting period to six months or even longer, as well
as considering potential options for downsizing the
structure, size and tasks of UNMIK. We are sure that
United Nations resources thus freed up could be put to
better use elsewhere.
We are confident that present challenges could be
successfully met within the EU integration process
through the active involvement of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the International
Security Force in Kosovo and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. With that in
mind, we think it is the right time to conduct a review
of UNMIK in order to provide the Council with options
on how to improve the Mission’s efficiency.
We welcome the latest statements by President
Vučić on beginning a new phase of internal dialogue,
the outcome of which would define the relations
between Serbia and Kosovo. We hope that that step
will be translated into actions, leading to the complete
normalization of relations. Ukraine commends the
readiness of the sides to intensify efforts to implement
existing agreements.
In our view, fulfilment of the agreement on the
establishment of the Association of Serb-majority
municipalities, the agreement on the freedom of
movement across Mitrovica and the agreement on
energy should be among the top priorities. We highly
value the role of the EU in the process of normalizing
relations and its assistance in implementing the
European reform agenda. Despite some problems in the
latter area during the reporting period, we welcome the
informal consultations at the highest level conducted
here in New York and in Brussels. Continued efforts
in the direction of full implementation of the judiciary
agreement also deserve our attention.
Next month, Ukraine finishes its term as an
elected member of the Council, and this is likely to
be our final statement on this issue. I would like to
take this opportunity to once again underline that
Ukraine remains fully committed to the normalization
of relations between Belgrade and Pristina and the
intensification of cooperation between them on the path
towards European integration, which is the real key to
their long-term stability.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Mr. Zahir Tanin for his update on recent developments.
We also thank First Deputy Prime Minister and

17-3801519/22

S/PV.8100

Kosovo

14/11/2017

Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić,
and Ms. Çitaku for their informative briefings.

missing persons and implementation of a law on the use
of languages.

We fully support the efforts of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in achieving peace and stability in Kosovo. We welcome
UNMIK’s facilitating role in promoting dialogue
between the parties. My delegation also commends
the European Union (EU) leadership for successfully
hosting a high-level meeting between the two parties
in Brussels on 31 August, as well as on the margins of
the General Assembly in New York in September. It
was very promising that both sides agreed to conclude
steps to implement the judiciary agreement, aiming
to integrate judges and prosecutors from the Serbdominated north into the Kosovo judiciary. We also
see constructive measures taken to implement other
existing agreements between Belgrade and Pristina.
It is good news that on 21 October, 40 judges and 13
prosecutors from the Serb-dominated north were
integrated into the judicial system in Kosovo.

Equally and crucially important is the protection of
vulnerable groups and the cultural heritage in Kosovo.
Fully implementing the languages laws to protect the
non-majority communities is crucial to ensure equal
rights and preserve the cultural diversity and heritage
of both Kosovo and Serbia. Special attention must be
paid to implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, by addressing the issue
of conflict-related sexual violence. In that regard, we
call on the authorities of Kosovo to withdraw their
decision to shorten the deadline for the verification of
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, and we
ask that victims be economically reintegrated, socially
empowered and psychologically supported.

Kazakhstan welcomes the recent decision by
Belgrade and Pristina to institutionalize their dialogue
process with the engagement of representatives of
the Government, opposition, civil society, the media
and religious organizations. For that to succeed, all
interested parties must boost and encourage steps that
promote the deliberations of the peoples of Serbia and
Kosovo and convince the local population in Kosovo to
accept their outcomes.
It is crucial to communicate with the parties and
communities, accurately and in detail, the types of
economic benefits gained by the local population in
Kosovo. Residents need to know that dialogue is the
only way to bring about good governance, the rule of
law and human rights, as well as to solve the problems of
unemployment, corruption, organized crime, education
and health care, among others. All such outreach
activities will assist in gaining much-needed support.
It is very important that any discussions that follow
on the agreement on the establishment of the Association/
Community of Serb-majority municipalities should
be inclusive, with the close and active involvement of
all relevant stakeholders, first of all the EU and the
United Nations. The situation in Kosovo requires the
continued attention of the Security Council. There are
still a number of complex and sensitive issues, such
as a lack of intercommunity trust, a large number of
20/22

The issue of returning refugees and displaced
persons, as well as their resettlement, will also have
to be addressed. With such a rapidly growing young
population in Kosovo, there is also a need to implement
resolution 2250 (2015), on youth and peace and
security, and to provide full support for the laudable
engagement of young people of all ethnicities in order
to promote reconciliation. Therefore, progress in the
normalization of relations between Serbia and Kosovo
remains crucially important to both sides, as well as
to the European Union and the Western Balkans as
a whole.
Finally, stability will be achieved only if the parties
follow agreements that avoid nationalist and provocative
rhetoric and focus on promoting intercommunity
reconciliation and mediation, as well as following
the path of trust, confidence-building measures,
peacebuilding and conflict-prevention in Kosovo.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express my gratitude to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his comprehensive
briefing on the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We wish
him every success. We also thank Mr. Ivica Dačić, First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku for their statements.
Egypt welcomes the significant political developments
in Kosovo, including the election of the Speaker of
Parliament and the establishment of a new Government,
which has ended the impasse in the country since the
legislative elections in June. Egypt calls on the new
17-38015

14/11/2017

Kosovo

Government to continue to build on the reform efforts
and the progress achieved in many areas, among them
the rule of law and economic development, by adopting
policies that will generate employment and improve the
investment climate in the country.
Egypt hopes that the Government will begin to
consider a number of urgent issues, including border
demarcation with Montenegro, the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina and matters
related to strengthening integration into European
institutions, all of which will have a positive impact on
peace and security not only in Kosovo but in the entire
Western Balkans region.
We welcome the continuing dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina at the presidential level in Brussels
and on the margins of the high-level general debate of the
General Assembly. Egypt reaffirms the fact that highlevel and European Union-facilitated talks between
the two parties remain the most appropriate way to
resolve all pending issues peacefully. In that regard, we
commend the mention in the report (S/2017/911) of the
two principal parties’ increasing acknowledgement of
the importance of strengthening dialogue. We welcome
the agreement resulting from the consultations in
Brussels on 31 August on the most recent measures for
implementing the justice agreement. We call for the
full and immediate implementation of that agreement
and all previous agreements reached between 2013 and
2015 without delay.
Egypt has consistently called for abstention from
inflammatory rhetoric and hate speech, which further
fuels internal strife. We have therefore urged both
parties to show the utmost restraint and avoid any
unilateral initiatives that may heighten tension. The
broad participation of Kosovo Serbs in the recent
elections therefore gives us grounds for optimism and
increases the possibility of their involvement in the
political processes.
In conclusion, we are convinced of the need for
Belgrade and Pristina to build on their joint initiatives
in order to overcome their differences and agree on
consensus-based, fair and lasting solutions for peace
and stability in the region and the peaceful coexistence
of all parts of society. We also believe that regional
integration into European institutions should be
expedited in order to ensure its positive impact on the
stability of Kosovo and the region.

S/PV. 8100

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.
I would first of all like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zahir Tanin
for his briefing and Minister Dačić and Ambassador
Çitaku for their constructive statements.
Italy is bound by long-standing ties of friendship
with Kosovo and Serbia and is also a long-standing
supporter of the path that the Western Balkan countries
have chosen towards the European Union. European
integration is the key to the long-lasting peace and
development of the entire region. Italy will continue to
promote regional integration, building on the outcomes
of the Western Balkans Summit held in Trieste in July
under our presidency of the Berlin process.
The normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina remains crucial. We commend Belgrade
and Pristina for resuming the dialogue facilitated by the
European Union at the presidential level and welcome
their resolve to open a new phase of that dialogue. We
call on both parties to take advantage of that window
of opportunity to move steadily towards normalizing
their relations. We also welcome the decision of the
President of Serbia to open an internal dialogue with
the aim of defining an overall, comprehensive and
widely shared policy on Kosovo by involving all
potential stakeholders. We welcome the formation of a
new Government in Pristina and look forward to the
free and fair conduct of the run-off municipal elections
on 19 November.
We call on the new Government to intensify
its efforts to move forward with the reforms that the
country so greatly needs. The most urgent measures
to be taken include the ratification of the agreement
on border demarcation with Montenegro and the
implementation of the association/community of Serbmajority municipalities. The rule of law, justice and
the fight against corruption should also remain high
on the Government’s agenda. We also underscore the
importance for all parties to ensure full cooperation
with the Specialist Chambers. We commend and support
the work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo and of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and we affirm our contribution
to the Kosovo Force.
Being aware of the many challenges that are still to
be tackled, while taking into account the progress made
in recent years, Italy will continue to assist Kosovo. In

17-3801521/22

S/PV.8100

Kosovo

that perspective, we stand ready to discuss a way forward
for the United Nations presence in the country, which
should be adjusted to the current needs in coordination
with the other international actors involved and in line
with the wider review of peacekeeping operations.
We therefore look forward to the Secretary-General’s
recommendations in that regard. We are also open
to extending this reporting period in line with the
evolution of the situation on the ground.
In conclusion, I call on both parties to refrain from
rhetoric rooted in the past and to focus their energy and

22/22

14/11/2017

attention on the future of the relationship. Both at the
international and bilateral levels and as a member of
the European Union, Italy will continue to do its part to
facilitate dialogue and to build mutual trust.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

17-38015
