A/75/926–S/2021/570

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
15 June 2021
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-fifth session
Agenda item 39
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventy-sixth year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General
I.

Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2543 (2020), in which the Secretary-General was
requested to report every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including political, humanitarian, development and human rights efforts,
since the issuance of the previous report, dated 12 March 2021 (A/75/811-S/2021/252).

II.

Relevant developments
3.
Efforts to reinvigorate the peace negotiations slowed following the
postponement of a proposed high-level conference in Istanbul, Turkey, highlighting
the need for a renewed commitment by the parties to fully and constructively engage
in talks. With the announcements by the United States of America and the No rth
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on the withdrawal of their remaining military
forces by September 2021, the Taliban stated that they would defer their attendance
of any high-level events until such time. Efforts to foster unity around the peace
process by the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan faced difficulties, while the
Government attempted to promote greater regional consensus on intra -Afghan peace
and reconciliation, economic cooperation and connectivity. Calls continued for a
more inclusive peace process as well as the preservation of fundamental rights and
freedoms. Security incidents remained at high levels, with the number of civilian
casualties increasing by 29 per cent in the first quarter of 2021 in comparison with
the same period in 2020. Ongoing violence, natural disasters and heightened levels of
food insecurity contributed to increased suffering, further compounded by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.

21-07380 (E)

180621

*2107380*

A/75/926
S/2021/570

A.

Political developments
4.
Ministerial and senior-level appointments continued during the reporting
period, including in the security sector. On 19 March, the President, Ashraf Ghani,
replaced the Minister of the Interior. On 24 April, several senior-level appointments
and replacements were announced in the Office of the National Security Council and
the National Directorate for Security, with the declared aim of accelerating security
sector reform efforts and meeting the demands of the security transition. Mr. Ghani
also nominated a new acting attorney general and appointed two new senators, a
presidential adviser on education, several ambassadors and officials in agencies and
directorates, including the national procurement and civil aviation authorities, as well
as governors. In the parliament, meanwhile, calls were reiterated to formally
introduce acting ministerial and other relevant nominees to the Wolesi Jirga (lower
house) for confirmation in accordance with the Constitution and to replace those
nominees rejected during previous confirmation hearings in No vember and
December. The Chairperson of the High Council for National Reconciliation,
Abdullah Abdullah, and other opposition officials, including Marshal Rashid Dostum,
raised concern over the lack of consultation on appointments, in particular the
replacement of the Minister of the Interior and the Provincial Governor of Faryab,
calling for the implementation of the arrangements stipulated in the political
agreement of 17 May 2020 between Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah.
5.
The President also continued to replace provincial and district governors, with
the stated objectives of improving security, subnational governance and development.
Since the President’s inauguration in March 2020, only 6 of the 34 provincial
governors have remained in their posts. In line with the presidential decree of 6 July
2020 establishing the position of Second deputy provincial governor for social and
economic affairs in each of the 34 provinces, 27 women have been appointed,
including 12 in 2021. All the positions are to be filled by women. Pursuant to the
presidential decree of 4 October 2020, by which a greater role was assigned to district
governors in security matters and conflict resolution, the performance of more than
half of the 387 district governors has been assessed. Most were subsequently replaced.
In the absence of new competitive civil service recruitment procedures, deputy
provincial governors and district governors are serving in acting capacities.
6.
The electoral management bodies continued preparations to hold provin cial
council, district council and municipal elections, as called for in the political
agreement of May 2020, as well as the delayed Wolesi Jirga elections for Ghazni
Province. On 8 March, the Independent Election Commission of Afghanistan
concluded its review of the election law and submitted draft amendments to the
Ministry of Justice. The proposed amendments include changes to the electoral
system for the Wolesi Jirga elections, voter registration, the use of technology and the
results management system. On 19 April, the Commission secretariat formally
advised the Commission that conducting elections in 2021 would not be possible, as
electoral planning required preparatory time of at least one year.
7.
The peace negotiations in Doha continued at a slow pace. In March, proposals
by the United States to accelerate the peace talks, and a meeting in Moscow between
Afghan political leaders and the Taliban, brought increased momentum, including to
convene a high-level conference in April in Istanbul between the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan and the Taliban.
8.
In preparation for the conference, the High Council for National Reconciliation
announced the receipt of more than 25 peace proposals from political leaders and civil
society for consolidation into a draft peace plan. Many were reportedly in response
to draft proposals circulated by the United States concerning guiding principles for

2/15

21-07380

A/75/926
S/2021/570

the future of Afghanistan, a transitional peace government and political road map, and
a permanent and comprehensive ceasefire. On 14 March, Afghan women activists
published a position paper on the draft United States proposal, demanding
inclusiveness, the upholding of the Constitution and women’s rights, and alignment
with international obligations under Security Council resol ution 1325 (2000) and
United States obligations under the Women, Peace, and Security Act of 2017. On
3 April, Mr. Ghani hosted meetings with foreign ambassadors to present his vision
for peace and a “sovereign, democratic, united, neutral and connected Afghanistan”.
He proposed the establishment of an interim peace government, followed by the holding
of elections. He stressed the need, in order to sustain peace, to focus on national
reconciliation, the reintegration of combatants and refugees and the process of
defining new security, development and governance priorities following the elections.
9.
To strengthen political inclusion and national consensus, on 28 February
Mr. Ghani inaugurated a high council of State, as envisaged under the political
agreement of May 2020. Its first meeting, on 10 March, brought together several
political leaders, including government and opposition actors. Consultation with the
opposition over the final membership is ongoing. On 1 March, the President chaired
the first meeting of the High Council for Women, created by presidential decree in
August 2020 to support the implementation of the Government’s commitments
regarding women’s rights. On 28 March, Mr. Ghani inaugurated the High Council for
Youth, comprising 45 members elected to provide recommendations to the
Government in different areas, including the peace process.
10. On 13 April, Turkey, Qatar and the United Nations announced that they would
co-convene a high-level and inclusive conference between the representatives of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban, to be hosted in Istanbul from
24 April to 4 May to accelerate and complement negotiations in Doha on the
achievement of a just and durable political settlement. Later that day, the Taliban
Political Commission stated that the Taliban would not participate in any conference
that made decisions about Afghanistan until the withdrawal of all foreign troops.
11. On 14 April, the President of the United States, Joseph R. Biden, Jr., formally
announced the withdrawal of the remaining United States military forces from
Afghanistan by 11 September. The announcement was echoed by the NATO
Secretary-General, Jens Stoltenberg, who declared that the withdrawal of NATO allies
by the same date would be orderly, coordinated and deliberate, and who reiterated
their long-term commitment to Afghanistan. On 15 April, the Secretary of State of the
United States, Antony J. Blinken, visited Kabul to express the continued com mitment
of his country to supporting the security forces of and democratic gains in
Afghanistan. Afghan leaders stated that their Government would work to ensure a
smooth transition.
12. Subsequently, on 21 April, the co-conveners of the Istanbul conference announced
its postponement to a date when conditions for meaningful progress would be more
favourable. They emphasized their commitment to supporting the peace process in
Doha, where representatives of the negotiating teams of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan and the Taliban continued to hold discussions.
13. Civil society, including women’s and youth groups, religious leaders and the
media, continued to call for a more inclusive peace process, as well as the preservation
of fundamental rights and freedoms and an end to violence. Several of the groups had
planned to engage on the sidelines of the proposed Istanbul conference. On 29 and
31 March, the Afghanistan Mechanism for Inclusive Peace and the Afghan Women’s
Network organized separate gatherings in Kabul to demand inclusivity in the peace
process. The United Nations supported a consortium of women’s networks that
gathered in Kabul on 14 and 15 April to discuss issues related to ceasefires,
21-07380

3/15

A/75/926
S/2021/570

transitional justice, governance structures and constitution al review processes.
Women leaders called for mechanisms to allow outcomes of civil society consultations
to inform the agenda and format of the peace negotiations. The Group of Friends of
Afghanistan and the Group of Friends of Women in Afghanistan, on 22 March, and
the Friends of Afghan Women Ambassadors Group, on 8 April, issued statements in
support of Afghan women’s right to have an influential voice on the country’s future.
On 26 and 27 April, the Women in the Peace Process Coalition conducted events on
women’s concerns about the peace process, demanding a ceasefire and women’s
meaningful participation.
14. At the regional and international levels, China, the Russian Federation and the
United States, along with Pakistan, known as the Extended Troika, h eld two meetings,
in Moscow on 18 March and in Doha on 30 April, to discuss the peace process and
ways to help the parties to reach a negotiated settlement and permanent ceasefire. On
both occasions, the group met representatives of the negotiating teams o f the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban. In their statement of 18 March, the four
countries opposed the restoration of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan. In their statement
of 30 April, they noted that a reduction in violence and sustained e fforts by the Taliban
to advance intra-Afghan negotiations would positively affect a review of the status of
designations of Taliban individuals and entities on the sanctions list established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). The countries also welcomed an expanded role of
the United Nations in contributing to the peace and reconciliation process.
15. In a joint communiqué issued on 15 April, special envoys from Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, as well as the European Union,
called upon Afghan parties to resume negotiations and condemned the high level of
violence. On 23 April, the ministers for foreign affairs of Afghanistan, Pakistan and
Turkey called upon all parties to reaffirm their commitment to an inclusive negotiated
settlement. On 6 May, special envoys and special representatives of France, Germany,
Italy, Norway, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States, the European Union and NATO, joined by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), met in Berlin to review the status of the peace
process. The negotiating teams of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban
joined the meeting separately by videoconference. In a communiqué issued after the
meeting, the need to accelerate the negotiations was highlighted and an expanded role
of the United Nations was welcomed.
16. UNAMA continued to implement nine local peace initiatives, including two new
initiatives for engaging with young people and religious scholars on peace and
mediation efforts in Nangarhar Province and Faizabad, while eight other initiatives
were concluded. Throughout March, United Nations-supported grass-roots events
involving several hundred participants were held in more than 30 provinces as part of
International Women’s Day to draw attention to the rights and leadership of women and
their inclusion in the peace process. Focusing on social cohesion, United Nations partners
jointly developed an initiative aimed at designing a peace curriculum in universities.

B.

Security
17. The security situation continued to deteriorate. Between 12 February and 15 May,
the United Nations recorded 6,827 security-related incidents, a 26.3 per cent increase
from the 5,407 recorded during the same period in 2020 and only a modest 5.3 per
cent decrease compared with the previous three-month period from 13 November
2020 to 11 February 2021. The number of armed clashes rose by 18.3 per cent, from
3,359 to 3,973, and of detonated improvised explosive devices by 46.9 per cent, from
515 to 757. As opposed to the trends seen in early 2020 following the conclusion of the

4/15

21-07380

A/75/926
S/2021/570

Agreement for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan between the United States of America
and the Taliban, the number of air strikes, conducted primarily by the Afghan Air Force,
rose by 83.2 per cent, from 161 to 295. The southern, eastern and northern regions
recorded the highest number of incidents and collectively accounted for 63.6 per cent
of all recorded incidents, with Helmand, Kandahar and Nangarhar the most conflict affected provinces. Violence briefly abated from 13 to 15 May as the Government and
the Taliban declared unilateral three-day ceasefires over Eid al-Fitr.
18. High-profile attacks continued countrywide. In total, 22 suicide attacks were
documented, compared with 8 during the same period in 2020. Seventeen attacks
involved suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices, primarily targeting
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces positions in contested areas, in
particular in the south; one, against a security convoy on 20 April, was the first suicide
attack recorded in the city of Kabul in 2021. The United Nations also documented
73 attacks using magnetic improvised explosive devices, including 10 in Kabul. The
number of targeted, usually unclaimed assassinations rose by 40.1 per cent to 297,
with victims including civil servants, two university lecturers in Kabul, three female
polio vaccinators in Jalalabad and the head of the Ulama Council of Takhar. Two
vehicle-borne improvised explosive device attacks, one near a guesthouse in Logar
Province on 30 April and one, followed by two other exp losions, near a high school
in a Shia neighbourhood of Kabul on 9 May, sparked outcries over the high number
of civilian casualties, which included numerous female students in Kabul.
19. No party to the conflict achieved significant territorial gains. The Taliban captured
four district centres and maintained pressure on urban areas, including in Baghlan,
Faryab, Ghazni and Helmand Provinces, and on transportation axes and
infrastructure, including in southern, north-eastern and north-western Afghanistan.
Apart from an attack on Kandahar airfield on 1 May, as at 25 May, the Taliban had
not launched direct attacks on international military forces, despite stating that they
had the right to do so given the delayed international military withdrawal.
20. The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces continued to conduct
operations to secure key highways and cities in the south and several other provinces,
including Baghlan, Faryab, Ghazni and Nangarhar. The Government continued to
reform the security sector through the Future Forces programme, with a focus on
improving structures and promoting a more responsive approach to operations.
Government officials noted that national security forces had conducted over 90 per cent
of operations in 2020, with international military forces providing only aerial support.
21. Attacks claimed by or attributed to Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan
(ISIL-K) increased to 88, compared with 16 during the same period in 2020. ISIL -K
continued to target civilians in urban areas. It claimed responsibility for the
assassination of three female media workers and one female doctor in Jalalabad on
2 and 5 March, for explosions targeting two civilian vehicles in Kabul on 14 March
and several civilian targets in Jalalabad on 21 March, and for attacks against a mosque
in Kabul and a Shia gathering in Kunduz in mid-May. While most incidents occurred
in Kabul and eastern provinces, the movement released a video on 22 February in
which it announced its “return to Khorasan”. It su bsequently claimed an incident in
Ghor Province on 21 April, the first since 2017, and attacks against electricity pylons
and fuel tankers in Baghlan, Kabul, Kunduz and Parwan Provinces in the first half of
May. Not all claims could be verified amid continued controversy as to whether
certain attacks claimed by ISIL-K were carried out by or coordinated with other
groups. Afghan security organs also reported the arrests of several dozen ISIL -K
suspects in two northern provinces, beyond the movement’s traditional areas of
operations, in addition to the arrest in Nangarhar Province, on 24 March, of a
suspected mastermind of the Kabul University attack in November 2020.

21-07380

5/15

A/75/926
S/2021/570

22. The United Nations documented 20 incidents affecting its personnel, including
11 cases of intimidation and 3 crime-related incidents.

C.

Regional cooperation
23. Afghanistan and regional countries remained focused on enhancing cooperation
and economic and infrastructure connectivity. On 19 February, the National
Directorate for Security convened the first (virtual) regional conference of
intelligence and security officials from Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan,
Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, as well as the United States, on cooperation in the fight
against terrorism.
24. On 23 February, a delegation from Uzbekistan led by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Abdulaziz Kamilov, visited Kabul and met Mr. Ghani, Mr. Abdullah, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, Mohammad Haneef Atmar, and the
National Security Adviser, Hamdullah Mohib, to discuss bilateral relations, regional
cooperation and the peace process. Mr. Kamilov conveyed the support of Uzbekistan
for an immediate halt to violence and for peace in Afghanistan. Both countries
discussed an action plan for cooperation in trade, transit, energy, mines and
agriculture, and a plan to launch the Mazar-e Sharif-Kabul-Peshawar railway project
to connect Central and South Asia through Afghanistan.
25. From 24 to 26 February, Mr. Atmar visited Moscow and met the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Sergey Lavrov, and other senior officials. Speaking to the media
during his visit, Mr. Atmar welcomed the position of the Russian Federation against the
return of an Islamic emirate in Afghanistan and stressed that no United Nations sanctions
on designated Taliban figures should be lifted until those behind the insurgency fully
complied with their peace commitments. Mr. Lavrov reiterated the commitment of
the Russian Federation to facilitating conducive conditions for intra -Afghan
reconciliation through the Extended Troika format and expressed readiness to resume
Moscow-format meetings with countries in the region and the United States. He also
conveyed Russian concerns over the continued escalation of violence and the
prevailing threat of illegal narcotrafficking to the region.
26. From 22 to 24 March, Mr. Atmar visited India and met the Minister for External
Affairs, Subrahmanyam Jaishankar, the National Security Adviser, Ajit Doval, and
other high-ranking officials to discuss regional and international consensus on the
peace process, and enhanced cooperation on security, economic, political and cultural
issues. He presented the peace plan of the Government of Afghanistan and stressed that
a republic was the only political structure that could gu arantee the equal participation
of citizens. Indian counterparts stressed the need for continued strategic cooperation
between India and Afghanistan and expressed the full support of India for the peace
process, including the consolidation of regional and international consensus.
27. In an effort to facilitate cross-border transportation and trade, the Afghan
authorities, with the assistance of the United Nations, established an international
transit warranty and payment computerization system at four major border-crossing
points to Iran (Islamic Republic of), Pakistan and Uzbekistan on 23 March and
implemented the Automated System for Customs Data World in the Ghulam Khan
customs house, bordering Pakistan, on 25 March. During the reporting period, Afghan
and Uzbek customs authorities implemented the first phase of an online transit data
exchange service.
28. On 29 March, Mr. Ghani travelled to Dushanbe for a two-day State visit and to
participate in the ninth Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process Ministerial Conference. He met
the President, Emomali Rahmon, and discussed strengthening bilateral ties. During the

6/15

21-07380

A/75/926
S/2021/570

visit, Afghan and Tajik officials signed five memorandums of understanding, on road
maps for political, security, trade, transport, transit, energy and cultu ral cooperation.
29. On 30 March, the ninth Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process Ministerial Conference
was held, bringing together foreign ministers involved in the Process, heads of
delegations of donor countries and regional and international organizations.
Participants adopted the Dushanbe Declaration, in which they welcomed renewed
diplomatic efforts by all countries to accelerate the peace process through meaningful
negotiations, including the talks in Doha, the Extended Troika meeting and
preparations for a high-level meeting in Turkey. In the Declaration, participants
condemned the persistently high levels of violence, expressing concern over
continued ties between the Taliban and other terrorist groups, including Al -Qaida.
They also endorsed an implementation plan for the new women’s empowerment
confidence-building measure.
30. On 1 April, Afghanistan and Pakistan extended their transit trade agreement for
three months to further strengthen regional connectivity. On 10 May, the Chief of
Army Staff of Pakistan, General Qamar Javed Bajwa, accompanied by the Director
General of Inter-Services Intelligence of Pakistan, General Faiz Hamid, and the Chief
of the Defence Staff of the United Kingdom, General Sir Nicholas Carter, visited
Kabul. Mr. Bajwa met Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah to discuss the peace process and
the strengthening of bilateral security and defence cooperation, including on border
management.
31. In separate calls with Mr. Atmar and Mr. Mohib on 17 May, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of China, Wang Yi, emphasized the importance of the strategic
partnership between China and Afghanistan and the willingness of China to deepen
counter-terrorism and security cooperation efforts with Afghanistan. He also stressed
the readiness of China to play a constructive role in an effort to advance the peace
and reconciliation process. The Government of Afghanistan expressed appreciation
for the positive role of China in supporting the peace process and stability in
Afghanistan and the region.
32. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Deborah
Lyons, continued to meet regularly with the ambassadors to Afghanistan of six
neighbouring countries and the wider region to discuss regional cooperation. She also
coordinated with United Nations partners in Afghanistan and neighbouring countries
on cross-border activities such as trade and transit, infrastructure connectivity and
movements of people. In addition, the Personal Envoy of the Secretary -General on
Afghanistan and Regional Issues, Jean Arnault, who was appointed in mid-March,
began his engagement to assist in achieving a political solution to the conflict.

III.

Human rights
33. On 14 April, UNAMA released its first-quarter update on the protection of
civilians. From 1 January to 31 March, the Mission documented 1,783 civilian
casualties (573 killed, including 64 women and 151 children, and 1,210 injured,
including 168 women and 401 children), a 29 per cent increase compared with the
same period in 2020. The number of women casualties increased by 37 per cent
compared with the first quarter of 2020. UNAMA documented increased civilian
casualties from ground engagements and non-suicide attacks, and a rise in the number
of targeted killings by anti-government elements in comparison with the first quarter
of 2020, whereas the number of civilian casualties from suicide attacks and air strikes
conducted by international military forces fell. Of specific concern, the Mission
documented a 38 per cent increase in the number of civilian casualti es in the

21-07380

7/15

A/75/926
S/2021/570

six months after the start of the Afghanistan peace negotiations in September 2020 in
comparison with the same period one year earlier.
34. In the first three months of 2021, almost two thirds of civilian casualties were
caused by anti-government elements (61 per cent), mainly by the Taliban (43.5 per cent),
ISIL-K (5 per cent) and undetermined anti-government elements (12.5 per cent).
Approximately one quarter of all civilian casualties were attributed to pro-government
forces (27 per cent), mostly caused by the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces (25 per cent), while the remaining 2 per cent were caused by pro -government
armed groups or undetermined pro-government forces. More than one third (38 per cent)
of civilian casualties were caused by ground engagements. Non -suicide improvised
explosive devices, targeted killings and air strikes caused 31 per cent, 19 per cent and
5 per cent of civilian casualties, respectively.
35. During the first quarter of 2021, the country task force on monitoring and
reporting on grave violations against children in armed conflict verified 636 grave
violations against 587 children (402 boys and 185 girls), including 552 child
casualties (151 killed, comprising 52 girls and 99 boys, and 401 maimed, comprising
133 girls and 268 boys). Anti-government elements were responsible for 226 child
casualties, while pro-government forces were responsible for 207. Ground
engagements remained the leading cause of child casualties, at 270 (71 killed and 199
maimed), accounting for approximately 49 per cent of the overall total.
36. The country task force verified the recruitment and use of 14 children (all boys)
by the Taliban (7) and pro-government militias (7), compared with 33 children during
the previous quarter. It verified one case of sexual violence against a child and the
abduction of 22 children (21 boys and 1 girl) by the Taliban. Of the 22 children
abducted, 17 have been released, 1 was killed and 4 remain in Taliban captivity. The
country task force verified 13 attacks on schools and educational personnel, a slight
decrease from the previous quarter (17), attributing incidents to the Taliban (4), joint
pro-government forces (2), joint fighting between pro-government and armed
opposition groups (2), the National Directorate for Security (1), pro -government
militias (1), the Afghan National Army (1), unspecified Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces (1) and an undetermined armed opposition group (1). The country
task force verified 21 attacks against hospitals and health-care personnel, compared with
39 in the previous quarter. These attacks were attributed to the Taliban (9), the Afghan
National Army (5), ISIL-K (4), the National Directorate of Security (1), pro-government
militias (1) and the Afghan National Police (1).
37. On 15 February, the National Commission on Protection of Child Rights
endorsed the national child protection policy, which was developed in line with the
Law on Protection of Child Rights. The country task force was actively engaged in
the development of the policy, including ensuring that the prohibition of child
recruitment and sexual violence (including bacha bazi), along with other child
protection measures, was mainstreamed throughout the policy.
38. Budget constraints in the Office of Prison Administration resulted in significant
staff cuts at juvenile rehabilitation centres. Among the positions cut were teachers,
vocational trainers, caregivers and observers, undermining the care and rehabilitation
of children in custody. With the Government, the country task force continued to
advocate the release and effective reintegration of children, including foreign
children, held in detention for alleged or actual association with armed groups or for
charges related to national security, and worked with the prison authorities to improve
detention conditions. The country task force also continued to work with the
Government on the development of a framework for the reintegration of children.

8/15

21-07380

A/75/926
S/2021/570

39. The increase in the prison population recorded since mid-August 2020
continued, with overcrowding having serious implications for detention conditions,
including increased vulnerability with regard to COVID-19. By the end of March
2021, at least 30 out of 38 prisons nationwide had exceeded full capacity, with an
average occupancy rate close to 200 per cent.
40. Several government entities celebrated International Women’s Day, including
with a national event hosted by the Ministry of Women’s Affairs in Kabul on 7 March.
UNAMA also supported several events to mark the day, including girls’ sports events,
radio programmes and public celebrations to raise awareness of women’s rights. On
11 March, the Ministry of Education released a memorandum banning schoolgirls over
the age of 12 years from singing at public events. After a backlash, the Ministry rescinded
the memorandum, stating that it had been misunderstood. In early April, the Ministry
of Women’s Affairs released a public report on the implementation of the Elimination
of Violence against Women Law from March 2017 to March 2019. The report includes
an analysis of cases of violence against women and girls registered by the Ministry
(6,549 cases, of which 65 per cent were criminal and 35 per cent were civil), the
Attorney General’s Office (5,331) and the Afghan National Police (2,568), showing
an increase in the number of cases reported. For instance, the report indicates a
year-on-year increase in cases registered by the Afghan National Police: 698 in 2015,
748 in 2016, 1,328 in 2017 and 1,240 in 2018.
41. Human rights defenders and media workers continued to face security threats.
UNAMA recorded the killing of three female media workers in two separate att acks
claimed by ISIL-K in Nangarhar Province, and the killing by unknown perpetrators
of one former journalist in Kandahar Province and one civil society activist in Paktiya
Province. Three human rights defenders (including a woman) and one journalist were
allegedly threatened by the Taliban in Baghlan, Kunduz and Bamyan Provinces. Two
women human rights defenders and one journalist allegedly received threats from
unknown perpetrators in Nangarhar, Takhar and Bamyan Provinces.
42. Following the announced withdrawal of international troops and uncertainties
around the peace process, human rights defenders and journalists raised with UNAMA
their increased sense of insecurity. Since the beginning of 2021, the Human Rights
Defenders Committee, a non-governmental organization, received 69 applications for
support from civil society actors in Afghanistan, of which 22 were from women. On
27 March, the Joint Commission for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders under the
Second Vice-President, Sarwar Danesh, met and agreed upon its rules of procedure and
next steps. On World Press Freedom Day (3 May), UNAMA and several embassies
publicly pledged continued support for free and independent Afghan media. On 5 May,
media organizations condemned a warning by the Taliban to the media to maintain
neutrality and requested clarifications from the National Directorate for Security
about alleged statements perceived as hostile to media freedoms.
43. UNAMA, with technical assistance from the Mediation Support Unit of the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, continued to engage with the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission on issues related to peace,
human rights and victim-centred justice.
44. On 7 May, the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court m et in The Hague
with a delegation from the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan led by Mr. Atmar to
discuss issues related to the request from the Government to defer the Court’s
investigation pursuant to article 18 (2) of the Rome Statute.

21-07380

9/15

A/75/926
S/2021/570

IV.

Coordination of development assistance
45. On 6 April, the Minister for Finance and the Head of the Administrative Office
of the President met donors to present the Cabinet-approved Geneva 2020 Conference
Commitments Implementation Procedure, in which mechanisms for the implementation
of the Afghanistan Partnership Framework are detailed. In a joint letter dated 29 April,
donors emphasized the need for enhanced strategic engagement with the Government
on high-level policy dialogues. Furthermore, membership of the Fram ework task
force was expanded to include the Administrative Office of the President and the
European Union, in addition to the Ministry of Finance, UNAMA and the World Bank.
On 22 April and 6 May, the expanded task force met to formulate a road map of key
events and activities leading up to the senior officials’ meeting, tentatively scheduled
for November. The Government released the first report on the implementation of the
Framework on 13 May, in which it highlighted that the 13 targets to be implemented
in 2021 were on track to be completed by the fourth quarter of the year. Separately,
on 20 April, the Government published a public investment management document,
which is aimed at enhancing accountability in public investment projects.
Development partners, including bilateral donors, multilateral financial institutions
(World Bank and Asian Development Bank), UNAMA and the Government,
continued to work on the results framework and monitoring system for the
Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework II.
46. On 20 February, Mr. Ghani appointed a four-member committee, chaired by the
chief administrator of the judiciary, to conduct a comprehensive assessment of the
financial and administrative problems, as well as the challenges to the integrity of the
staff, of the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre. The findings of the committee have not
yet been made public. On 26 March, the chief prosecutor of the Centre resigned,
alleging interference in his work. The President appointed a new chief prosecutor and
new heads of prosecution units for the Centre.
47. In collaboration with development partners, UNAMA provided technical
support and recommendations to the Anti-Corruption Commission on a draft interim
national anti-corruption strategy for 2021, pending the adoption of the first long-term
strategy since 2017, when the prior strategy expired. The streamlining of the
institutional framework of anti-corruption bodies continued, with the announced
integration of the Ombudsperson’s Office into the Anti-Corruption Commission. On
12 April, the Wolesi Jirga approved a new law on the authority and jurisdiction of the
courts, as well as the Whistleblowers Protection Law, which was adopted by
presidential legislative decree on 5 September 2018. Both laws await approval by the
Meshrano Jirga (upper house).
48. Some prosecutions of high-ranking public officials for corruption continued. On
28 February, a special panel of the Supreme Court convicted a former Minister for
Commerce and Industry of embezzlement and sentenced him to one year in prison
and a fine of $864,000. The Attorney General’s Office is investigating three other
ministers. From 15 February to 5 May, the primary court of the Anti -Corruption
Justice Centre tried six cases involving 16 defendants, while the App eal Court
finalized four appeals with 12 defendants. On 7 March, the same court convicted a
former provincial governor of Herat Province (who was also a former member of the
Meshrano Jirga) of misuse of authority and sentenced him to two years and six mont hs
in prison and restitution of approximately $1,400. On 3 April, the primary court also
convicted a former mayor of Kabul of forgery and sentenced him to one year and one
month in prison. The limited enforcement of arrest warrants and final judgments
continued to jeopardize accountability.

10/15

21-07380

A/75/926
S/2021/570

49. The Government continued its efforts to build a meritorious public administration.
On 8 April, the electronic human resources management information system, which
will facilitate civil-servant pay, retirement and evaluation systems and allows
governors to have access to information on provincial organizational structures and
employee personnel records, was handed over to the Independent Directorate of Local
Governance and local administrations.
50. To strengthen the oversight role of the parliament and increase the level of
parliamentary engagement in the national budget preparation process, on 1 April the
Minister for Finance announced that he would initiate consultations with the
parliament to reform the process, including the mechanism for identifying and
determining priority provincial budget allocations. He reported expenditure of 13 per
cent for the first quarter.
51. On 7 and 9 March, the United Nations and the Office of the First Vice -President
co-hosted the first in a series of stakeholder consultations to discuss the initial
findings of the common country analysis and the strategic priority outcomes and
theories of change derived therefrom. The findings will define the focus and structure
of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework for
Afghanistan (2022–2025), ensuring alignment with and support for the Afghanistan
National Peace and Development Framework II and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and addressing the priority needs of Afghanistan. Programming will also
prioritize the combined impact of humanitarian, development and peace collaboration.
52. United Nations entities provided technical support to the Government for the
preparation of the 2021 voluntary national report for Afghanistan on progress towards
the Sustainable Development Goals, including the convening of a stakeholder
consultation on 2 May. The report will be finalized by the end of June.

V.

Humanitarian assistance
53. Sustained conflict, natural disasters, chronic poverty, food insecurity and the added
burden of the COVID-19 pandemic caused increasing suffering. Some 18.4 million
people, or almost half the population, need humanitarian assistance in 2021, up from
9.4 million at the beginning of 2020. Between January and March, humanitarian
partners reached 3.7 million people, of 15.7 million, with some form of assistance.
54. As at 17 May, more than 62,000 people were confirmed to have contracted
COVID-19, but the actual number was believed to be much higher. In total,
Afghanistan has received 968,000 vaccine doses through the COVID -19 Vaccine
Global Access Facility and bilateral donations. Close to 500,000 people have been
vaccinated to date, although overall uptake remains slow owing to misinforma tion
and rumours, resulting in public scepticism towards the vaccine. Since late May, cases
of COVID-19 have escalated rapidly owing to the arrival of new variants of the virus.
55. Since the beginning of the pandemic in Afghanistan in March 2020,
humanitarian aid workers have supported the establishment of 29 laboratories for
COVID-19 testing, the redeployment of 34,000 polio surveillance volunteers to assist
with case identification and contact tracing, the provision of more than 42 million
units of protective equipment to health providers and front-line aid workers
nationwide, the training of more than 25,000 health-care workers in infection
prevention and control, and the screening of 11.66 million people at points of entry
since the start of the crisis.
56. Between 13 February and 19 May, health partners provided medical assistance
to more than 378,500 people, of whom 52 per cent were women and girls. The number
of trauma cases in the reporting period was almost 24 per cent higher than for the
same period in 2020.

21-07380

11/15

A/75/926
S/2021/570

57. One confirmed case of polio has been reported since the start of 2021. In
addition to wild polioviruses, Afghanistan has experienced an outbreak of circulating
vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 following an outbreak in Pakistan, resulting in 303
confirmed cases in 2020 and 38 in 2021. Most occurred in areas in which house -tohouse vaccination campaigns had been banned since May 2018 by anti-government
elements. Health partners have conducted three nationwide polio vaccination
campaigns in 2021, each targeting 9.9 million children.
58. Humanitarian partners provided sexual, reproductive health and gender-based
violence response services to over 15,300 people at entry points with Iran (Islamic
Republic of) and Pakistan between 15 February and 17 May. During the same period,
11 emergency reproductive health kits were distributed to maternity hospitals,
supporting over 300,000 women and girls for three months.
59. Food insecurity remained at alarmingly high levels, with 27 out of 34 provinces
above the emergency threshold of acute malnutrition. By the end of May, 14.1 million
people are expected to be at “crisis” and “emergency” levels of food insecurity. It is
expected that almost one in two children under 5 years of age will face acute
malnutrition at some point in 2021. Between 1 February and 19 May, humanitarian
partners provided more than 51,925 metric tons of food and $16 million in cash to
some 3.4 million food-insecure people and supported more than 318,000 shock affected people with livelihood assistance. Worsening conflict and the high likelihood
of drought triggered by the La Niña weather phenomenon will only exacerbate
humanitarian needs.
60. The number of undocumented Afghans returning to Afghanistan remained high,
whereas refugee returns remained low, albeit higher than the return figures recorded
during the same period in 2020. Returns continued to be driven by the COVID -19
outbreak and related lockdowns and restrictions, limited access to health care and the
associated deteriorating socioeconomic circumstances. Between 13 February and
19 May, 331,932 undocumented Afghan migrants and 392 refugees returned from the
Islamic Republic of Iran, 3,946 undocumented Afghans and 200 refugees returned
from Pakistan and 8 refugees returned from other countries. Since 1 January, 423,784
undocumented returnees and refugees have crossed into Afghanistan. The initial
estimates of 654,000 undocumented returns included in the humanitarian response
plan are likely to be significantly exceeded during 2021.
61. Conflict and disasters continued to create new humanitarian needs. Between
13 February and 19 May, over 31,000 people became internally displaced and some
12,000 were affected by natural disasters, mostly floods. Humanitarian partners
provided emergency shelter, household items, winterization assistance and related
cash support to some 31,000 vulnerable people affected by the harsh climate, conflict
and natural disasters.
62. From February to April, the Mine Action Service and partners cleared more than
2.57 km 2 of land contaminated by high-impact explosives, safely removing over
775 items of explosive ordnance to the benefit of 80 communities. In addition,
198,290 people received explosive ordnance risk education.
63. Widespread insecurity continued to present challenges for humanitarian access.
Between 1 January and 19 May, humanitarian workers reported 637 access-related
incidents, a 76 per cent increase compared with the same period in 2020. Between
13 February and 19 May, 5 aid workers were killed, 17 injured and 19 abducted.
Attacks on health care continued, with 15 incidents affecting nine health facilities in
which 11 health workers and patients were killed and 6 injured.

12/15

21-07380

A/75/926
S/2021/570

64. Recognizing the multiple, overlapping challenges during the spring season , the
inter-cluster coordination team developed a spring disaster contingency plan
identifying $390 million to meet the most urgent needs from March to June. The plan
is a subset of the 2021 humanitarian response plan, which remains severely
underfunded, with only 13 per cent of the total requirements of $1.3 billion received
as at 19 May. Furthermore, the capacity to provide essential health -care services and
vaccinations, especially in areas of active conflict and non-government-controlled
areas, is insufficient and limited owing to severe underfunding and the diversion of
scarce resources to the emergency COVID-19 response. Humanitarian actors are
unable to scale up and respond to additional needs unless more funding is provided.

VI.

Counter-narcotics
65. From 15 February to 9 May, law enforcement authorities in Afghanistan
conducted 812 counter-narcotics operations. They led to the seizure of 395 kg of
heroin and 4,077 kg of opium, 53,630 kg of hashish, 5,631 kg of cannabis, 169 kg of
methamphetamine, 3,311 kg of diverse chemical precursors and 56,289 tablets of
methylenedioxymethamphetamine, as well as to the eradication of 126 ha of poppy
cultivated land. The seizures resulted in the arrest of 917 suspects and the confiscation
of 138 vehicles and 121 weapons.
66. On 17 and 21 February, the Airport Interdiction Unit, working with other law
enforcement agencies at Hamid Karzai International Airport, seized 10 carpets
impregnated with 7 kg of heroin and clothes impregnated with 7.5 kg of heroin. Five
suspects were arrested.
67. According to the executive summary of the Afghanistan Opium Survey for
2020, supported by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and published on
3 May, potential opium production in Afghanistan was estimated at 6,300 tons that
year. The average opium yield was 28 kg per ha. The south-western region remained
the major opium-producing region, accounting for 68 per cent of total opium
production in the country. The farm-gate value of opium production in 2020 was
estimated at $300 million, its lowest level since 2009. This is because opium prices,
at $55 per kg, are at their lowest level since the beginning of systematic monitoring,
rendering alternative development activities more profitable for some products than
illicit opium cultivation.

VII.

Mission support
68. As at 31 March, vacancy rates in UNAMA were 13 per cent for international
staff, 13 per cent for United Nations Volunteers, 10 per cent for National Professional
Officers and 3 per cent for national staff, compared with approved rates of 6 per cent,
7 per cent, 3 per cent and 3 per cent, respectively. The proportion of female staff was
34 per cent for international staff, 47 per cent for United Nations Volunteers, 13 per
cent for National Professional Officers and 10 per cent for national staff.
69. While sustaining the delivery of critical programmes and activities during the
COVID-19 pandemic, alternate work arrangements remained in place. In view of the
precarious situation associated with the pandemic and compounded by the uncertain
security situation, UNAMA and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
continued to enhance contingency planning and decided not to increase the levels of
international personnel present at the duty stations and nat ional staff reporting to
work, with numbers to be reviewed regularly in consideration of potential changes in
the COVID-19 caseload, along with regular assessment of security risks to United
Nations personnel and operations.

21-07380

13/15

A/75/926
S/2021/570

70. The United Nations in Afghanistan has received 5,000 doses of the Covishield
vaccine, covering 20 per cent of total eligible personnel, including staff of
international non-governmental organizations. Vaccines are being administered to
personnel who have registered in the vaccine registration and administration portal
and are prioritized in accordance with the occupational health and safety guidelines
of the World Health Organization.

VIII.

Observations
71. Afghanistan is entering a new and uncertain phase of its decades -long conflict.
Progress in the peace talks that began in September 2020 in Doha has slowed, and
fighting continues around the country. While the three-day ceasefire around the Eid
al-Fitr celebrations provided a brief respite from violence, fears of military esca lation
increasingly threaten the atmosphere for genuine negotiations. The announced
withdrawal of the remaining international military presence, due for completion
within months, has underscored the need for national unity around the peace process.
I reiterate my call upon both parties to intensify their efforts in this regard, with the
awareness that an inclusive peace process, in which women, young people and victims
of conflict are meaningfully represented, is essential for a durable resolution of the
conflict. It is only by a negotiated settlement that the violence can end.
72. Regional consensus holds that achieving peace in Afghanistan can benefit
populations by virtue of improved conditions for economic cooperation, cross -border
exchange and the revival of historic ties. Envisaged plans for greater connectivity
would link Afghanistan to the region and the region to Afghanistan. Recognizing the
important role of regional countries in achieving peace in Afghanistan and on the
political front, I appointed Jean Arnault as my Personal Envoy on Afghanistan and
Regional Issues. His work is complementary to and closely coordinated with that of
UNAMA in supporting the peace process.
73. The security situation remains deeply concerning. In the six months followin g
the start of the peace talks in September 2020, the number of civilian casualties has
increased substantially compared with the same period in 2019. The welfare and
protection of civilians is the responsibility of all parties. The deliberate targeting of
civilians by anti-government elements, including the targeted killing of media workers,
civil society activists, members of the judiciary and civil administration, and women,
has been an abominable feature of the conflict. Such attacks must stop immediate ly
and be publicly condemned by all parties, as well as being fully investigated, with
perpetrators held to account.
74. The Government’s efforts to promote and protect fundamental human rights are
commendable. By focusing on the implementation of existing laws and policies, such
as the Elimination of Violence against Women Law, specific actions can be taken
more readily to promote and guarantee women’s rights. Human rights defenders, civil
society and the media are essential to the make-up of Afghan society. Continuous
support for the human rights sector in Afghanistan during this delicate period,
including advocacy for civic space, will be critical.
75. Overcrowding in prisons continues to have a negative impact on conditions of
detention, including increased vulnerability to COVID-19. I call upon the Government
to explore possible measures to reduce the prison population, including through
careful consideration of limiting pretrial detention and increased use of alternative
sentencing, as well as addressing overcrowding.

14/15

21-07380

A/75/926
S/2021/570

76. The humanitarian situation remains extremely precarious. The significant
number of people facing crisis or emergency levels of food insecurity and the
expected high rates of acute malnutrition in children under the age of 5 years are
alarming. The substantial likelihood of drought triggered by the second La Niña
weather event in three years will exacerbate the humanitarian needs. I call upon donor
countries to mobilize early contributions in response to the 2021 humanitarian
response plan, which remains severely underfunded, in order to allow humanitarian
actors to urgently scale up life-saving activities. I urge all parties to refrain from
attacks against humanitarian workers and facilities, ensure safe and unimpeded access
and create an enabling environment for humanitarian assistance.
77. Afghanistan will continue to depend on civilian assistance for the foreseeable
future. I welcome the progress made in taking forward commitments made at the 2020
Afghanistan Conference, in particular the Afghanistan Partnership Framework.
Strong partnership between the Government and donors will be essential to clearly
define priorities and support Afghanistan on the road to sustainable economic and
social growth, including steps to curb the illicit eco nomy.
78. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to be felt, with concerns about increases in
cases as a result of new variants. The start of the vaccination campaign and continued
measures to limit the spread of the virus are important elements for sustainably
reducing the caseload. The United Nations will continue to support the Government
and the people in addressing the impact of the pandemic and is working to ensure
equitable access to vaccines.
79. The drawdown of the international military presence reflects a significant
change in the operating environment for the United Nations and non -governmental
partners. The presence of the Organization remains premised on the principle of
staying and delivering. The United Nations has stood by and worked with the peopl e
of Afghanistan for 75 years and remains committed to providing impartial, neutral
and integrated assistance in support of peace, human rights and sustainable, inclusive
development that provide hope and opportunities for all. I call upon all parties to
maintain their commitment to protect United Nations and humanitarian personnel and
enable them to carry out their vital work in a safe and unhindered manner.
80. I thank all United Nations personnel in Afghanistan, my Special Representative
and Head of UNAMA, Deborah Lyons, and my Personal Envoy, Jean Arnault, for
their continued dedication under challenging conditions to fulfilling the commitments
in support of the Government and people of Afghanistan.

21-07380

15/15
