S/2021/172

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 February 2021
Original: English

Situation in South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2514
(2020), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) to 15 March 2021 and requested the Secretary-General to
report on the implementation of the Mission’s mandate every 90 days. The report
covers political and security developments, the humanitarian and human rights
situation and progress towards the implementation of the Mission’s mandate since the
previous report dated 9 December 2020 (S/2020/1180).

II. Political and economic developments
2.
The parties to the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan made progress on the formation of the Revitalized
Transitional Government of National Unity. On 30 December, the President of South
Sudan, Salva Kiir, appointed deputy governors for six states. The incumbent
Transitional Government of National Unity was allocated Jonglei, Western Bahr
el-Ghazal and Western Equatoria while the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement/Army in Opposition (SPLM/A-IO) was allocated Eastern Equatoria,
Lakes and Unity. On 22 January, Mr. Kiir appointed deputy governors from the Other
Political Parties coalition for Warrap, Northern Bahr el-Ghazal and Central Equatoria.
Significantly, SPLM/A-IO and the Other Political Parties coalition adhered to the 35
per cent quota for women in their appointments. The reconstitution of the Transitional
National Legislative Assembly and the appointment of the Council of States,
however, remained pending. The absence of county commissioners continued to
affect the provision of social services, conflict mitigation and humanitarian action.
3.
On 29 January, following a six-month impasse over the position of Governor of
Upper Nile, Mr. Kiir appointed Budhok Ayang Kur and James Tor Monybuny as
Governor and Deputy Governor, respectively, of the state. On 28 January, he replaced
the Governor of Warrap, Bona Panek Biar, with General Aleu Ayieny Aleu, stating
subsequently that he had done so to improve law and order. On 30 January, the new
officials were sworn in.
4.
With regard to the Abyei, Greater Pibor and Ruweng administrative areas,
representatives of the incumbent Transitional Government of National Unity and

21-02041 (E)

250221

*2102041*

S/2021/172

SPLM/A-IO agreed on 18 January to allocate 55 per cent of administrative posts to the
incumbent Transitional Government of National Unity, 27 per cent to SPLM/A-IO,
10 per cent to the South Sudan Opposition Alliance and 8 per cent to the Other
Political Parties coalition.
Implementation of the Revitalized Agreement
5.
From 7 to 13 December, the senior commanders of the South Sudan People’s
Defence Forces (SSPDF) and the opposition participated in a training course on
leadership, peacebuilding and reconstruction, held in Nairobi.
6.
The Joint Military Ceasefire Commission reported that, while it had registered
87,000 soldiers, the planned graduation and deployment of those forces had been
further postponed. The lack of a coherent security strategy and funding impeded
progress on the implementation of the transitional security arrangements and left
cantonment and training in dire straits. On 28 January, at a reconstituted Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission seminar on the transitional security
arrangements, the Chair of the National Transitional Committee, Tut Gatluak, stated
that Mr. Kiir had ordered the graduation of the necessary unified forces at the earliest
possible opportunity.
7.
Following the review of the Public Financial Management and Accountability
Act 2011 (Amendment) Bill of 2020 and the Southern Sudan National Audit Chamber
Act of 2011, the National Constitutional Amendment Committee concluded a two day stakeholder validation workshop in Juba on 1 December. The stakeholders
proposed the inclusion of gender-based budgeting techniques and capacity-building
for legislators, among other things. On 28 January, the Committee started to review
the draft amendments to the Petroleum Revenue Act and the Public Financial
Management and Accountability Act. On 28 January, the Committee reported to the
First Vice-President the financial constraints that it faced and sought support from the
Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity.
Peace process developments
8.
From 1 to 5 December, SPLM/A-IO held its sixth national conference, in Juba,
at which it reiterated its commitment to the Revitalized Agreement and called upon
partners to work together to address the challenges faced in the peace process. The
party recommended, inter alia, increasing the benchmark for the participation of
women to 40 per cent, establishing an independently m anaged fund for the
implementation of the Agreement, holding parties accountable for the past actions of
defectors once they have joined them, and graduating the necessary unified forces.
9.
From 3 to 5 December, the Community of Sant’Egidio convened talks in Rome
between the South Sudan Opposition Movements Alliance and the Revitalized
Transitional Government of National Unity on the cessation of hostilities and a
declaration of principles that was pending from the talks held in October. Howe ver,
the parties were unable to agree on several issues, deferring them to the next round.
10. On 5 December, Brigadier General Kennedy Ongie, the Commander of Section 9
of the Tafeng Division of SPLM/A-IO in Eastern Equatoria, defected to the National
Salvation Front (NAS). On 10 January, the Chair of the Communication Committee
and Spokesperson for the National Democratic Movement, David Lawrence Lual,
resigned from the party, arguing that its leadership was flawed. On 22 January, the
Khartoum-based faction South Sudan United Front-Progressive Peace announced its
intention to return to the original group. On 1 February, the Deputy Chief of Staff for
Administration of NAS resigned.

2/17

21-02041

S/2021/172

11. On 21 January, Major General Defalla, the Deputy Chair of the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification Mechanism, during
a meeting of its Technical Committee held in Juba, noted that, although the ceasefire
continued to hold, the defections from the opposition forces to the Government were
a source of rising tension, in particular in Central Equatoria.
12. On 26 January, SPLM/A-IO issued a press statement accusing government
forces of attacking Banketa, Upper Nile, an SPLM/A-IO assembly area. It condemned
the attack and demanded an immediate withdrawal of government forces to avoid
escalation.
Regional engagements and developments
13. On 20 December, the Vice-President for Gender and Youth Cluster, Rebecca
Nyandeng De Mabior, attended the thirty-eighth Extraordinary Summit of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) Heads of State and
Government, in Djibouti. The Summit commended the parties for the progress made
in the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement and appreciated the resumption
of the Rome peace talks.
14. On 10 January, the Deputy Chair of the Sovereign Council of the Sudan,
Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo, also known as Hemedti, met Mr. Kiir in Juba and gave
him a briefing on the implementation of the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan.
On 14 January, Tut Gatluak, the Presidential Adviser on Security Affairs, informed
the Chair of the Sovereign Council of the Sudan, General Abdel Fattah al -Burhan,
that Mr. Kiir had offered to mediate in the border conflict between Ethiopia and the
Sudan over the disputed Fashaqah region.
Other major national developments
15. On 27 January, while closing a peace conference in Juba for Jonglei State and
the Greater Pibor Administrative Area, Mr. Kiir called upon the communities to
forgive each other and to coexist peacefully. In the conference communiqué,
abductions, revenge and arbitrary killings and cattle raiding were condemned, and
calls were made for justice and accountability, security and law enforcement, the
strengthening of relationships with neighbouring communities, humanitarian
interventions and the provision of socioeconomic and peacebuilding opportunities.
16. In a statement issued on 26 January, the Jieng Council of Elders expressed
concern about escalating community violence across the country, the co llapse of the
economy and the lack of progress in the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement. It also endorsed the outcomes of the national dialogue and recommended
its implementation.
Economic situation
17. The low price of oil has further depreciated the South Sudanese pound. The
rising gap between the official rate and the parallel market rate continued to cause
hardship and tension. Inflationary pressure has aggravated food insecurity for
households, including those hosting a total of 1.24 million internally displaced
persons living outside displacement sites.
18. The national budget for 2020/2021 has not yet been approved. The proposed
resource envelope for 2020/2021 indicated a fiscal deficit of over 50 per cent of the
$1.3 billion budget, with no clear indication of how it would be funded. However, the
Government continued with its public financial management reform agenda, with the
National Revenue Authority eliminating unduly applied tax exemptions.

21-02041

3/17

S/2021/172

19. Efforts to diversify the economy continued through the promotion by the
Government of gum arabic exports and foreign investment as well as tourism.
Separately, in January, South Sudan and the Sudan reached an agreement to increase
oil production. In January, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, supported
by the United Nations Development Programme, launched a review of the national
development strategy for 2018–2021 in order to update and reflect national priorities
for the transition period.

III. Security situation
20. The security context continued to be dominated by localized and subnational
violence, with an overall increase in incidents compared with the previous reporting
period coinciding with the onset of the dry season. The linkages between local
conflicts and national dynamics continued, a trend that was further underlined by the
latest outbreak of violence in Maban. Macroeconomic pressure, political competition
for local administration positions, increased pressure on livelihoods and food price
increases were layered over pre-existing local and national fissures, spurring
localized conflicts. Central Equatoria remained the key hotspot for conflict -related
sexual violence, accounting for 53 per cent of the 11 incidents reported.
Greater Upper Nile region
21. In mid-December, conflict broke out in Maban, Upper Nile, as tensions between
eastern and western Mabanese flared over the incomplete transitional security
arrangements. Initial tensions with SPLM/A-IO soldiers cantoned outside their
villages at Liang, Upper Nile, without consistent supplies, led to several clashes in
the area between combined National Security Service, SSPDF and Mabanese forces
on one side and SPLM/A-IO supported by Mabanese from Beneshowa, Upper Nile,
on the other.
22. Intraethnic tensions were the key driver of subnational violence throughout
Jonglei. Receding flood waters enabled the movement of armed young people, leading
to instances of violence. On 15 January, large-scale clashes among young Nuers
occurred in Paguir, Fangak, which reportedly resulted in five dead and 18 wounded.
The clashes were reportedly triggered by young people attempting to disarm other
local young people without instructions or permission from local authorities. Violence
persisted in Pibor and surrounding areas through December and January, primarily
between the Kurenen and Lango groups.
23. In Unity, the security situation was defined by inter-Nuer conflict in the areas
of Koch, Leer, Mayendit and Rubkona, as well as by cross-border and inter-ethnic
tension involving communities in Unity and neighbouring Warrap and Lakes.
Greater Equatoria region
24. Flooding, land and resource disputes and defections served as drivers of
insecurity in Central Equatoria. In Terekeka, Central Equatoria, disputes over land
and resources led to a series of violent clashes and revenge attacks between Mundari
sub-clans. The conflict also spread into Lainya in the southern part of the state as
some Mundari groups moved south, bringing the total number of people killed to
approximately 70. The movement of the Mundari into Lainya drew NAS into the local
conflict. On 7 January, Mundari cattle keepers attacked two cattle camps in Lainya
belonging to the Pajulu community. Subsequently, on 12 January, NAS -affiliated
armed actors conducted cattle raiding activity against the Mundari, which led to at
least 12 deaths. NAS also attacked an SSPDF position at Loka on 25 January.

4/17

21-02041

S/2021/172

Nevertheless, an overall decrease in NAS activity was noted compared with the
previous reporting period.
25. In Kajo Kaji, Central Equatoria, on 27 December, clashes broke out between
SPLM/A-IO and the forces of Major General Lokujo, resulting in the death of three
SPLM/A-IO soldiers and the capture of four soldiers loyal to Major General Lokujo.
The subsequent deployment of SSPDF acted as a buffer between the clashing forces.
Greater Bahr el-Ghazal region
26. Intracommunal and intercommunal violence and cross-state clashes continued
to prevail in the greater Bahr el-Ghazal region. In Tonj North, Warrap, cattle-related
conflicts in the second half of December 2020 and January 2021 occurred mostly
between Kirik- and Noi-allied communities. Meanwhile, the Luanyjang engaged in
fighting with Ananatak communities comprising Thiik, Akok and Jalwau, in Tonj
East. Conflict drivers included long-standing grievances, the seasonal migration of
cattle, increased mobility, the lack of effective state-level intervention and the loss of
cattle and crops owing to flooding.
27. In Lakes, communal violence and cattle raids centred on Cueibet, Rumbek
North, Rumbek Centre, Rumbek East and Yirol West, with 15 people killed in Mayath
Payam, Cueibet, on 9 December alone. In addition, Dinka Atuot cattle keepers from
Yirol West clashed with Moru cattle keepers in Mvolo, Western Equatoria, on
15 December over grazing lands.

IV. Humanitarian situation
28. Humanitarian needs were dire in 2020 and are projected to remain high in 2021.
According to the 2021 humanitarian needs overview, some 8.3 million people are
estimated to be in need of assistance, an increase of 800,000 people from the previous
year.
29. According to the latest Integrated Food Security Phase Classification analysis,
conducted in December, 5.82 million people, or 48 per cent of the population, were
projected to face severe acute food insecurity between December 2020 and March
2021. In the same period, it is estimated that 11,000 people would endure
“catastrophic” (phase 5) acute food insecurity in Pibor, and an estimated 1.79 million
people were likely to face “emergency” (phase 4) acute food insecurity. Some
1.4 million children under 5 years of age were expected to be acu tely malnourished
in 2021, the highest caseload for acute malnutrition since the start of the crisis in
December 2013. Some 483,000 pregnant and lactating women will need treatment for
malnutrition in 2021.
30. On the basis of these projections, humanitarian organizations scaled up lifesaving operations in areas of most severe acute food insecurity, including Pibor and
Akobo (Jonglei) and Aweil South, Tonj East, Tonj North and Tonj South (Warrap). By
31 December, humanitarian organizations had reached over 23,000 people in Pibor
and 5,600 in Duk, both in Jonglei, with food assistance.
31. Flooding affected over 1 million people and displaced 480,000 persons between
July and December 2020. Meanwhile, humanitarian organizations targeted over
420,000 people for live-saving responses in flood-affected areas. Physical access to
Jonglei and the Greater Pibor Administrative Area, however, remained challenging.
32. Subnational violence and insecurity continued to displace large numbers of
people. In December, an estimated 46,000 people were displaced by subnational
violence, armed attacks on civilians and armed clashes in several locations in Central

21-02041

5/17

S/2021/172

Equatoria, Lakes and Warrap. Violence resulted in civilian displacement and
casualties in Central Equatoria and Upper Nile in January. Some 8,000 people were
displaced in Mundri East, Western Equatoria, and an estimated 13,000 people were
displaced by fighting in Maban, Upper Nile. In the meantime, according to the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, over 4,000 refugees
spontaneously returned in December.
33. Humanitarian access deteriorated during the reporting period. As at 1 February,
86 humanitarian access incidents were recorded. Owing to insecurity, 22 aid workers
were relocated in four locations. In addition, two humanitarian workers were arbitrary
detained. No humanitarian workers were killed.
34. Humanitarian organizations reached more than 7.3 million people with
humanitarian assistance and protection services in 2020. This represente d 97 per cent
of the revised target of 7.6 million people through the humanitarian response plan for
2020, including those reached through coronavirus disease (COVID -19) response
activities. As at 31 December 2020, $1.1 billion was secured against the $1.9 billion
requested in the plan. The steep funding gap affected response activities, in particular
water, sanitation and hygiene services, increasing the risk of disease outbreaks.

V. Implementation of the Mission’s mandated tasks
A.

Protection of civilians
35. Civilians continued to face threats of physical violence, such as killings and
injuries, abductions, forced recruitment and sexual violence, including owing to
continuing tensions in Jonglei and the flare-up of violence in Central Equatoria,
Warrap and Upper Nile. The Mission continued to respond to these threats through a
comprehensive approach that combined the proactive, robust posture of peacekeepers,
key leadership engagements with military and political counterparts, community level conflict-resolution initiatives, support for rule of law and justice institutions and
other programmatic activities tailored to address root causes of conflict.
36. In Jonglei and the Greater Pibor Administrative Area, interventions to convene
communities for dialogue seem to have been successful in mitigating widespread
violence, despite rumours of mobilization and sporadic clashes. The Mission
facilitated separate consultative meetings between Murle and Lou Nuer young people
and traditional leaders in Juba in early December. Both forums resolved to cease
hostilities and pursue peace between the communities. On 25 and 26 January,
UNMISS further supported the work of the high-level committee, led by the VicePresident, James Wani Igga, by airlifting approximately 100 traditional, youth and
political leaders from greater Jonglei to attend a consultative forum led by the
committee in Juba in January. The forum adopted resolutions containing
commitments to, inter alia, a return of all abducted women and children, the
establishment of special courts, the cessation of cattle raiding and revenge attacks,
the holding accountable of leaders who aid criminals in their areas and a call for
comprehensive civilian disarmament across Jonglei and the Greater Pibor
Administrative Area. In parallel, UNMISS peacekeepers conducted regular patrols in
Jonglei to project their presence, increase security and support the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. On 1 January, the Mission and its humanitarian and
international non-governmental organization partners commenced preparations for
the launch in February of a multi-agency community violence reduction programme
in Jonglei supported by the joint UNMISS and United Nations country team
reconciliation, stabilization and resilience trust fu nd.

6/17

21-02041

S/2021/172

37. In response to the surge of violence in Maban, Upper Nile, the Mission engaged
with political and community leaders at the national and local levels. It also increased
the number of peacekeepers in Bunj and reinforced their capacities. Peacekeepers
conducted patrols in the area to build confidence, assess the security situation and
reopen roads to enable the delivery of humanitarian assistance. From 25 to 27 January,
the Deputy Special Representative (Political) for South Sudan visited Maban, where
he engaged with key stakeholders, including representatives of the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification Mechanism,
communities, humanitarian partners and local authorities, and called upon all parties
to immediately deescalate the situation and prevent the further loss of life and
displacement of civilians.
38. In January, to address intercommunal violence in the greater Tonj area, Warrap,
the Mission sought to establish a temporary operating base in Romic but was
prevented from obtaining access to the area by the authorities. The Mission also
conducted peace campaigns between 16 and 18 December that engaged youth and
local leaders in order to encourage non-violent approaches to resolving communal
conflict. Furthermore, to mitigate migration-related violence in Warrap and Western
Bahr el-Ghazal under a project funded through the reconciliation, stabilization and
resilience trust fund, the Mission continued to support state and national authorities
in establishing a mobile special court. This included facilitating a workshop from
14 to 18 December for traditional leaders, prosecutors, police and prison personnel
nominated to support the court. In addition to investigating crimes, the court served
as a rapid response mechanism to deploy to hotspot locations in order to promote
accountability at the onset of violence and deescalate tensions.
39. In January, clashes in Central Equatoria involving Mundari cattle keepers
prompted UNMISS to deploy peacekeeping forces to Lainya on two occasions to deter
violence and protect civilians from further attacks, after which relative calm returned
to the area. On 21 January, UNMISS engaged with the Paramount Chief of Lainya,
the bishop, youth leaders and elders, who expressed appreciation for UNMISS being
in the area and requested its continued force presence.
40. The situation in the former protection of civilians sites in Bor, Wau and Juba – which
in 2020 transitioned to conventional camps for internally displaced persons under
sovereign control of the Government of South Sudan – remained calm. The Mission
continued to monitor the situation, maintained quick -reaction capacity to respond to
emergencies and provided critical support to authorities, in particular the South Sudan
National Police Service, regarding their responsibility to ensure safety and security
in the camps. Implementation of the agreement with the National Police Service on
operational coordination, signed on 5 November, is advancing, including through the
establishment of coordinated patrol teams, joint security coordination centres and the
enhancement of co-location arrangements. The Mission also continued to engage with
humanitarian partners who operate in the sites and with internally displaced persons,
in support of efforts to promote peaceful co-existence among communities in and
around the camps.
41. Joint efforts between the Mission and humanitarian partners on the ground to
redesignate the Bentiu protection of civilians site – home to 97,321 people – progressed.
During a joint field visit to Bentiu with the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees on 26 and 27 January, the Special Representative for South Sudan met with
the Governor of Unity and signed a memorandum of understanding on the
redesignation of the site. During the meeting, the Special Representative reiterated
the Mission’s commitment to continuing to provide support to the Government in
taking on responsibility for security, including through assistance for the South Sudan
National Police Service.

21-02041

7/17

S/2021/172

42. In Malakal, the Mission convened a joint task force with humanitarian partners
to prepare for an eventual redesignation of the Malakal protection of civilians site,
which currently hosts 33,137 internally displaced persons. With the delayed
appointment of the Governor of Upper Nile and tensions between residents of the site
and the town of Malakal, the Mission continued to carefully monitor the situation
while maintaining efforts to promote peaceful co -existence in the area. It held two
workshops with stakeholders from Malakal and the protection of civilians site,
including traditional and youth leaders. Both workshops addressed issues of mistrust
and the promotion of social cohesion between the two communities.
43. In support of the implementation of the peace process at the grass-roots level,
local conflict management, reconciliation and social cohesion, UNMISS conducted
22 workshops, community dialogues and peace campaigns and disseminated local and
national peace agreements in addition to providing capacity-building assistance to
traditional authorities, women and young people. A total of 1,883 participants
(including 614 women) were reached through such activities.
44. UNMISS continued to support broader protection activities through quick impact projects. A total of 41 projects with an overall budget of $2 million were
approved by the Mission, with 80 per cent of funding released as at 20 January 2021.
About 7 per cent of the budget will target peacebuilding structures; 36 per cent will
be used to improve access to basic services to facilitate the dignified, safe and
voluntary return of displaced people; and 42 per cent will be used to construct or
rehabilitate rule of law facilities aimed at providing justice and security services. The
100 per cent commitment of funds will support interventions targeting peacebuilding,
returns and rule of law facilities.
45. As at 1 February, the UNMISS force conducted 54,594 patrols, including 1,170
short-duration patrols, 389 long-duration patrols, 101 dynamic air patrols and
26 riverine patrols. Women were included in 312 of the patrols. A total of 9,460
patrols were conducted in and around protection of civilians sites. Through its regular
patrols, the UNMISS force continued to provide protection to women and girls.
46. The United Nations police continued to expand its outwards protection posture
and footprint beyond the protection of civilians sites, focusing on deterring and
mitigating violence against civilians and building confidence. A total of 170
confidence- and trust-building patrols, 44 short-duration patrols, 23 long-duration
patrols, 17 dynamic air patrols and 287 high-visibility patrols was conducted. Of those
541 patrols, 290 included women.
47. Furthermore, the United Nations police, in cooperation with th e South Sudan
National Police Service and other stakeholders, conducted nine radio awareness
programmes intended to raise public awareness of community safety, democratic
policing, sexual and gender-based violence, conflict-related sexual violence, gender
equality and human rights. In addition, the United Nations police held 23 training
sessions on human rights, community security, sexual and gender-based violence,
crime scene management, investigations and COVID-19 preventive measures for 704
South Sudan National Police Service officers, including 212 women. It also
conducted 925 technical assistance sessions with the National Police Service during
which 5,120 officers, including 1,316 women, received information on those topics.
The training programmes are aimed at building the capacity of the National Police
Service and other law enforcement agencies, thereby enhancing professionalism,
accountability and the community-oriented disposition to further guarantee and foster
the protection of civilians and build durable peace.

8/17

21-02041

S/2021/172

Rule of law and accountability
48. UNMISS continued its support for national accountability measures for security
incidents affecting protection of civilians sites. During the reporting period,
21 persons suspected of being responsible for serious security incidents within the
protection of civilians sites in Bentiu and Malakal were detained. UNMISS referred
four persons to national authorities for investigation and prosecution. Eight
individuals were tried by mobile courts deployed in Bentiu and Malakal, resulting in
six convictions, with imprisonment terms from 2 to 10 years.
49. UNMISS also continued to support the national criminal justice chain in
promoting accountability across the country. In December, six UNMISS correc tions
officers were deployed to Wau and Kuacjok to provide case-based mentoring and other
technical support to the National Prison Service of South Sudan, facilitate improved
prison operations, promote secure and humane conditions of detention and forge
stronger links with the entire national justice chain in order to expedite the review of
pending cases, including through bail and other alternatives to pretrial detention.
50. On 13 December, the UNMISS-supported mobile general court martial,
composed of judges, prosecutors and defence counsel of the SSPDF military justice
directorate, concluded its session in Bentiu. It heard 16 cases involving 33 suspects.
Trial proceedings were concluded in seven cases, involving nine suspects charged
with serious offences such as murder, culpable homicide and robbery. One suspect
was acquitted for lack of evidence; the eight remaining suspects were convicted and
sentenced to terms of imprisonment ranging from two to six years, plus compensation
in the form of cattle or cash equivalents to the victims or their families. All convicted
service members, who held ranks from private to captain, were discharged from active
military service and will serve their sentences in a civilian prison.
51. Between 2 and 9 December, UNMISS supported the Ministry of Youth and
Sports in carrying out five inclusive public consultations, including three virtual
consultations involving young people from across the country, on the African Youth
Charter. The consultations sought to raise awareness of the content and importance of
the Charter. Following the consultations, all stakeholders, including line ministries,
parliamentarians, independent government bodies and youth-led civil society
organizations, unanimously endorsed the Charter and recommend ed its ratification by
the Transitional National Legislative Assembly, once reconstituted.

B.

Monitoring and investigating human rights violations
52. As at 1 February, UNMISS documented a total of 155 incidents that negatively
affected the human rights and protection situation, including arbitrary killings,
abductions, conflict-related sexual violence, arbitrary arrests and detention (including
proxy detention), torture and ill-treatment, forced military recruitment and the looting
and destruction of civilian property. These incidents resulted in at least 376 civilian
casualties (251 killed and 125 injured), including at least 21 women and 17 children. The
incidents were attributed to self-defence groups (116); SSPDF (11); SPLM/A-IO (7);
NAS (4); the South Sudan National Police Service (3); SPLM/A-IO Riek Machar
defectors affiliated with government forces in Wau (3); the National Security Service (2);
joint SSPDF and SPLM/A-IO Riek Machar forces (1); joint SSPDF and South Sudan
National Police Service forces (1); and clashes between SPLM/A-IO Riek Machar
elements and armed young people from the Mabanese community (1). Attribution for
six other incidents remained pending.
53. As in previous reporting periods, attacks carried out by self-defence groups
continued to account for most of the violence affecting local populations. By early

21-02041

9/17

S/2021/172

January, the overall number of such incidents, in particular in Lakes, Warrap and
Eastern Equatoria, had risen by more than 30 per cent compared with the same period
in 2020. This included a series of clashes around Juba involving armed elements from
various communities. Also of concern was an increase in the number of casualties
attributed to conventional parties to the conflict (up from 27 to 73 compared with the
previous reporting period), as well as the impact on local populations of rising
tensions and clashes involving SPLM/A-IO defectors affiliated with government
forces in areas of Central Equatoria, Upper Nile and Western Equatoria.
54. UNMISS continued to receive alarming reports of censorship, harassment and
arbitrary arrest and detention by the National Security Service of journalists, activists
and other civilians expressing views that were critical or dissenting from those of the
Government. At least two journalists and human rights defenders were threatened,
arbitrarily arrested and detained in connection with their professional activities during
the reporting period.
55. The imposition of the death penalty remained of concern, in particular
considering inadequate safeguards to protect due process and fair trial rights. During
the reporting period, civil society actors secured the release of five death row inmates
(including one woman) after successful appeals processes or the acceptance of
compensation by victims’ families.
56. On 29 January, the Government announced that the Cabinet had instructed the
Ministry of Justice to take steps to establish the transitional justice mechanisms
provided for in the Revitalized Agreement. However, as at 1 February, the
Government had not yet signed the memorandum of understanding with the African
Union for the establishment of the hybrid court. Accountability for serious human
rights violations and abuses remained low.
57. UNMISS carried out 11 human rights due diligence policy ri sk assessments
before travel and material assistance was provided to non-United Nations security
forces in support of the implementation of the peace process.
Children and armed conflict
58. The number of children affected by grave violations decreased from 23 to 11
(four boys and seven girls).
59. Five children (two boys and three girls) were verified as victims of abduction;
four girls as survivors of rape; one boy was injured and another was a victim of
recruitment and use. Children were most affected in Unity (four girls) and Western
Bahr el-Ghazal (two boys and two girls), Central Equatoria (one girl), Upper Nile
(one boy) and Warrap (one boy).
60. Violations were perpetrated by, among others, SSPDF (one boy and four girls)
and SPLM/A-IO (two boys and three girls). A violation against one boy resulted from
crossfire between SPLM/A-IO and an unknown group. No attacks on schools or
health-care facilities nor any instances of denial of humanitarian access were verified
during the reporting period.
61. In line with the Government’s action plan on children associated with armed
conflict, between 27 October and 3 December, the country task force on monitoring
and reporting supported the establishment of three state-level technical committees
in Kuacjok, Wau and Torit, bringing the total number of such committees to nine. The
committees constitute the key state-level structures that oversee implementation of
the action plan. Furthermore, between 8 and 10 December, the task force delivered a
capacity-building workshop in Juba for the specialized military justice sector, drawn
from all parties, benefiting 20 participants (17 men and 3 women).

10/17

21-02041

S/2021/172

62. In addition, 6,728 people (5,288 men and 1,440 women) across the country, 205
newly deployed UNMISS personnel (146 men and 59 women) and 99 members of
armed forces and groups (91 men and 8 women) benefited from child protection
awareness-raising, mainstreaming and training sessions.
Conflict-related sexual violence
63. UNMISS continued to observe concerning levels of sexual violence perpetrated
by parties to the conflict, self-defence groups or other armed elements involved in
localized violence. The Mission verified 11 incidents of conflict -related sexual
violence involving 16 survivors, including six girls. Victims, whose ages ranged from
13 to 50, were subjected to, inter alia, rape (1), gang rape (3) and attempted rape (1).
Incidents were attributed to SSPDF (6) and defected SPLM/A -IO Riek Machar
elements allegedly affiliated with government security force s (1), while unidentified
armed elements were responsible for four incidents.
64. UNMISS continued to engage with parties to the conflict on the prevention of
sexual violence. In January, pursuant to the NAS unilateral communiqué issued by
Thomas Cirillo in September 2020, UNMISS delivered three remote training
programmes on conflict-related sexual violence to four senior NAS officials,
including the group’s designated high-level focal point on conflict-related sexual
violence, to enable them to disseminate knowledge among the NAS leadership and
field commanders. On 27 January, the senior leadership of the Joint Defence Board
signed the action plan for the armed forces on addressing conflict -related sexual
violence in South Sudan. The document – which builds upon the SSPDF and
SPLM/A-IO action plans issued in 2019 – standardizes efforts to prevent and respond
to conflict-related sexual violence for a three-year period until December 2023. Its
public launch remains pending.
65. To mark the 16 Days of Activism against Gender-based Violence campaign, in
early December national and local authorities, in collaboration with civil society and
the United Nations, carried out nationwide awareness-raising activities on sexual and
gender-based violence throughout South Sudan. These included a joint campaign by
UNMISS and the national and state ministries of gender, child and social welfare to
denounce the stigmatization of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, with over
200 participants attending workshops, focus group discussions and radio programmes
in locations across the country.

C.

Creating conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance
66. As at 1 February, in coordination with humanitarian partners, UNMISS
conducted 389 long-duration patrols and 1,170 short-duration patrols across the
country to support the delivery of assistance and ensure the protection of humanitarian
workers, including through the establishment of temporary operating bases. It
provided force protection to 264 integrated missions, enabling access to high-risk
areas. In addition, it conducted 801 force protection patrols supporting convoys and
humanitarian partners, including non-governmental organizations. The force also
conducted maintenance of several key main supply routes, including the Juba-Bor and
Mankien-Jonglei roads.
67. The Mine Action Service responded to requests from local authorities, SSPDF,
the Embassy of the United States of America, road construction companies and
community members to remove and dispose of 290 items of explosive ordnance from
residential compounds, along roadsides and in villages in several states.

21-02041

11/17

S/2021/172

68. As at 1 February, the Mine Action Service had deployed 20 teams, which had
released 1,277,006 m 2 of land and destroyed 963 explosive items and 60,205 rounds
of small arms ammunition. This improved safety for civilians and conditions for the
voluntary return and resettlement of refugees and internally displaced persons. Over
18 million m 2 of land remains contaminated across 18 per cent of payams, primarily
located in the Equatorias and on the main return routes of returnees.
69. On 16 December, a grenade exploded inside a tukul in Jur River, Western Bahr
el-Ghazal, which killed two boys and injured another three children (one girl a nd two
boys) when one of the boys tried to play with the item. The Mine Action Service
investigated the accident, delivered explosive ordnance risk education to the
communities and assessed 2,500 m 2 of the surrounding areas. No additional explosive
items were found.

D.

Supporting the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement and
the peace process
70. UNMISS continued its good offices with the parties to and partners and
stakeholders of the Revitalized Agreement. These included several meetings between
the Special Representative and senior officials of the Revitalized Transitional
Government of National Unity and other representatives in support of the timely
implementation of the Agreement. The Special Representative also engaged with
regional envoys to coordinate and reinforce efforts. UNMISS supported a joint visit
on 23 January to training sites in Rajaf (Central Equatoria) and Maridi (Western
Equatoria) by the Minister for Defence and Veteran Affairs, Angelina Teny, the
Special Envoy of IGAD, Ismail Wais, the Interim Chair of the reconstituted Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, Major General Charles Tai Gituai,
ambassadors of States members of the African Union and representatives of the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism. The visit allowed for key government, IGAD and African Union partners
to gain first-hand knowledge and promote progress. On 28 January, the African
Union, IGAD and the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
issued a joint statement expressing concern about the slow implementation of the
transitional security arrangements and the lack of food, medicine, shelter and separate
facilities for women in the training sites. The partners recommended that the
Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity improve conditions, graduate
the necessary unified forces and publish their redeployment plan. They also called
upon the Presidency to engender the political will across all implementing
mechanisms to make up for lost time and implement the transitional security
arrangements in letter and spirit.
71. On 3 December, UNMISS participated in the inaugural meeting, held in Juba,
of the reconstituted working committee on constitutional affairs of the reconstituted
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, which is tasked with monitoring the
implementation of constitutional processes under the Revitalized Agreement.
UNMISS supported the reconstituted Commission and the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) in convening a
workshop in Juba for women leaders on the constitution-making process, on 2 and
3 December. UNMISS also participated in the working committees of the
reconstituted Commission on governance and humanitarian affairs, including by
providing technical support.
72. UNMISS continued to promote national and subnational engagement to advance
civic and political space through the Political Parties Forum. On 9 and 10 December,
UNMISS convened a hybrid Political Parties Forum seminar in Juba, with the

12/17

21-02041

S/2021/172

participation of national and state representatives. The attendees re affirmed their
commitment to the peace agreement and the use of dialogue to resolve outstanding
issues. They also committed themselves to upholding the principles of transparency,
inclusivity and respect for media freedom.
73. UNMISS hosted two radio programmes to bring together working professionals and
leaders to exchange views on improving livelihood opportunities and peacebuilding.
74. While UNMISS continued to engage in wide-ranging activities to mitigate and
prevent the spread of COVID-19 in South Sudan, the pandemic created further
limitations to its ability to carry out its mandate and was an additional factor in the
slowing of the implementation of the peace agreement. The number of in -person
meetings with key interlocutors had to be reduced; local capacities to implement the
peace agreement, such as required training related to transitional security
arrangements, were undermined; and economic challenges due to the pandemic
resulted in an increase in violence. Operational costs increased in many mand ate
areas, for instance owing to the need for physical distancing during helicopter
assessment missions. However, UNMISS successfully managed to continue to operate
and implement its mandate despite these constraints.

E.

Women and peace and security
75. UNMISS continued to engage with key political decision makers and women’s
networks on the need for improved implementation of the gender provisions in the
Revitalized Agreement. The appointment of three female Deputy Governors was a
step in the right direction, but the 35 per cent benchmark envisioned in the Agreement
remained unmet. UNMISS provided technical assistance to the Ministry of Gender,
Child and Social Welfare on a proposed affirmative action bill that, once adopted,
would reaffirm the legal requirements for the signatories to the Agreement to include
women at all levels and in all structures of government.
76. The force and the United Nations police continued to provide training to
personnel on preventing and addressing sexual and gender-based violence, thereby
further strengthening the Mission’s overall response to it. In parallel, substantive
sections further implemented gender-responsive programmatic activities while
advocating the application of gender analysis and the inclusion of women in conflict
management, reconciliation and social cohesion efforts, as well as in local peace
dialogues, to address gender dimensions at the local level, including through the
participation of women peacebuilders.

VI. Mission staffing, status of deployments and conduct
and discipline
77. On 1 February, the number of UNMISS civilian personnel stood at 2,643,
comprising 884 international staff members (246 women, 27.8 per cent), 1,388
national staff members (198 women, 14.3 per cent) and 371 United Nations
Volunteers (155 women, 41.8 per cent).
78. The police strength stood at 1,692 (of an authorized 2,101 personnel),
comprising 494 individual police officers (159 women, 32.3 per cent), 1,145
personnel in deployed formed police units (280 women, 24.5 per cent) and
53 corrections officers (14 women, 26.4 per cent).
79. Of the authorized 17,000 troops, UNMISS troop strength stood at 14,830
military personnel: 214 military liaison officers (46 women, 21.5 per cent), 387

21-02041

13/17

S/2021/172

military staff officers (68 women, 17.6 per cent) and 14,229 military contingent
personnel (678 women, 5.3 per cent).
80. In accordance with the applicable policy, all information on misconduct was
processed in a timely manner. As at 1 February, 18 allegations were recorded in the
case management tracking system and processed in accordance with applicable
procedures and time frames. No allegations of sexual exploitation or abuse were
recorded. All identified victims of sexual exploitation and abuse continued to receive
support from the Mission’s Senior Victims’ Rights Officer in South Sudan.
81. The resumption of internal Mission travel – previously on hold owing to the
COVID-19 pandemic – enabled outreach and risk management on conduct and
discipline to continue in person. Field visits were conducted to Aweil, Rumbek, Bor,
Bentiu, Wau and Kuacjok, where town hall meetings were held on the prevention of
sexual exploitation and abuse and prohibited conduct. Meetings were held with the
gatekeepers of community-based complaints mechanisms in Yambio on 4 December
and Bor on 19 January. The Mission continued to work closely with the inter-agency
task force on the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse in South Sudan to
integrate risk management activities on sexual exploitation and abuse, prom ote a
common understanding of risks and enhance the coordination of mitigation activities.
Inter-mission support for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
82. On 24 December, 300 troops consisting of two companies of the Juba-based
Rwanda battalion and two helicopters from the Sri Lanka aviation unit were
redeployed at short notice to support election security tasks undertaken by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. The Mine Action Service also conducted three short -notice ammunition
inspections to facilitate this inter-mission assignment.

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law and the security of United Nations personnel
83. As at 1 February, UNMISS recorded 54 Status of Forces Agreement violations
compared with 79 in the previous reporting period. Of those, 50 violations involved
movement restrictions by the Government, impeding the Mission’s ability to
implement its mandate.
84. Access denials to UNMISS patrols continued across the country. The SSPDF
Joint Verification and Monitoring Mechanism continued to insist that all sharing of
information and flight safety assurance documents for the Mission’s ground and air
patrols must be acknowledged by its headquarters in Juba. An additional requirement
was further compounded, in some instances, by the Government’s insistence on
acknowledgement of the sharing of information at both the headquarters and local
state level. This resulted in delays, requiring the Mission to either postpone or cancel
a significant number of its planned patrols.
85. Notably, of the 50 movement restrictions documented, 47 were a result of
sharing of information or flight safety assurance not being acknowledged at either the
headquarters or local state level. On two occasions, UNMISS patrols deployed from
Wau to Kuajena and Mapel in Western Bahr el-Ghazal were denied access by SSPDF
soldiers at the Jur River bridge checkpoint on the outskirts of Wau. The patrols had
aimed to verify reports of the presence of armed itinerant cattle keepers in the area
and to deescalate growing tensions between the cattle keepers and the local
community. On three occasions, in Western Equatoria, UNMISS reconnaissance
14/17

21-02041

S/2021/172

flights were cancelled because the SSPDF Joint Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism headquarters in Juba failed to acknowledge the flight safety assurances.
In Northern Bahr el-Ghazal, an UNMISS patrol that was intending to establish a
temporary operating base was denied access by a Joint Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism officer and threatened with hostage-taking by the SSPDF Division III
Chief of Operations in Wanyjok.
86. UNMISS continued to reinforce with relevant authorities the fact that the
sharing of information was only for coordination purposes and that UNMISS was not
required to obtain approvals for the implementation of its mandated tasks.
Nevertheless, security personnel across the country denied access to UNMISS patrols
on numerous occasions.
87. The whereabouts of two national staff members arrested in 2014 remain
unknown. The Government has neither granted UNMISS access to them nor provided
information about their condition, despite regular requests.
88. While progress was noted in early December in the approval of backlogged visas
for UNMISS personnel, recurring delays in visa approvals for individual uniformed
personnel continued to have a negative impact on UNMISS activities.
89. UNMISS recorded one incident of access denial by SPLM/A-IO, on 12 January,
impeding its ability to monitor and investigate the human rights situation at Kedibo
police station, Western Equatoria.
90. UNMISS continued to notify the Government of the violations through notes
verbales and regular engagements. A monthly matrix of the incidents prepared for the
Security Council is also shared with the Government.

VIII. Performance of uniformed components
91. Two UNMISS force units were evaluated by visiting review teams, assessing
sector headquarters staff support for troop contingents. Both units were rated above
average. No additional force or police assessments could be conducted owing to
COVID-19-related restrictions. On 25 January, an integrated team from Unite d
Nations Headquarters arrived in Juba to conduct a four-week military and police
capability study to assess the performance of uniformed components and examine
possible adjustments to the UNMISS military and police structure. The COVID -19
pandemic presented major challenges for UNMISS staff and uniformed personnel.
Mandatory predeployment and in-mission quarantine remained a major challenge, as
did delays in visa clearances. In combination, they led to prolonged quarantine
periods for some units, affected the welfare and morale of Mission personnel and
extended tours of duty for uniformed personnel.
Financial aspects
92. The General Assembly, by its resolution 74/293 of 30 June 2020, appropriated
the amount of $1,178,515,100 for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021. As at 9 February 2021, unpaid assessed contributions to
the special account for UNMISS amounted to $269.0 million. The total outstanding
assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to
$3,173.5 million. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs, as well as for
contingent-owned equipment, has been made for the period up to 30 September 2020,
in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

21-02041

15/17

S/2021/172

IX. Observations and recommendations
93. I acknowledge the progress made on the political front in South Sudan over the
past year. During the reporting period, the filling of gubernatorial positions, including
the recent appointment of the Governor of Upper Nile, was a significant step forward.
I commend the parties and Mr. Kiir for these decisions but also call upon them, as
partners in government, to renew their commitment to the timely and effective
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement. In particular, I urge them to accelerate
the establishment of all institutions of government while adhering to the 35 per cent
quota for women.
94. The peace process is at a critical juncture in the current transitional peri od,
which will end with elections. I remain concerned at the lack of momentum in meeting
key benchmarks of the peace agreement, in particular the establishment of a
reconstituted legislative assembly and transitional security arrangements. Priority
must be given to finalizing the overall security strategy to provide a comprehensive
and coherent framework for decision-making. While I welcome the stated
commitment by the Government to unify armed forces and to graduate soldiers, those
troops currently remain in cantonment sites and face dire living conditions. Until they
are deployed, resources have to be made available to ensure that they have access to
adequate shelter, health care, food and water.
95. I am encouraged that the ceasefire continues to hold. Ho wever, I am concerned
about increasing subnational violence in several parts of the country. Cattle migration,
flooding and a volatile economy owing to the COVID-19 pandemic are driving the
conflict, but political actors at the national level also play a r ole. The violence has
resulted in a challenging human rights and protection environment characterized by
ongoing conflict-related sexual violence, curtailed freedom of speech and the
destruction of civilian and public property.
96. These factors have compounded the already serious humanitarian situation, with
a worsened outlook highlighted in the latest Integrated Food Security Phase
Classification report. I call upon the international community to close the
humanitarian funding gap so that much-needed assistance can be delivered to the
more than 1.6 million internally displaced persons in South Sudan.
97. I welcome the positive cooperation with the Government of South Sudan on the
transition of three United Nations protection of civilians sites to camps for internally
displaced persons, which are now under full government responsibility. I urge the
Government to fully protect its citizens in those camps and throughout the country.
The transition of the camps has enabled United Nations uniformed personnel,
previously occupied with static duties at protection of civilians sites, to be redeployed
on more proactive operations to conflict hotspots and areas of return, resulting in an
increase in UNMISS protection provided to civilians across the country.
98. The approach by UNMISS to protect civilians in this new context hinges upon
its continued ability to move around South Sudan freely, as enshrined in the Status of
Forces Agreement and on the increased capacity of government institutions to take a
more active role in resolving conflict and ending impunity. I appreciate the fact that
violations of the Agreement, including with regard to UNMISS freedom of
movement, declined somewhat during the reporting period, and I call upon the
Government to ensure that UNMISS can carry out its missions without impediment.
99. Obligations enshrined in the Status of Forces Agreement must also be fully
respected vis-à-vis humanitarian workers. I remain deeply troubled by reports of
threats and violence against humanitarian workers and call for unhindered and safe

16/17

21-02041

S/2021/172

access to all United Nations operations in order to ensure essential support and
protection for those in need.
100. I wish to express my gratitude to El-Ghassim Wane and his team for leading the
independent strategic review of UNMISS requested by the Security Council in its
resolution 2514 (2020). In its report, the review team noted the positive impact of the
ceasefire of 2017 and the Revitalized Agreement of 2018, but also warned that the
underlying dynamics that contributed to the outbreak of civil war in South Sudan
continued to exist.
101. Naturally, the Government and people of South Sudan are in the lead on their
path towards peace and stability. I reassure them of the continued and steadfast
support of the United Nations and recommend that the UNMISS mandate be renewed.
The four pillars of the mandate remain valid, and I envisage a continuation of the
Mission’s key role in protecting civilians throughout the countr y, while underscoring
the primacy of politics and enhancing the strategic political engagement between the
United Nations, IGAD and the African Union on South Sudan.
102. I also highlight the recommendation of the strategic review to enhance the role
of UNMISS in providing technical support to judicial and law enforcement
institutions, as well as the need to factor in electoral and security sector reform
expertise. In addition, I foresee a broadening of the functions of the United Nations
police to mentor and increase the capacity of the South Sudan National Police Service
and, where appropriate, co-locate to build community policing to prevent and respond
to crime.
103. Finally, I convey my appreciation to the uniformed and civilian personnel of
UNMISS and the United Nations country team, who have continued to work in
extraordinary circumstances, compounded by the continuing severe impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic. I thank my Special Representative, David Shearer, who has
demonstrated exemplary leadership and commitment to securing peace for the people
of South Sudan. I thank the troop- and police-contributing countries and acknowledge
the vital efforts to achieve peace of IGAD Heads of State and Government, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat, the Executive
Secretary of IGAD, Workneh Gebeyehu, the IGAD Special Envoy, Ismail Wais, and
the Community of Sant’Egidio. I also express my deep respect and appreciation to
the people of South Sudan, who have suffered greatly and deserve lasting peace and
prosperity.

21-02041

17/17
