United Nations

S/PV.5766

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5766th meeting
Tuesday, 23 October 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Osei-Adjei . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Chevalier
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Biabaroh-Iboro
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Pratomo
Mr. Spatafora
Mr. Arias
Mr. Chávez
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Rogachev
Ms. Algayerová
Mr. Kumalo
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Wolff

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2007/567)
Letter dated 8 October 2007 from the Permanent Representative of Ghana to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2007/598)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-55817 (E)

*0755817*

S/PV.5766

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2007/567)
Letter dated 8 October 2007 from the
Permanent Representative of Ghana to the
United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2007/598)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bangladesh, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Egypt, El Salvador, Finland, Germany, Guatemala,
Guinea, Honduras, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Liechtenstein, Malawi, Mexico, Myanmar, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Spain, the Sudan,
Sweden, the United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam and
Zambia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, the Security Council has extended
invitations under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women; and Ms. Joanne Sandler, Ad Interim Executive

2

Director of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Gina Torry, Coordinator of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/567, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security.
I should also like to draw attention to document
S/2007/598, which contains a letter dated 8 October
2007 from the Permanent Representative of Ghana,
transmitting a concept paper on the subject of this
meeting; and document S/2007/607, which contains a
letter dated 17 October 2007 from the Permanent
Representative of South Africa, transmitting the Report
on the Africa Regional Meeting on Gender Justice.
I welcome the participation of the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, at this
meeting and invite him to take the floor.
The Secretary-General: I am honoured to
address the Council for the first time as SecretaryGeneral on the vital subject of women and peace and
security. We have gathered to discuss the
implementation of a landmark resolution. Since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), seven years ago,
Member States have made significant progress. More
and more, women are participating in mediating and
negotiating peace, in searching for justice, in fostering
reconciliation, in supporting disarmament and
demobilization and in shaping development policies
and rebuilding institutions.
More and more, the Security Council is ensuring
that peace processes empower women and advance
gender equality. More and more, United Nations
entities are working closely and actively with
Governments and women’s organizations, including
through the United Nations System-wide Action Plan
on implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

07-55817

S/PV.5766

But there is so much left to do, both for the
United Nations and for Member States. More countries
in conflict or post-conflict situations need to establish
their own national action plans. They need to take
greater ownership of programmes and priorities in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). They need to
identify the capacity-building and the technical and
financial support needed to scale up programmes for
implementation, and they need to strengthen
approaches
to
monitoring,
evaluation
and
accountability.
For our part, we in the United Nations system
must take a more evenly coordinated approach than we
have done so far. We need to work better with
Governments to establish truly joint programmes
driven by national priorities. We need to clarify the
roles and responsibilities of United Nations entities at
the country level. We need to work better as a team, so
as to give countries access to a common entry point.
And we need to appoint more women in
leadership positions in our peace operations around the
world. I am delighted that Ambassador Ellen
Margrethe Løj of Denmark has agreed to serve as my
Special Representative for Liberia. She will be heading
one of our biggest peacekeeping missions, and I know
she will provide a shining example of the kind of
qualities we need in our leaders in the field.
Violence against women has reached hideous and
pandemic proportions in some societies attempting to
recover from conflict. Together, all of us need to
strengthen our collective and individual responses to it.
That is essential if we are to reverse the damage done
by conflict and to build more inclusive, accountable
and cohesive societies, underpinned by viable
democratic institutions.
Earlier this year, I urged the Security Council to
establish a mechanism dedicated to monitoring
violence against women and girls within the framework
of resolution 1325 (2000). I reiterate that call today. I
also encourage Member States to actively consider
proposals to strengthen the Organization’s gender
architecture, as presented by the High-level Panel on
United Nations System-wide Coherence. I believe we
could significantly advance our cause by replacing
several current structures with one dynamic United
Nations entity. Such a new body should be able to call
on all of the United Nations system’s resources in the
work to empower women and realize gender equality

07-55817

worldwide. It should mobilize forces of change at the
global level and inspire enhanced results at the country
level.
We all have a collective role and responsibility in
accelerating the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) —the Security Council, Member States, the
United Nations system, other international and regional
actors and civil society. On this anniversary of its
adoption, let us rededicate ourselves to that mission.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement. I understand that he has to proceed to the
General Assembly for the meeting on financing for
development.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
Mr. Guéhenno: I am very pleased to be able to
brief the Council once again at this year’s open debate
on resolution 1325 (2000), on women, peace and
security.
In 2007, we have seen a number of significant
advances in the contribution of women to the
prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding. Some of those advances have taken
place in countries in which peacekeeping operations
are deployed and also represent initiatives in how the
United Nations goes about peacekeeping. For instance,
in Haiti’s municipal election this year, 25 women were
elected mayors, as compared to six in 2000. That was
due, in part, to the collaboration of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti with national partners to
provide coaching for female candidates. In turn,
January saw the deployment, for the first time, of an
all-female police contingent to a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, when an Indian formed police
unit took up duties with the United Nations Mission in
Liberia.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) also continued to take steps to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) in the past year. Last
November, DPKO adopted a policy directive on gender
equality in United Nations peacekeeping operations
that obliges all uniformed and civilian staff to ensure
the equal participation of women, men, girls and boys
in all peacekeeping activities. DPKO and the
Department of Field Support are now translating that
policy into action, including through the development

3

S/PV.5766

of initiatives such as guidelines for political affairs
officers on how to mainstream gender in their work.

Council to the composition of the new standing police
capacity, nearly 25 per cent of which is female.

Both Departments at Headquarters continue to
oversee the joint DPKO-Department of Field Support
action plan on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) through the interdepartmental task force on
gender. Such task forces are also being replicated in the
missions, with the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (UNOCI) having most recently re-established
its gender task force in August, in order to further
strengthen its gender mainstreaming across all sections
of the mission.

I recognize that we still have far to go in
expanding the role and contribution of women in our
operations. Nonetheless, the momentum towards
achieving greater balance is building. I again urge
Member States to work closely with us in putting
forward suitably qualified female candidates ready and
willing to serve in peacekeeping operations.

The gender team at Headquarters has been
bolstered through the recent realignment process. That
included the upgrading of the post of gender adviser to
the P-5 level, as a reflection of the skills and
experience required to lead the team’s work in
backstopping and providing policy advice to the field
and all divisions and offices within DPKO and the
Department of Field Support.
Similarly, as I have mentioned to the Council
before, we are committed to increasing the number of
women serving in the field in civilian leadership
positions and in operational military and police roles.
The Secretariat has therefore taken concrete steps to
strengthen its capacity to identify suitably qualified
senior women, including through the establishment
within the Department of Field Support of a small
dedicated capacity focused on senior leadership
appointments.
Since February, the number of women serving in
senior civilian positions has increased by almost 40 per
cent. As the Council is aware, last week,
Ms. Margrethe Løj was appointed as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to lead the
United Nations Mission in Liberia, along with
Ms. Henrietta Mensah-Bonsu as Deputy for Operations
and the Rule of Law. Female deputy heads of Mission
were also recently appointed in the Sudan — where,
Ms. Ameerah Haq was named the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Humanitarian
Coordinator and Resident Coordinator — and in
Burundi, where Ms. Bintou Keita was appointed as the
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General. I
am particularly pleased at the appointment of
Commissioner Agatha Lele as Senior Police Adviser in
Burundi. I should also like to draw the attention of the

4

Most importantly, in the context of this debate, I
would like to reiterate our ongoing implementation of
zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse that
may have been committed by United Nations
personnel. We have continued to take significant
measures and have deployed additional resources to
address sexual exploitation. There are currently several
related policies before the General Assembly for
consideration, including one on assistance to the
victims of alleged abuses by United Nations personnel.
In addition, earlier this year, DPKO adopted a welfare
and recreation policy. It has also provided for guidance
on the design and implementation of welfare and
recreation measures and facilities to improve the
wellness and the working and living conditions of all
United Nations peacekeeping personnel.
The theme of today’s debate is “Towards coherent
and effective implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2005)”. In the past seven years our
strategy has been to focus on the implementation of the
individual parts of the resolution. To that end, we have
indeed made progress in the implementation of our
responsibilities. I would suggest, however, that it is
time to review that fragmented and disparate approach
to the implementation of the resolution. We know that
resolving conflict requires a multifaceted and
interlinked approach. If we are therefore to empower
women in that process, our efforts will also have to be
integrated. Coherent and effective implementation first
requires that we more fully understand the relationship
between protection and empowerment in all their
aspects, as set forth in the resolution, and that we
understand how that affects the role and contribution of
women to the maintenance of peace and security.
Strategies must thereafter be developed that
incorporate a range of mutually reinforcing and
coordinated activities aimed at the full implementation
of the resolution.

07-55817

S/PV.5766

If we look, for example, at the range of
interventions necessary to address rape and other forms
of sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations, it becomes clear how pressing is the need
for such a concerted and integrated approach.
Though DPKO is committed to combating sexual
violence, we can start to truly address it in the field
only with the help of the national authorities, the
United Nations country team, and bilateral and
non-governmental organization partners. The need for
a truly United Nations-wide approach to that
underscores the need for a strengthened United Nations
gender architecture, as recommended by the High-level
Panel on System-wide Coherence.
While rape is used as a weapon of war in
situations such as those in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Darfur, addressing that war crime
requires going beyond political compromise and
power- and resource-sharing agreements. Instead,
combating rape and other forms of sexual violence
calls for concerted, robust and ongoing action on the
part of national actors and the international community
alike at every level of engagement.
(spoke in French)
Sitting here today, I wish to stress that a first
element of an effective strategy is the importance that
the Security Council attaches to both understanding the
impact of sexual violence on the maintenance of peace
and security and to ensuring that the mandates and
resources given to peacekeeping missions take into
account the tragic situations faced by women and girls
who suffer in conflicts and that they provide for the
protection of civilians, including the special needs of
women and girls.
The second element of an effective strategy is the
political leadership of the United Nations, through the
special representatives of the Secretary-General on the
ground, in eliminating sexual violence. I have no doubt
that, with the backing of the Council and interested
Member States, special representatives can play a very
important and decisive role in their advocacy, dialogue
and good offices with the host countries and
Governments concerned.
Thirdly, our missions can play a key role in
providing preventive physical protection, for example,
through their daily patrols. Such actions should be
coordinated with preventive and victim’s assistance

07-55817

programmes, including those carried out by other
mission components, such as the United Nations
country team, national actors and non-governmental
organizations. In some locations in which we are
deployed, such modest patrols can make the difference
between life and death and act as a deterrent to rape,
abductions and other forms of torture. At the same
time, I know that we should not overstate the
protection we can provide and that, even where each
person protected represents a victory over the horror of
sexual violence, we must be aware that the protection
we offer will always be limited. When I think of our
future deployment to Darfur, I am well aware that the
reinforcement of troops there and the deployment of
Blue Berets alone will not bring an end to sexual
violence and the terrible crime of rape, given the extent
of the territory to be covered, and that we will have to
take action on all fronts in the fight against sexual
violence and abuse. We cannot rely exclusively on
military protection.
The fourth element of an effective and
comprehensive strategy is the role our missions can
play in facilitating and assisting national efforts to
reform institutionally discriminatory structures,
including rule of law institutions and the legal
framework, in States where we have a presence. Such
efforts appropriately reflect the impact of such
structures in perpetuating sexual violence by ignoring
them. In addition, those efforts underscore the fact that
a coherent strategy to combat sexual violence must
incorporate a thoughtful understanding of sexual
violence in conflicts. If there is no such understanding
of the problem, there can be no effective campaign
against it. It is therefore a question of addressing the
issue both in the short term and in the long term if we
truly seek to resolve it.
As part of our efforts to address discrimination
against women, we must clearly stress the assignment
of women to senior civilian positions, as I noted, as
well as to military and policing posts, so as to
encourage local women in the countries where we are
deployed to assume lead roles and to promote the
development of a non-discriminatory system once the
mission leaves. One example I would note is that the
Liberian National Police received three times the usual
number of female applicants in the month following
the deployment of the Indian all-female police
contingent to which I referred earlier.

5

S/PV.5766

More women in a police force must be
accompanied by a strategy to improve policing as a
service equally accessible to women. That in turn
requires laws that incorporate women’s rights and a
judicial system accessible to victims of sexual
violence. While it is the national Government’s
responsibility to ensure such accessibility, our missions
have a role to play — as defined in their mandates —
in monitoring remaining obstacles to women’s access
and in developing capacity-building programmes for
human rights and judicial institutions.
(spoke in English)
Combating sexual violence requires a multiplicity
of actors carrying out a multiplicity of actions in
coordination and in coherence. I would urge that this
approach be applied across the range of actions
envisaged in resolution 1325 (2000). If we are to be
effective in implementing that resolution, it is crucial
that we share a common understanding of the factors
that affect the role of women and their capacity to
contribute to the maintenance of peace and security.
We must also commit to identifying ways in which our
different roles at the national and international levels
can link together in an integrated and effective manner.
Only together can we truly ensure the protection and
empowerment of women in conflict.
The President: I now call on the Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, Ms. Rachel Mayanja.
Ms. Mayanja: I have the honour to introduce the
report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security (S/2007/567). May I begin by expressing
gratitude to you, Sir, for convening this crucially
important meeting on a coherent and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Your
presiding over this Council today is testimony to the
deep commitment of Ghana to peace, gender equality
and the empowerment of women worldwide.
The report before the Council contains the results
of a second implementation review of the 2005-2007
United Nation System-wide Action Plan on resolution
1325 (2000) and an update of the Action Plan for 20082009.
The second implementation review conducted by
my Office in consultation with United Nations entities
noted new progress by the United Nations system in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), through an

6

increased political commitment to gender equality,
leadership and support by senior officials, strengthened
or new policies and programmes, enhanced capacitybuilding on gender mainstreaming, improved advocacy
and better engagement with Member States and civil
society.
It also reaffirmed the findings of the first review
of the implementation of the System-wide Action Plan,
which was conducted in 2006 and was reported to the
Council in document S/2006/770. The lack of such key
elements as baseline data, performance indicators and
timelines, which constitute an effective tool for
measuring performance, negatively affected the
monitoring, reporting and accountability processes.
The updated Action Plan for 2008-2009 has been
reconceptualized and transformed into a results-based
programming, reporting and monitoring tool.
The proposed framework is rooted in
intergovernmental mandates contained in resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent presidential statements on
women and peace and security. It has three new main
features: a sharpened focus through the consolidation
of 12 areas into five thematic areas — prevention,
participation, protection, relief and recovery, and
normative — to enable the United Nations system to
promote inter-agency synergies within the thematic
areas; a results-based management framework,
including indicators to measure progress in achieving
goals under each of the aforementioned thematic areas;
and expected accomplishments and baseline data.
The development of a common set of indicators
provides the basis for enhanced reporting, monitoring
and accountability with respect to the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) by United Nations entities.
The establishment of accountability procedures
through the utilization of common standards is central
to a coherent and efficient implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) by the United Nations. Where
there is accountability, we will make progress; where
there is none, we will underperform.
It is imperative for international organizations,
national Governments and civil society to work
together to identify priorities and to develop a practical
approach to implementation strategies on women and
peace and security at the national level. The challenges
are many and continue to defeat the best efforts of
Member States, United Nations entities and civil

07-55817

S/PV.5766

society in the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
Member States play a critical role in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) at the national
and local levels. As national Governments shape and
contribute to peacemaking, peacekeeping and
rebuilding efforts and to conflict prevention, their
commitment to women and peace and security
enhances women’s empowerment in survival and
reconstruction efforts — or their inaction leaves
existing structures of discrimination, poverty and
violence unchanged.
In that connection, I wish to pay a special tribute
to the Government of India for sending an all-women
police contingent to the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, as we heard this morning from Mr. Guéhenno.
As role models for the women of Liberia, they have
contributed in no small measure to the substantial
enrolment of Liberian women in the Liberian police.
National action plans and strategies provide a catalyst
for ensuring that these commitments to gender equality
and women’s empowerment are effectively translated
into domestic and foreign policies.
The United Nations system, other multilateral
institutions and international partners should, in turn,
be held accountable for supporting nationally owned
plans and strategies and for making sure that they meet
international standards and norms. Once these are in
place, the support provided by the United Nations and
the partners should align with national plans, priorities
and approaches.
Resolution 1325 (2000) is primarily about how to
make this world safe for women’s and girls’ equal
participation in matters of peace and security.
Determined action to eradicate gender-based violence
will be required to enable the achievement of those
goals. Impunity for perpetrators and insufficient
response to the needs of survivors are morally
reprehensible and unacceptable. Sexual violence in
conflict, particularly rape, should be named for what it
is: not a private act or the unfortunate misbehaviour of
a renegade soldier, but aggression, torture, war crime
and genocide.
The Security Council has done much to place the
issue of sexual violence in conflict on the global policy
agenda, and has strongly condemned it. However,
despite the Council’s repeated condemnation of all acts
of gender-based violence and its demands to all parties

07-55817

to conflict for the immediate cessation of such acts,
sexual violence remains pervasive. If the situation is
not addressed now, and with urgency, thousands of
women and girls will continue to die, and tens of
millions more will be sexually brutalized, traumatized,
tormented, stigmatized and ostracized.
I firmly believe that we are at a moment in
history when the world should finally be ready to alter
the course of human development and renounce all
forms of violence by decisively accepting the
responsibility to stamp them out. Today, the Council
can help accelerate that shift by establishing a
dedicated mechanism to monitor the situation of
women and girls in conflict situations and hold parties
to conflicts accountable for sexual and gender-based
violence.
I urge all Governments, parliaments, international
organizations and civil society to join the worldwide
campaign on violence against women and girls to be
launched by the Secretary-General later this year, to
build and sustain global political commitment and
action to prevent and respond to gender-based
violence. Only by acting together can we create more
equal relationships and more peaceful societies.
The President: I thank Ms. Mayanja for her
statement.
I now give the floor to the Ad Interim Executive
Director of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women, Ms. Joanne Sandler.
Ms. Sandler: On behalf of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), I am
honoured to address the Security Council on the
important issue of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security.
As the Secretary-General, Mr. Guéhenno and
Ms. Mayanja have noted, it is clear that our collective
commitment to moving that resolution forward requires
significant strengthening. As they have also noted,
there is progress on which to build. Gender advisers
have been placed in most integrated missions, and
gender-sensitive action plans have been formulated in
security and humanitarian areas of United Nations
work. Security Council members now regularly meet
with women’s groups and networks on their trips to
conflict-affected countries. Member States are making
efforts to increase the numbers of women among
peacekeepers and police. The verdicts announced by

7

S/PV.5766

the Special Court for Sierra Leone in July showed that
war crimes against women and girls could be
successfully and fully prosecuted.

or have been inconsistently applied, proportions of
national assembly seats won by women have been
disappointing.

But the real measure of effective implementation
is not the setting up of systems, plans and processes.
The measure is women’s participation in and
contribution to more sustainable peace agreements and
post-conflict reconstruction strategies. The measure is
better protection of women and girls in today’s conflict
zones.

Perhaps our greatest collective challenge,
however, is our ability to use resolution 1325 (2000) to
meaningfully address sexual violence as a method of
warfare. Current media reports highlight the horrific
extent of sexual violence in conflicts around the world.
Even so, what gets reported is only the tip of the
iceberg, as the Council recently heard from the
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. John Holmes.

UNIFEM supports the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in over 30 countries, building
on a vast range of partnerships with Member States,
United Nations organizations, non-governmental
organizations and women’s networks. Allow me to
present some insights from our experience.
While there are positive exceptions, women’s
access to peace processes has been highly uneven. In
the past year, UNIFEM, in partnership with many
United Nations and non-governmental organizations,
has supported women’s networks in Uganda, Kosovo,
Nepal and the Middle East to build capacities and
intensify their lobbying for inclusion in peace
negotiations. In many cases, women are building
dialogue across lines of conflict and have much to
contribute about aspects of sustainable peace that
would otherwise be neglected. But there remain too
few examples of structured access for women to peace
talks. Despite the promises of resolution 1325 (2000),
peace tables remain the province of those who made
the conflict rather than those who have the greatest
motivation to end it.
In countries emerging from conflict, the numbers
of women participating in elections are high — a
remarkable testament to women’s eagerness to
participate in post-conflict decision-making, in spite of
the gender-based violence that so many women
encounter in daring to run for office. The numbers of
women winning those contests vary according to
whether electoral systems embrace special temporary
measures as mandated by the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW).
The strongest examples of the positive impact of
those measures come from Rwanda, where women won
49 per cent of Assembly seats in the 2003 election, and
Burundi, where they won 30.5 per cent in the 2005
elections. Where such measures have not been adopted

8

Resolution 1325 (2000) calls on us to take action
against sexual violence in conflict. UNIFEM has joined
with 11 other United Nations entities in setting up
United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict. United Nations Action is providing strategic
and technical support to United Nations integrated
missions and United Nations country teams to step up
their responses. It is seeking to build global awareness
of the extent and impact of sexual violence in presentday conflicts and advocating for more effective
responses from international and regional security
institutions in conflict situations.
Vigilance and action are needed to send an
irrevocable message that sexual violence must be
prevented, that impunity for perpetrators is
unacceptable and that providing services to survivors
of such violence is the highest priority.
The days in October when the Security Council
turns its full attention to the issues of women, peace
and security and the presidential statements that the
Security Council issues, all add up to a message of
hope for women whose unique experiences of war and
armed conflict has for too long been ignored.
Given the enormity of the agenda of resolution
1325 (2000) and the need to step up its implementation
to contribute to greater security and protection for
those who are most in need, I would end with two
points that we hope the Council will give due
consideration.
The first point is that the Security Council should
consider calling for more holistic and concerted action
by Member States and regional organizations, with
United Nations system support, to protect women and
girls from gender-based violence, particularly sexual
violence. That means building on the excellent points
made by Mr. Guéhenno and stepping up the global

07-55817

S/PV.5766

response in the following three key areas: first, the
expansion of services for survivors, including
provision of health services to treat HIV infection and
the many forms of psychological and physical trauma
that women and girls endure; second, focusing on
transitional justice systems to build capacity to
prosecute perpetrators; and third, above all, finding
means to prevent the perpetration of sexual violence by
ensuring that peacekeeping operations make life safe
for women and girls.
The second point is that the Council should
consider calling for more detailed reporting on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and enhance
its own capacity to monitor gaps and achievements in
its implementation. We reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s call for Member States to establish a
Security Council mechanism to monitor national
implementation.
The issue of women, peace and security is one for
which there is a huge constituency. We at UNIFEM are
at the Council’s disposal to assist in turning the tide of
history to meet the implementation challenge. Security
and peace for women remains a necessary prerequisite
to security and peace for all.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Gina
Torry, Coordinator of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security.
Ms. Torry: I would like to thank the Security
Council for the invitation and the honour to be here
today. I am here on behalf of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security, a coalition of
international civil society organizations formed in 2000
to advocate for a Security Council resolution on
women, peace and security. We continue today to
advocate for full and effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Unfortunately, we are not at a
point where we can say that implementation has been
coherent and effective. We value the opportunity to
discuss that as we mark the seventh year since the
adoption of that resolution.
Seven years later, we come here to ask this
question: what has the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) meant for the situation of women and girls
in Sierra Leone, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in Liberia, in Burundi, in Côte d’Ivoire, in
Afghanistan, in Haiti, in Timor-Leste and in all other
situations on the agenda of the Security Council?

07-55817

Seven years later, women and girls in situations
of armed conflict continue to be subjected to
widespread and systematic sexual violence. This is a
matter of international peace and security.
Seven years later, women remain largely
excluded from the very structures that make the
decisions to sustain peace or to engage in conflict.
They are still marginalized in peacemaking and
peacebuilding processes. This is a matter of
international peace and security.
Seven years later, the integration of resolution
1325 (2000) into the work of the Security Council
remains inconsistent. This means that in the situation in
Darfur, women are still struggling to be part of peace
talks in Tripoli. This means that in the situation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, sexual violence
continues unabated and with impunity. Greater efforts
must be undertaken to end impunity and to prosecute
those suspected of crimes against women, particularly
sexual violence — not only in the States where the
crimes occurred and the States of which the suspects
are nationals, but also in other States where suspects
may be found.
Seven years later, there are still no monitoring or
accountability mechanisms to ensure the coherent and
effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
This is a matter of international peace and security.
We note the progress that has been made and that
has been mentioned by other speakers here this
morning. We would like to focus on the role of the
Security Council in driving progress in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
It does make a difference when the Security
Council integrates resolution 1325 (2000) into its
work. For instance, in the June 2006 mission to the
Sudan led by the United Kingdom, Council members
met with women’s groups and gender experts in both
Khartoum and Darfur. Two months later, on 31 August
2006, the Security Council issued resolution 1706
(2006), which both invokes resolution 1325 (2000) and
contains useful gender-specific language.
Resolutions need to contain such language.
However, where mission mandates contain adequate
language on the integration of a gender perspective or
women’s human rights, too often the gender mandate is
not reflected in the directives, guidance, terms of

9

S/PV.5766

reference and incentive structures for mission staff,
including the Special Representative.

cast your light on the path we follow. Our failure
is your failure; our successes, your successes.”

Mandates also need to contain standard
provisions for regular and adequate monitoring of and
reporting on implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
by the field missions. Reporting is needed on concrete
and specific issues that address the following
questions: what is the status of women’s participation
in the maintenance and promotion of peace and
security? What is being done to ensure that women are
able to effectively participate in elections? What work
is being done with national women’s machineries in
regard to matters of security?

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached among Council members, I wish
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to not
more than five minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber.

As the situation stands, some field missions do
have a mandate to monitor and report on, for example,
grave violations of human rights, but the data and
trends regarding many violations, such as sexual
violence, are still lacking. Reports need to provide a
picture of the security situation in regard to women,
especially the violence that affects their everyday lives.
Strong accountability mechanisms are imperative
to drive and to support timely and systematic
implementation. Such a mechanism would help to
address inconsistency in invoking resolution 1325
(2000) in the directives from the Council to the field
and inadequate monitoring and reporting on
implementation by field missions — particularly on
violations of human rights, such as sexual violence.
The NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security respectfully urges the Council to consider how
it could provide more effective monitoring and
reporting on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), including through the establishment of a focal
point and an expert-level working group, with
appropriate leadership to ensure its active engagement
with all aspects of the work of the Council.
We would like to thank members for their
attention and to end with a quotation from Ms. Barbara
Bangura of Sierra Leone, who spoke in an Arriaformula meeting in October 2006. She said that
“women rely considerably on the guidance and
assistance that the United Nations, in its many
forms, provides. Resolution 1325 (2000) can only
be successful if the Security Council is proactive
in the use of resolution 1325 (2000) in its work.
As such, the onus is on you here in New York to

10

I invite Her Excellency Ms. Olga Algayerová,
State Secretary of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and
First Deputy Foreign Minister of the Slovak Republic,
to take the floor.
Ms. Algayerová (Slovakia): First of all, I would
like to express my delegation’s gratitude to the briefers
for their presentations and to the Ghanaian presidency
for organizing this important debate on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security.
Slovakia fully associates itself with the statement
to be delivered later by the representative of Portugal
on behalf of the European Union.
Slovakia
strongly
supports
the
full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which
represents a concrete and effective tool for the
promotion and protection of the rights of women in
conflict and post-conflict situations. The active and
equal participation of women in conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and peacekeeping, including in peace
and reconciliation efforts, represents the best way to
eliminate gender-based violence, sexual abuse and all
other forms of violence against women in conflict
situations. Women’s empowerment plays a critical role
in peace and security processes.
In this respect, we welcome the second follow-up
report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/567) on the
implementation of the United Nations System-Wide
Action Plan for 2005-2007, as well as the proposed
further actions for the period 2008-2009. We are
pleased with the reported progress in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on a truly
system-wide scale. However, we are very well aware
that there is still much to be done.
The mainstreaming of the gender perspective in
conflict prevention, including the development of
gender-sensitive early warning mechanisms, increased

07-55817

S/PV.5766

participation by women in peacekeeping operations
and decision-making and gender training for all staff,
have been promoted by action plans and other
important initiatives within United Nations entities,
such as the Department of Political Affairs, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office for
Disarmament Affairs, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the United Nations Environment Programme
and the World Food Programme (WFP).

The special needs of women and girls have been
reflected
in
the
majority
of
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes. In
Liberia, for example, 22,370 women and 2,440 girls
out of some 100,000 ex-combatants were disarmed,
demobilized and reintegrated into the community. The
efforts
of
UNICEF
and
non-governmental
organizations led to the release of over 1,000 women
and girls from armed forces in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and of over 800 girls in Sri
Lanka.

An appropriate presence of women and gender
training in armed forces, including peacekeeping
forces, have a clear and positive effect on the
behaviour of troops and on the actual conduct of their
duty. Therefore, the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) are fully relevant for any security sector reform
plan. In this context, we welcome activities linked with
the promotion of women’s participation in
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and the development of
specific action plans for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) by the field missions of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

Despite the tangible progress achieved in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) at the level
of the United Nations system, we remain extremely
concerned about the actual situation of women and
girls in conflict situations, where they continue to face
all possible forms of violence. I will not go into the
horrible details and recall the stories of women and
girls heard by the Council during the recent Arriaformula meeting organized by France. Our particular
concerns are linked with rape and other forms of sexual
violence on an enormous scale, which are often
systematically used as a tool of war.

We also very much appreciate the work of
UNICEF, which has provided gender training for 500
staff members of the international organizations based
in the Sudan, and which, in cooperation with Save the
Children, has provided gender training for 3,300
military observers, protection forces and civilian police
officers in Darfur. I would also mention the training
provided by OHCHR to military and police personnel
deployed in peacekeeping operations. The activities of
the United Nations International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women, the Geneva
Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces,
the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe are also commendable in this
area.

Slovakia strongly condemns such crimes and
supports the use of all available means to put an end to
the impunity of perpetrators. In that respect, we also
reiterate our full support for the zero-tolerance policy
with respect to crimes committed by United Nations
personnel.

Gender perspective has also been mainstreamed
in some humanitarian assistance programmes, as well
as in the areas of post-conflict reconstruction and
rehabilitation. In those areas, for example, the World
Food Programme assisted States in gender
mainstreaming in food security programmes and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda provided
gender training for investigators and legal personnel,
establishing gender-sensitive policies and mechanisms
to coordinate the rehabilitation of witnesses.

07-55817

We believe that national authorities and the whole
international community must respond more effectively
to widespread sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict, and that their responses need to be based on
reliable information. Slovakia therefore fully supports
the idea of establishing a comprehensive and effective
monitoring and reporting mechanism that will help to
identify the victims, patterns, real scale and
perpetrators of sexual violence in the context of armed
conflicts. We firmly believe that more detailed and
focused monitoring could lead to more effective
measures by Governments, the United Nations system,
civil society and all other actors working on the
ground.
The President: I invite His Excellency Mr. Pierre
Chevalier, Special Envoy of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Belgium, to take the floor.
Mr. Chevalier (Belgium) (spoke in French): As
we speak — at this very moment — thousands of

11

S/PV.5766

women are victims of sexual violence in its most
atrocious forms. Who among us has not reacted with
horror when reading the reports on the sexual violence
committed against women in the Kivus in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, or in the Sudan?
Therefore, some might wonder: what is the point of
another debate in these hushed halls of the United
Nations? We have the duty to answer that question by
going beyond statements and reaffirming our political
commitment to combating violence against women,
using all means at our disposal. This public debate on
strengthening the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, is thus
particularly timely, because it is urgent to act.
Therefore, I would like to warmly thank the presidency
for having organized this debate.
Nearly seven years ago, the Security Council
adopted its ground-breaking resolution on women and
peace and security. Today, unfortunately, we must note
that the issues and the challenges posed remain fully
relevant. Despite the efforts of the United Nations
system, described in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2007/567), and despite efforts on all our
part, the resolution’s objectives have not been attained.
My country is particularly concerned about the
persistent scourge of gender-based acts of violence,
particularly in armed conflicts. The momentum
unleashed by resolution 1325 (2000) has helped to
accelerate the raising of awareness about that scourge.
A doctrine against this type of crime is in the process
of being developed. Various United Nations forums as
well as Member States have contributed to that effort.
Here, I should like to recall the Brussels Call to Action
to Address Sexual Violence in Conflict and Beyond.
But we need more than awareness-raising if we
are to implement the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) in that regard. Belgium calls for closer Security
Council follow-up and for the development of tools to
that end. Indeed, the Council should have at its
disposal a horizontal report on gender-based acts of
violence in the armed conflicts on its agenda. Such a
report should draw on all sources available within the
United Nations system and elsewhere. The experience
acquired in combating the use of child soldiers has
shown us the importance of this type of instrument.
Such a report should also enable us to define bettertargeted and far more effective actions.

12

Strengthening the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) in its entirety is a collective duty. The
Security Council can and must do more when it defines
the mandates of peacekeeping missions. In general
terms, it must take greater account of the situation of
women in the conflict in question. In fact, depending
on the case, women can be not only potential victims,
but also major actors in the political or socio-economic
areas, or even combatants — actors in the conflict.
Women continue to be underrepresented in peace and
reconstruction processes.
That preliminary analysis must be translated into
better-defined mandates, in the spirit of resolution
1325 (2000). Clearer mandates will facilitate follow-up
by peacekeeping missions on issues related to
resolution 1325 (2000) on the ground and will facilitate
reporting to the Security Council. Moreover, the need
to mainstream the gender perspective in peacekeeping
mandates applies not only to United Nations
peacekeeping missions, but also to the peacekeeping
missions of regional organizations such as the
European Union and the African Union.
As you yourself, Mr. President, emphasized in
your invitation to this debate, the role and the
responsibility of Member States in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) cannot be overestimated. At
the national level, Belgium has prepared a charter for
its armed forces to promote the equality of women and
men; in particular, it takes into account the provisions
of resolution 1325 (2000) within the framework of
operations conducted abroad. Training on the gender
perspective is an integral part of preparing troops who
will take part in a mission.
Furthermore, resolution 1325 (2000) now serves
as a point of reference for the identification of
assistance projects eligible for financial support from
Belgium. The formulation of a national plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is also under
way.
Today’s debate reminds us once again that action
to meet these challenges goes beyond the Security
Council’s sphere of action. It is therefore important
that all United Nations forums shoulder their
responsibility to strengthen their implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). In that context, we welcome
the debate planned in the Commission on the Status of
Women at its forthcoming session, to be held in 2008.

07-55817

S/PV.5766

In conclusion, the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) represents an extremely complex
challenge. The Security Council must show the way
forward. We believe it is urgent to strengthen its
capacity to follow up on problems related to genderbased acts of violence in armed conflict. To that end,
the Council must have better-targeted reporting at its
disposal.
The President: I now call on His Excellency
Mr. Eddy Pratomo, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Director General for Legal Affairs and
International Treaties of Indonesia.
Mr. Pratomo (Indonesia): Let me first express
my appreciation to the delegation of Ghana for
convening this debate on women and peace and
security. My delegation is certain that, under the able
stewardship of Foreign Minister Akwesi Osei-Adjei,
the Council will arrive at a successful outcome.
We have come some distance since the adoption
of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), in 2000.
The plight of women in armed conflict has been
publicized, and new paths of leadership have been
forged by women in the political environment, in
peacekeeping and in peacebuilding. However, action
on behalf of women is needed to close the gap between
our political pledges and the current reality of
empowering women in situations of armed conflict, in
order to attain peace and security.
While war is a great equalizer in terms of
suffering, the plight of women in conflict situations is
compounded by the physical displacement experienced
in war, the environmental hazards of war and sexual
crimes such as rape, which are attendant to war. In
many situations of armed conflict, women are already
marginalized in the political process, and the conflict
situation makes that reality even more apparent.
We need to ensure that fair treatment and
protection of women are incorporated into all phases of
peace processes. A negotiation that satisfies the needs
of the parties requires that all relevant actors be
involved, irrespective of their gender. Women are
habitually underrepresented and bring additional
interests and roles to bear, including as victims and
witnesses, which need to be integrated into any peace
process. Including women may have the added benefit
of expanding the palette of options for successful
negotiation by increasing the number of issues at stake
and the subsequent bargaining leverage. A key issue is

07-55817

the identification and selection of women who can
participate in peace negotiations. Like their male
counterparts, female participants should be linked to
the greater community and should have a
representative stake in the outcome.
In addition to considering the phases of conflict
and ceasefire agreements, we need to consider how the
interests and needs of women can be addressed in the
post-conflict peace process and in the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Political leaders need to
become sensitized to existing problems by listening
directly to victims and witnesses and by giving them an
opportunity to share their difficulties. We should also
envisage how the United Nations system might be able
to engage in remediation efforts in conjunction with
relevant civil society organizations.
Grass-roots efforts can be employed. In many
countries and communities, there are local conflict
resolution procedures and women’s peace initiatives
that might be utilized in order to gain a peace that is
most compatible with the situation in a given country.
We should seek to utilize mechanisms that have
worked for the community and have worked in the past
in efforts to achieve a peaceful resolution. Resolution
1325 (2000) provides a strong impetus, but it is really
only a guideline for further strengthening our efforts to
implement the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action. We need to consider homegrown initiatives that
develop within national and regional contexts and to
utilize local wisdom and capacity.
To encourage the development and dissemination
of best practices, regional organizations can be
involved in conducting workshops on issues relative to
women in armed conflict, peace processes and
peacebuilding. Moreover, we support the development
of a database of good practices to further our efforts.
This undertaking can be accelerated in the form of a
comprehensive
knowledge
and
information
management system that can be instituted. Such a
method could include a demographic database of
shifting gender distribution and political involvement.
Concomitant with the role of national strategies
and regional initiatives, civil society organizations can
play an important role in helping to enable women in
conflict environments. Their efforts have benefited
women in the population and have contributed to
peace. They can play an invaluable role in campaigns

13

S/PV.5766

to raise awareness about women’s issues, including the
participation of women in peacekeeping.

Document is something that first requires discussion
within the General Assembly.

Women represent over half the world’s
population today, and their presence in political
processes in many parts of the world is growing. But
they are underrepresented in the phases of conflict
resolution and peace and security in places where
conflict persists. Men still are dominant in these
processes, with the result that women are often
disenfranchised.

In terms of its goals under the Charter, the focus
of the Council should be primarily on the most acute
and major armed conflicts, and obviously not just in
Africa. We believe that the United Nations as a whole
should give priority to responding to massive and
systematic violence against women. That goal will be
promoted by strengthening the gender component in
reports of the Secretary-General to the Security
Council dealing with specific situations, and that could
be a new specific step in the Council’s work furthering
this objective.

Resolution 1325 (2000) charts a course to
improving the lot of women in armed conflict
situations. It is only the beginning of a journey. It
should not discourage continued thinking regarding
new and creative ways to empower women and raise
their voices to a higher plane. Lastly, we consider it
pertinent that the Council should continue to cooperate
more closely with other relevant United Nations organs
in this endeavour.
Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Resolution 1325 (2000) remains significant
as a guideline in determining the role of women in the
prevention and settlement of conflicts, in post-conflict
reconstruction and in assessing the situation regarding
the protection of women’s rights in conflicts. It is
important that the work of the Security Council for its
implementation should focus on tasks relating to the
Council’s mandate, and not duplicate the activities of
other United Nations bodies, including the General
Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission, the Human
Rights Council and the Commission on the Status of
Women.
An artificial connection between gender
questions and the whole gamut of questions under the
exclusive purview of the Security Council would lead
to imbalance in terms of system-wide coherence and
would impede the effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). On the other hand, the Council
cannot focus on sexual violence only when it occurs
during armed conflict. We must make efforts to find a
balanced approach to this problem within the Security
Council, bearing in mind its tasks and competence
under the Charter of the United Nations. That has to
do, also, with the fact that we see in this problem and
other topics an attempt to promote the concept of
responsibility to protect within the Security Council, an
issue which under the 2005 World Summit Outcome

14

We also should not, we believe, reduce the scope
of this important resolution to the problem of sexual
violence while ignoring other forms of violence against
women, not even referring to other issues such as equal
participation by women in peace processes,
incorporating gender aspects in United Nations
programmes and strategies, and so on. We believe that,
as in the work on children and armed conflict, we
should pay equal attention to all serious cases of
violence against women and children, including murder
and mutilation. Such crimes — including those
resulting from acts of terrorism, indiscriminate or
excessive use of force or unlawful actions by armed
forces, including private defence contractors — require
consistent attention from the international community.
The System-wide Action Plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) for 20052007 has facilitated the implementation of the United
Nations strategy on women and peace and security. Its
implementation has contributed to enhancing national
potential, that being a key condition for protecting the
rights of women and encouraging their equal
participation in peacebuilding. We agree with the
conclusions of the Secretary-General contained in his
report (S/2007/567) on the need to overcome the
shortcomings in the implementation of this plan.
At the same time, we cannot agree with the
recommendations on creating specialized machinery
within the Security Council to monitor the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on a national
level. We believe that that would simply exacerbate the
problem of duplication and lack of coherence.
Experience in similar plans has shown that it would not
lead to real improvements in the field. What is needed
is to enhance the effectiveness of existing machinery

07-55817

S/PV.5766

and not establish new bureaucratic structures,
particularly at a time when the issue of the new gender
architecture of the United Nations has not yet been
resolved.

women considered for United Nations special
representative and envoy positions and encourages
Member States to redouble their efforts to nominate
women candidates for these positions.

In this context, we are bewildered by the public
statements made on the eve of this Security Council
meeting by the Secretariat prejudging the Council’s
conclusions with respect to creating a monitoring
mechanism. Generally speaking, we support the
extension of the plan for 2008-2009, in order to further
develop constructive coordination between the United
Nations and interested States.

One of the key challenges we face today is
reducing the tragedy of violence against women and
girls in areas afflicted by armed conflict. It is often
women and children who face the most horrific
consequences of conflict in the world today. Sexual
violence against women is reprehensible in any
context, but it is especially heinous when it is used by
political or military leaders as a tool to achieve
political or military objectives.

Mr. Wolff (United States of America):
Mr. President, the United States would like to thank
you and the Permanent Mission of Ghana for choosing
to focus on the important topic of women and peace
and security for this month’s open debate. We welcome
the Secretary-General’s latest report and agree that
important groundwork has been laid for a longer-term
effort by the United Nations towards the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). However,
much more needs to be done.
The important contribution women can and do
make in decision-making to prevent conflict, mediate
peace processes and assist in post-conflict
reconstruction and rebuilding must be recognized and
endorsed at a national level. Failure to bring women
into these processes in a meaningful way leaves a
critical resource untapped and excludes a large
segment, in many cases, a majority of the population.
This undermines both the credibility and the
sustainability of these processes.
The United States calls on all Member States to
promote gender equality and a greater role for women
in the prevention of conflict, peace processes and postconflict reconstruction.
As part of this effort to incorporate women fully
into international efforts to prevent and resolve
conflicts, the United States strongly supports the
appointment of women to senior positions throughout
the United Nations system and, in particular, a special
envoy or representative of the Secretary-General. In
this regard, the United States especially welcomes the
recent nomination of Ambassador Løj as the SecretaryGeneral’s new Special Representative for Liberia.
The United States calls on the Secretary-General
as a matter of urgency to increase the number of

07-55817

It is with this in mind that the United States and
others have introduced a draft resolution in the Third
Committee of the General Assembly entitled
“Eliminating the use of rape and other forms of sexual
violence as instruments to achieve political or military
objectives” (A/C.3/62/L.16). This draft resolution
condemns the use by States and by non-State actors of
rape, typically systematic mass rape, to achieve
military or political objectives. This would be the first
United Nations resolution to focus specifically on this
particularly egregious form of violence against women.
It calls for States to end impunity by prosecuting and
punishing those who use rape as a military or political
tool and to protect and support victims; and it calls for
States, appropriate United Nations officers and
agencies and civil society to develop and implement
comprehensive
strategies
on
prevention
and
prosecution of rape. We ask Member States to support
and to consider sponsoring the text, which will be
addressed under the Assembly’s agenda item 63, on the
advancement of women.
Given the special vulnerability of the civilian
population during conflicts that threaten the peace and
security of their nations, it is particularly abhorrent
when those charged with restoring peace and stability
become the perpetrators of sexual exploitation and
abuse of women and children. The Council has
addressed this issue in past statements, reiterating its
condemnation of all acts of sexual exploitation and
abuse by all categories of personnel in United Nations
peacekeeping missions and urging troop-contributing
countries to take appropriate preventive action,
including the conduct of pre-deployment awareness
training and to take disciplinary and other action to
ensure full accountability in cases of misconduct
involving their personnel.

15

S/PV.5766

The United Nations, as we heard earlier this
morning from Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno, has
made considerable and laudable efforts to enforce a
zero-tolerance policy towards sexual exploitation and
abuse by personnel assigned to United Nations
peacekeeping operations and has made considerable
progress in providing appropriate training, as well as
improved oversight of conduct and discipline.
We underscore the need for all allegations to be
investigated properly and for appropriate follow-up
action to be taken.
Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): May I
first of all thank the delegation of Ghana for convening
this meeting. I am grateful to the Secretary-General for
his significant presentation and to Ms. Mayanja,
Ms. Sandler, Ms. Torry and Mr. Guéhenno for their
important briefings, which objectively describe the
successes and challenges relating to women and peace
and security and also in particular the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).
The Security Council’s adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) was an important milestone for this
Organization. It recognizes, inter alia, the valuable
contribution of women in the prevention and settlement
of conflicts, as well as in peacebuilding. Nonetheless,
in spite of the progress made in the implementation of
this resolution, a great deal remains to be done. This is
why the Security Council, the Secretary-General and
other United Nations forums must continue to support
Member States in adopting policies and establishing
national programmes and plans that are aimed at its
implementation. The Organization must do likewise
within its administration. In this context, Panama
wishes to welcome the appointment of Ambassador
Ellen Margrethe Løj as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Liberia.
As for the Republic of Panama, while we must
not disregard progress made in the implementation of
all the aspects of this resolution, it is equally true that
today we are confronting situations that directly affect
women and girls that require our immediate attention
and action. Obviously, we refer to the persistent
scourge of sexual violence in situations that are on the
Security Council’s agenda. Consideration of the reports
from the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Louise Arbour, as well as from the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,

16

John Holmes, inter alia, oblige us to refer specifically
to these situations in this debate.
The systematic rape of women and children who
are simply going about their daily activities is only one
segment of the challenge facing women in certain
regions of the world. At the present time, the rise in the
use of sexual violence against women as a tool of war
has reached a truly alarming stage. In spite of its
recurrence, the lack of public order and the situation of
insecurity prevent State bodies from protecting women
from being victims of this violence.
In the face of this problem, the Security Council
and the entire Organization must reflect on more
effective measures to prevent sexual violence in all
cases and particularly in the aforementioned tragic
situations. As part of its consideration, the Council
could re-evaluate the effectiveness and the scope of the
mandates of some peacekeeping operations, with a
view to ensuring the presence of its components in
these areas of repeated attacks. Furthermore, care of
the victims must be part of the joint efforts of the
Security Council and the rest of the Organization.
Ensuring access to psychological, social and health
support, including free and confidential HIV/AIDS
screening and, where necessary, treatment, is a key part
of this work. At the same time, little can be achieved
without education of the people; and, therefore, States,
with the needed support, must conduct awarenessraising campaigns on the subject of sexual violence.
Lastly, and as is universally agreed, justice is the
main guarantor of human rights. The lack of the rule of
law only results in a collapse of public order, in
insecurity and in conflict. Consequently, the detention
and prosecution of those guilty of using sexual
violence as a tool of war is something that this body
must emphasize repeatedly. In this context, we support
the efforts of the International Criminal Court to
prosecute those who are guilty of this crime against
humanity.
The Security Council’s capacity to react
effectively to this challenge depends on the quality,
credibility and relevance of the information it receives.
More information on sexual violence with empirical
data, broken down by gender, must form part of the
reports considered by this Security Council. This will
help us understand how and why this phenomenon
exists. It will also help define more effective strategies
to combat it. This is why the Republic of Panama

07-55817

S/PV.5766

hopes and trusts that, as of now, the Secretariat will
include in its reports to the Council more details
relating to this grave violation of the rights of women.
In conclusion, may I reiterate my own country’s
well-known position that in order to put an end to the
cycle of violence against women, which exists both in
peacetime and in wartime, it is necessary to promote,
inter alia, women’s active participation in all aspects of
political, socio-economic and cultural life. This must
be the ongoing commitment of our countries and of the
United Nations system.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): May I join others
in thanking you in particular, Mr. President, for
honouring us with your presence today and for
choosing such an important theme for this debate. We
are also pleased to be honoured by the presence of so
many other ministers.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2007/567) and for appearing here today.
We also very much welcome what the UnderSecretary-General said about the work of the
Secretariat on this important matter. We would like to
extend our congratulations to them for what they have
achieved.
It was also very good to be able to hear from the
Special Adviser, the acting Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) and the Coordinator of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security. We welcome
them to the Council and congratulate them and their
teams for the important strides they have made on
these issues.
This is not a new issue, as anyone who is familiar
with the Greek play Lysistrata — which means “she
who disbands armies”. The role of women in peace and
security is a very old and distinguished one. It behoves
us today to see how we can build on that.
The United Kingdom is committed to the key
resolution 1325 (2000). We continue to promote its
implementation at the United Nations and in the
international community. As many speakers have
noted, there has been progress in the seven years since
its adoption, but much more remains to be done.
Women and children suffer disproportionately in
armed conflict. They constitute the majority of all
victims. The Security Council has a key role to play in
providing for the protection of women from gender-

07-55817

based violence, including torture, rape, forced
pregnancy, sexual slavery, prostitution and trafficking,
which are all committed during conflict and continue
in post-conflict situations. Conflict is the business of
the Council.
The evidence from countries on the Council’s
agenda today shows how much remains to be done.
There is continued sexual violence on a massive scale
in the conflict-affected areas of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. UNICEF recently stated that
18,000 cases of rape were reported in three provinces
alone. The cruelty of the sexual violence inflicted upon
women and children, in particular as a weapon of war,
is unspeakable. This is not a debate about the
institutional niceties of whether the subject does or
does not belong on the Council’s agenda. This is a
debate about protecting people who are suffering as a
result of conflict.
The situation in Darfur continues to be
characterized by gross and systematic violations of
human rights and by breaches of international
humanitarian law. That too is a matter for the Council.
In Burma, Mr. Pinheiro, the United Nations
Special Rapporteur on human rights, has reported on
the systematic sexual violence used by the military,
police and border guards as part of the Government’s
anti-insurgency tactics.
The Council has a duty to listen to, but also to act
upon, such reports. We welcomed the Arria Formula
meeting hosted by the Mission of France earlier this
month. It is imperative that the Security Council hears
the often unpalatable testimonies of witnesses on the
ground. We heard about public rape in front of families
and communities, forced rape and incest between
victims, the introduction of objects into victims’
cavities, the pouring of melted rubber into women’s
vaginas, the shooting of women in the vagina and
inducing abortion using sharp objects.
That sort of cruelty is something that concerns us
all. Events such as the ones described in that Arria
Formula meeting — on the situation of women in
Darfur, Chad and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo — and the report of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to the Security
Council in September regarding conditions in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are an important
part of the debate.

17

S/PV.5766

Much of what resolution 1325 (2000) deals with
takes place at levels where Security Council
resolutions are often not heard. But we do need to hear
about such acts. Resolution 1325 (2000) must be used
as recognized doctrine to inform the Council’s
deliberations; in turn, it must have impact on the
ground. That can only be achieved by fully
implementing it. The provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) and successive presidential statements thereto
need to be translated more consistently from words
into actions.
We support Minister Chevalier’s call for
resolutions mandating that peacekeeping missions
ensure that that happens. We also welcome what
Minister Pratomo said about the role of regional
organizations and civil society. In addition, we
welcome the updated United Nations system-wide
Action Plan for 2008-2009, which we hope will
promote greater coherence and awareness within the
United Nations system while also promoting gender
mainstreaming within peace-support operations. In that
context, I would like to join other speakers in
congratulating the Secretary-General on appointing
Ellen Margrethe Løj his Special Representative for
Liberia. She is an outstanding choice.
To encourage national implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), Member States should be able
to look to the United Nations for guidance and
assistance in the production and ownership of national
action plans. The Peacebuilding Commission can also
contribute crucially by its development of
peacebuilding strategies.
Violence against women is a crime in itself. It is
an obstacle to long-term peace and security. Evidence
shows that peace and security reconciliation processes
are only sustainable when all actors in society are
involved. We heard today of the need for the female
voice to be heard at the Tripoli conference on Darfur,
as part of a process of bringing in non-State actors. We
would support that.
We also believe that, although the United Nations
Secretariat has done some welcome work, there is more
that can be done to enlist different parts of the
Secretariat — for instance, UNIFEM and the United
Nations System-wide Action Plan — so that they too
can contribute to the reports that are presented to the
Council and this issue can be given the weight it
deserves.

18

The issue of sexual and gender-based violence
against women is as much about perpetrators and
tackling impunity as it is about victims. Those accused
of such violations should be named, shamed and
brought to fair trials. The Security Council will only
limit its ability to ensure long-term peace and security
in many of the countries on its agenda if it does not
address gender-based violence.
I would like to turn to the draft presidential
statement before the Council. The United Kingdom
would like to thank your Mission, Mr. President, for its
outstanding work in seeking to promote the agenda of
resolution 1325 (2000), not only through today’s
debate but also through the draft statement that it has
prepared. We and other delegations had hoped that the
final draft could have addressed the current and
growing concern in the apparent proliferation of sexual
and gender-based violence within States that are
currently on the agenda of the Security Council.
We are disappointed that consensus could not be
reached on the proposal to request the SecretaryGeneral to prepare a report within the next six months
that focused on sexual violence in current countries in
conflict. I think that is all the more disappointing given
that the Secretary-General himself and the Special
Adviser and other speakers have said that they would
support such a report. Quite frankly, we find it
astonishing that anyone could object to that on narrow
institutional grounds. We believe that the debate has
shown very clearly why that is the business of the
Council. But we also support what Mr. Chevalier and
Mr. Pratomo have said, namely, that this is not the
exclusive business of the Council. There are other parts
of the United Nations system that can, and should, deal
with this issue. We look to those who do oppose
additional reporting through the Security Council to
lead and produce initiatives in other United Nations
bodies, which we would be happy to support.
We also hope, however, that it will be possible to
return to this issue within the context of the Security
Council when we have the report on the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). A long-term
solution to gender-based violence depends upon the
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), with
true gender mainstreaming and gender equality. We are
committed to working together towards that goal, and
to do justice to this landmark resolution.

07-55817

S/PV.5766

Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s open debate and for presiding over it in person
in New York. I also wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2007/567). I welcome his
presence and statement at this meeting. I also wish to
express my gratitude to Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno, Ms. Rachel Mayanja and Ms. Joanne
Sandler for their statements.
This year marks the seventh anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). A milestone in the
field of women, peace and security, that resolution has
laid the foundation for cooperation by all parties
concerned in this field. The Security Council has taken
a lot of follow-up action to the resolution and the
Member States concerned have also actively taken
relevant measures pursuant to the resolution. Since the
Secretary-General formulated the United Nations
System-wide Action Plan in 2005, positive results have
been achieved in the implementation of various aspects
of the resolution over the past two years.
However, we need to take an objective view of
the successes that have been achieved and the
shortcomings that still exist. As stated by the
Secretary-General in his report, various degrees of
progress have been registered in such fields as conflict
prevention and early warning, peacemaking and
peacebuilding, peacekeeping, humanitarian assistance,
post-conflict reconstruction and rehabilitation, the
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, and the prevention of and
response to sexual violence.
On the other hand, capacity-building at all levels
still leaves much to be desired, the problem of
inadequate funding remains prominent, and there is a
lack of close coordination between international
cooperation and national activities. Those challenges
have compromised the effectiveness of the
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The Security Council should further enhance
the implementation of the resolution and advance
comprehensive progress in all aspects of the issue of
women, peace and security. In order to achieve that
goal, all parties concerned should put special emphasis
on the following tasks.
First, the Security Council can play a unique role
in the field of women, peace and security, and various
organs of the United Nations system should strengthen

07-55817

mutual coordination and cooperation, while working
under their respective mandates. It is the broad
common understanding of the international community
that it is necessary to protect and empower women,
safeguard their rights and interests, and achieve gender
equality. That is an important undertaking which
requires integrated action. The United Nations has
adopted quite a number of instruments in this field. As
the organ with the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, the
Security Council should work effectively within its
terms of competence, focusing on conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction. The
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council,
the Human Rights Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission have their respective mandates and roles
in advancing women’s rights and interests, and the
work of the Security Council should not duplicate or
seek to replace that of those organs.
Secondly, it is necessary to enhance the
participation of women in all stages of a peace process
and to acknowledge their status and role so as to lay a
firm foundation for peacebuilding and the realization
of lasting peace. Respect for and protection of women
are manifestations of social civilization and progress,
and necessary elements of a mature social system.
Respect for and protection of women should be
incorporated into a peace process from the beginning
to the end. The special needs and concerns of women
should be accommodated and their potentials and roles
tapped. They should enjoy greater participation and
decision-making power with institutional guarantees.
In recent years, the Secretariat has taken many positive
measures to increase the ratio of female senior officials
and female heads and staff of peacekeeping missions.
We hope to see such efforts continue.
Thirdly,
countries
concerned
should
be
encouraged to formulate, on the basis of their specific
circumstances, national plans of action or strategies to
implement resolution 1325 (2000), with vigorous
support from the United Nations and the international
community. Resolution 1325 (2000) cannot be
comprehensively implemented without national action.
However, the countries that need to take
implementation actions the most, especially those
involved in or recently emerged from armed conflict,
often lack implementing capabilities and are burdened
by specific special situations and difficulties. The
international community and donors should come

19

S/PV.5766

forward with generous help and the United Nations
should provide various kinds of assistance to give the
Government and people of countries concerned full
ownership and strengthen their capacity-building, and
avoid acting in their place or imposing anything on
them.
The Outcome Document of the World Summit
emphasized that the progress of women is the progress
of all humankind. That is equally true in the field of
peace and security. The comprehensive implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) represents an important
guarantee for the realization of that goal. We support
the Secretary-General in his ongoing efforts to
implement the United Nations System-wide Action
Plan. The Chinese Government has always attached
importance to the protection of women’s rights and
interests and the empowerment of women.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank you, Sir, for your presence at
this important meeting and to extend to the permanent
mission of Ghana to the United Nations my sincere
thanks for its thorough preparations for this open
debate.
I would also like to extend my thanks to
Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations; Ms. Rachel Mayanja,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women; Ms. Joanne
Sandler, Ad Interim Executive Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women; and Ms. Gina
Torry, Coordinator of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security, for their briefings today.
The State of Qatar firmly believes that women are
key partners in all efforts towards and stages in the
maintenance and strengthening of international peace
and security. It also believes in the priority of the
ongoing work to integrate women into all peacekeeping
and peacebuilding operations and in the development
of national policies for the consolidation of peace in
areas of armed conflict. The State of Qatar strongly
condemns all sexual and physical abuse of women and
girls in areas of armed conflict. The State of Qatar
stresses the need to provide them with comprehensive
protection and to take firm action against those who
sexually abuse women and girls in areas of armed
conflict, be they parties to the conflict or United
Nations peacekeeping operations personnel, in order to
put an end to impunity.

20

We have reviewed the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the United Nations
System-wide Action Plan for the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) for the years
2005-2007. In that regard, we commend the efforts and
activities carried out by all the entities of the United
Nations, which have made significant progress in many
areas of the Plan. It is reassuring to note that the
review process indicates an increase in the political
commitment to gender equality, the empowerment of
women in peace processes, and the strengthening of
capacity-building, especially in the area of women’s
full participation in all stages of peace processes,
including in negotiating and implementing peace
agreements and in the development of new
mechanisms for monitoring and reporting on the status
of women and their contributions to peace processes.
With regard to addressing all forms of violence
against women and children in armed conflict,
including sexual violence, and to addressing the issue
of impunity from prosecution for such crimes, we
commend the efforts of United Nations entities in
carrying out the United Nations zero-tolerance policy
on sexual exploitation and abuse committed by their
personnel; in providing support to Member States in
their efforts to align their national legal systems with
the relevant international standards; and in cooperating
in the area of national capacity-building in the fight
against those crimes and against impunity. We also
commend the Governments concerned for their
cooperation, which is essential for the success of any
plan intended to put an end to this phenomenon.
Despite the progress that has been made, many
institutional and organizational challenges must still be
addressed to achieve universal implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The Governments of postconflict countries and countries affected by conflict
bear the primary responsibility for the implementation
of that resolution. While such countries have
established national mechanisms for the advancement
of women, they need financial and technical support to
ensure active participation by women in the
formulation of policies and programmes relating to the
establishment and consolidation of peace and security.
In that respect, the Secretary-General has pointed out
in his report the inadequate funding of gender-related
projects in peace processes and post-conflict
peacebuilding.

07-55817

S/PV.5766

Overcoming these challenges does not require the
creation of new mechanisms and bodies or the
submission of new reports. That would entail a waste
of money and effort that could be better spent to
improve and strengthen existing mechanisms. With
regard to monitoring and follow-up, the SecretaryGeneral should include in his periodic reports to the
Security Council on various of armed conflicts an
assessment of progress made in mainstreaming the
gender perspective in all peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions and data on all forms of
violence against women and children, including killing
and maiming and sexual violence committed by the
parties to the conflict and by peacekeeping personnel.
Those reports must also include best practices and
lessons learned in the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000).
Turning to national implementation, the
successful implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
requires enhancing the capacity of the United Nations
peace support, humanitarian and post-conflict
reconstruction operations to backstop the efforts of
Member States in strengthening their national
capacities, in line with national objectives and the
relevant international standards, to achieve gender
equality, the empowerment of women in the area of
peace and security, success in the fight against all
forms of violence, especially violence against women
and children, and the eradication of the culture of
impunity. Success also requires paying special
attention to countries emerging from conflict, which
need financial and technical support in the preparation
of national plans of action to implement resolution
1325 (2000). We commend the effort to take that
objective into account in the formulation of the United
Nations
System-wide
Plan
of
Action
for
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) for the
period 2008-2009. We also stress the importance of
continued financial and technical support, the lack of
which could make the objective of achieving the global
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) elusive. We
will support the draft presidential statement that is
before the Security Council, which enjoys consensus.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to start by thanking you, Mr. President, for taking
the initiative to hold this public debate on women and
peace and security. The French delegation appreciates
your presence here with us.

07-55817

I would like at the outset to recall that France
fully aligns itself with the statement that will be made
shortly by the Portuguese Presidency of the European
Union.
The adoption, seven years ago, of resolution 1325
(2000) was recognition that the participation of women
on an equal footing with men in society and in
decision-making processes and the protection of
women from violence and violations of their rights
have an important impact on conflict prevention, on the
course of conflicts and on post-conflict stabilization
and reconstruction. It is thus not only legitimate but
essential for the Security Council, in the context of its
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and complementing the actions
pursued by other United Nations organs, to continue to
concern itself with the situation of women in conflict
and post-conflict situations.
A great deal has been done in seven years,
especially in the United Nations system, to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). The Security Council has
integrated — not systematically enough, it must be
recognized — the approach advocated in resolution
1325 (2000) in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and has tried to convince the parties
themselves to integrate this perspective in peace
processes. The Secretariat and the agencies, funds and
programmes, each in its own area, have increased their
activities to better protect women, ensure that their
specific needs are taken into account in transition
phases and involve them more in decision-making
processes.
My delegation would like, in that connection, to
warmly thank the Special Adviser on Gender Issues
and Advancement of Women, Ms. Rachel Mayanja, the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, and Ms. Joanne Sandler of
the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) for their respective contributions to the
implementation of the resolution and for their
statements in today’s debate.
The report that the Secretary-General has
submitted on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) (S/2007/567) reflects the profusion of initiatives
to train personnel for peacekeeping operations, to
rethink the organization of refugee camps in order to
take into account women’s specific needs, to support

21

S/PV.5766

women who are victims of violence and to fight
impunity.
Among those initiatives, I would like to draw
attention to the one carried out by UNICEF and
sponsored by France, which led to the adoption in
February 2007 of the Paris Guidelines on the
protection and reintegration of children associated with
armed forces or armed groups. One of the fundamental
underpinnings of the guidelines is to give more
consideration to the specific needs of girls, including in
all processes involving the demobilization and
reintegration into the community of children who have
been associated, in one way or another, with an armed
group.
Should we thus consider that seven years of
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) have met the
expectations it raised? The answer is no.
When Mrs. Rama Yade, Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs and Human Rights of the French
Republic, came to New York on 1 October to chair,
together with Mrs. Mary Robinson, an Arria-formula
Security Council meeting on the question of women in
conflicts in Africa, it was to awaken the consciences of
Security Council members to that subject. The
powerful testimony at the meeting on the extent of the
suffering of women and girls, in camps for displaced
persons in Darfur and in regions of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where certain groups engage in
systematic sexual violence accompanied by acts of
barbarism that defy reason, reminded us that on the
ground the real situation for women has changed far
too little since 2000.
The Security Council and all the actors involved
in the implementation of the resolution must therefore
ask themselves a number of questions. How can we
claim that resolution 1325 (2000) is being implemented
when 27,000 cases of sexual violence were recorded in
2006 in South Kivu province alone? Again, those are
just the reported incidents. We can assume that the
reality was far worse. How could such a situation
develop? What new means can be used to put an end to
that situation — and all situations in which women are
victims of systematic violence? How do we explain the
fact that in spite of specific references in certain
Council resolutions and statements, many peace
processes still take place without the involvement of
women and without taking into account their concerns
and contributions?

22

In order to allow the Council to respond to those
among other questions and to develop new approaches
to ensure a more effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), especially with regard to protection,
France had been in favour of the speedy preparation of
a report of the Secretary-General on this specific issue.
We regret that such a basic proposal was not supported
by all Security Council members. We hope
nevertheless that the mechanism put in place to ensure
that the Council has more detailed information on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) with respect
to all the situations on its agenda, and that it can
engage in dialogue on this subject with the special
representatives of the Secretary-General. We hope that
that mechanism will make it possible for those
questions to be addressed more effectively and will
lead to concrete improvements in the situation on the
ground.
Before concluding, I wish to refer to a few areas
on which my delegation believes we need to focus our
efforts in post-conflict phases. The first is the
protection of women and the rehabilitation of victims,
especially victims of sexual violence. How can lasting
peace be restored when women who have already been
victims of violence in the conflict phase are then
ostracized within their communities? It is important,
inter alia, that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes take fully into account the
fate of women who have been associated, most
frequently by force, with groups of combatants.
The second relates to the administration of
justice. How can women speak out and take part in
civic life if they have to remain in contact with their
former tormentors and to live in fear? How can we ask
them to seek justice if that is synonymous with further
humiliation, denial and, potentially, reprisal? The fight
against impunity and the adoption of a gender-specific
approach by the judicial system are indispensable.
The third area is the participation of women in
decision-making processes. Access by women to
elective office is an important element; one can only
welcome in that regard the examples of Rwanda,
Burundi and Liberia. But we must also ensure that
women, especially through their organizations, are
involved in all administrative processes.
Fourthly and finally, the establishment of
institutions committed to parity is necessary. The phase
of building institutions offers a unique opportunity for

07-55817

S/PV.5766

countries emerging from conflict to establish
institutions in accordance with the most advanced legal
standards. Instruments such as the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women must be a point of reference for all actors
involved in reconstruction.

violence against women in conflict and post-conflict
situations is increasingly widely recognized and
documented. Everybody today agrees that such
violence must be condemned, along with the climate of
impunity in which such acts continue to be perpetrated,
as those are the main obstacles to peacebuilding.

In conclusion, I wish only to say that we consider
the ongoing participation of civil society to be
extremely important in our collective efforts on this
subject. In that connection, my delegation listened with
great attention to the speech by Ms. Gina Torry,
Coordinator of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security. My delegation thanks her for her
contribution, which will continue to spur and inspire
our actions in the Security Council towards the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

My Government understands the need to
eliminate all obstacles to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), and we remain convinced that
success more than ever requires close cooperation
between Member States and the United Nations
system. Only then can our objectives be achieved. For
its part, Congo is working to mainstream the gender
perspective in many sectors of public life and to
involve women in all stages of the peacebuilding
process,
in
particular
the
negotiation
and
implementation of peace agreements, on the basis of
the Beijing Platform for Action and resolution 1325
(2000).

Mr. Biabaroh-Iboro (Congo) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I wish to begin by expressing to you the
regrets of your brother and fellow Foreign Minister,
His Excellency Mr. Basile Ikouebe, who, because of
his schedule was unable to travel to New York. My
delegation also wishes to express its pleasure in seeing
you presiding over this annual debate of the Security
Council to review — now, seven years after its
adoption — the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security.
This year’s report of the Secretary-General
(S/2007/567) provides useful information on progress
made since the first follow-up on the United Nations
System-wide Action Plan for the implementation of
that historic resolution. It will be recalled that the first
report (S/2006/770) made it possible to see what
progress had been made and what shortcomings needed
to be corrected, thus allowing for the updating of the
System-wide Action Plan for 2008-2009. In that
connection, my delegation wishes to thank all of those
involved in that difficult task, including the Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, experts from throughout the system, United
Nations bodies and civil society organizations. The
quality of their work deserves our appreciation.
In the light of the report of the Secretary-General,
my delegation has a number of observations to make.
Numerous obstacles impede the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), in particular serious cases of
discrimination and sexual violence against women and
girls. They are the ones who pay a particularly high
price in conflict situations. The frequency of acts of

07-55817

At the regional level, Congolese women are
involved in the International Conference on Peace,
Security, Democracy and Development in the Great
Lakes Region and are actively participating in the work
of the thematic groups and in meetings of the
preparatory committees. In that framework, they
participated in the meeting of women from the Great
Lakes region on peace and security held last year in
Kinshasa.
With respect to the role played by women in
building the life of the nation and in the light of the
recommendations of the first report of the
Peacebuilding
Commission
(S/2007/458),
my
Government supports any mechanism designed to
ensure the full participation of women in the postconflict phase. Along the same lines, the Congo is in
favour of improving the representation of women in
peacekeeping operations and appreciates the successful
efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
in that area.
We believe, however, that additional efforts need
to be made at all levels in order to appoint women
officials to high-ranking posts within the United
Nations system, including as special representatives or
envoys of the Secretary-General. In that connection,
we welcome the appointment of Ms. Ellen Margrethe
Løj as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Liberia. Her ability and her dynamism have already

23

S/PV.5766

convinced us that she will be equal to the task
conferred on her by the Secretary-General.
Moreover, the Congo is convinced that it is
necessary to establish a subsidiary body on women and
peace and security whose mandate would be, inter alia,
to ensure the effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Indeed, such a mechanism would help not
only to strengthen the actions of the Security Council
by speeding up the implementation of that resolution
but would also help to perpetuate the positive changes
in the situation and the role of women, in particular in
the case of countries in a conflict or post-conflict
situation, as well as enhancing coherence in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) at various
levels. However, as we focus our attention on all forms
of violence against women and young girls in countries
on the agenda of the Security Council, the fact
nonetheless remains that the seriousness of these acts
in most countries in conflict cannot fail to awaken our
collective conscience.
My delegation is ready to support any action
designed to speed up the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). In that regard, we fully support the draft
presidential statement prepared by the delegation of
Ghana, which we warmly thank for this important
initiative and which we congratulate once again on the
outstanding manner in which it has presided over the
Council.
In conclusion, my delegation hopes to see this
debate contribute to enhancing the now recognized role
of women in the maintenance of peace and security,
and in peacebuilding.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Mr. President, your
presence in New York with us today is a clear
indication of how seriously Ghana takes this matter.
We commend the Ghanaian delegation for organizing
the annual open debate on women and peace and
security. We are also grateful for the contributions
made to the debate by Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno on
behalf of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, Ms. Joanne Sandler, Ad Interim Executive
Director of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women, and Ms. Gina Torry, Coordinator of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.

24

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
that will be read out by the delegation of Zambia on
behalf of the Southern African Development Community.
It has been seven years since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). While there has been progress
in implementing that resolution, there is still a lot to be
done to improve the lives of women, particularly
women in conflict-affected areas. For this reason we
agree with the concept paper, presented to us by the
Ghanaian delegation (S/2007/598, annex), that one of
the central objectives remains to meet the demand for
gender mainstreaming in all its aspects.
Throughout the history of South Africa, women
have played a pivotal role in the liberation of our
country. In the negotiations for a new South Africa,
women were in the forefront in developing a
constitutional framework centred on a non-sexist and
non-racist policy. From the beginning, South Africans
recognized the need for mainstreaming a gender
perspective in all aspects of our lives. As a result, we
pride ourselves on having senior women in key
government, business and civil society positions. As
South Africa has increased its participation in the
international arena, our representatives in regional and
international peacebuilding and peacekeeping efforts
have always included women.
Also from our experience, we have learned that it
is important to build solidarity among all actors,
particularly women. For example, South African
Women in Dialogue (SAWID) has links with women
throughout the world. SAWID has collaborated with
women from the Great Lakes region, including women
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Recently,
SAWID travelled to Darfur in solidarity with the
displaced women of the Sudan.
Despite those efforts, South Africa believes that
there is still more work to be done in support of women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict societies. Women
and girls make up a disproportionate and
overwhelming number of the victims of violence,
particularly gender-based violence. Mothers and girls
are the first to be affected in war situations and suffer
among the highest casualties. Those who survive
conflict are victimized and traumatized yet again just
because they are women.
While the situation of women, particularly in
conflict areas, remains desperate and unacceptable, we
should resist seeing women only as victims. While

07-55817

S/PV.5766

women may be the first casualties of conflict, it is also
true that women have played and continue to play a
meaningful role in the recovery of families and their
reintegration into society. Women have also been
among leading policymakers and have been
instrumental in bringing about democracy in some
post-conflict societies. As we approach the seventh
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), my country,
South Africa, would like to pay tribute to those women.
One of Africa’s leaders is President Ellen JohnsonSirleaf of Liberia, who was one of the major
contributors to resolution 1325 (2000), which we are
discussing today.
We also agree that Member States must
continually look at measures to strengthen the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We believe that full implementation requires the
resolve of Member States in forming partnerships with
civil society, the private sector and community-based
organizations to promote women’s rights.
During the negotiations for the drafting of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), South Africa was among the advocates of
ensuring that gender-based violence was included in
the list of war crimes. When the International Criminal
Court was created, South Africa presented a woman
candidate, who has since contributed meaningfully to
the ICC’s jurisprudence on violence against women in
armed conflict. Judge Navi Pillay, a member of the
ICC, is a well-known advocate for the protection of
women’s rights.

the Africa Regional Meeting on Gender Justice as a
document of the Security Council (S/2007/607).
In conclusion, South Africa believes that there is
still more work that needs to be done to address the
situation of women and peace and security. There is a
need for increased participation by women at all levels,
particularly in peacekeeping and peacebuilding, as well
as in United Nations field operations. More women
should be appointed as special representatives and
envoys of the Secretary-General. For that reason, we
commend the Secretary-General for appointing our
colleague Ambassador Ellen Løj of Denmark as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Liberia.
South Africa remains committed to working
within a consultative and collaborative framework to
find peaceful resolutions to conflicts. To that end, we
believe it would be important for women in local
communities to be allowed to participate in finding
solutions for the reconstruction and rebuilding of their
own countries. Besides being the ones who are the first
to suffer when there is conflict, women are often the
ones who know when and how to rebuild the lives of
their families and communities.

Also, South Africa has joined with Sweden and
others in promoting the Partners for Gender Justice
initiative. The aim of that initiative is to forge a more
coordinated and integrated system of collaboration to
assist national stakeholders in achieving gender justice
in conflict affected countries.

Mr. Chávez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes the initiative of the Ghanaian presidency to
hold an open debate on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and on the role of women in
peacebuilding. We also wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for presenting his report. In addition, we
appreciate the statements made by the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, the
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, the Ad Interim
Executive Director of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women and the Coordinator of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.

We recently hosted in Cape Town the Africa
Regional Meeting on Gender Justice, with the
participation of ministers of justice and ministers of
gender, at which there was a sharing of experiences on
how best to identify gaps, challenges and opportunities
with regard to implementing resolution 1325 (2000) at
the national level. The Regional Meeting also focused
on ways to promote gender justice and ensure the
participation of women in the legal system. We wish to
thank the President of the Council, the Permanent
Representative of Ghana, for circulating the report of

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/567)
is revealing, because it indicates that women and girls
continue to be the principal victims of acts of violence
in armed conflicts. Peru wishes to associate itself with
the rejection of all acts of violence and to express its
concern at the information that rape and sexual abuse,
primarily against women and girls, are increasingly
being used intentionally as tools of war by parties to
armed conflict. That is why the international
community must continue to use all instruments
available to put an end to violations of the human

07-55817

25

S/PV.5766

rights of women and girls living in situations of armed
conflict. This battle must be fought at the national and
international levels, with programmes and policies that
promote the prevention of violence through the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in all its
aspects.
In that regard, we also want to highlight the role
of the International Criminal Court in the fight against
impunity, as well as the need for States to make it a
priority to shoulder their responsibility to do justice
and punish those responsible for crimes, as part of a
comprehensive approach to peace, justice, truth and
national reconciliation.
Peru notes with satisfaction the SecretaryGeneral’s report and the initiatives and actions
undertaken by United Nations entities to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). We agree with the SecretaryGeneral that, if we are to promote the implementation
of the resolution, we must improve and rework
measures adopted by the United Nations and by States
that find themselves in conflict situations or
reconstruction processes. We appreciate the rethinking
of the concept of the 2008-2009 Action Plan to make it
a results-based instrument for planning, following up
on and presenting results-based reports.
We share the view that the Action Plan’s central
objective must be to develop the capacity of United
Nations operations to support peace as well as postconflict and reconstruction efforts so that they can
assist States in their efforts to strengthen national
capacity to achieve gender equality and the
empowerment of women in the areas of peace and
security. In that connection, we support the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal that a system-wide evaluation of the
progress achieved in the coordinated implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) be conducted in 2010, followed
by the submission of a report to the Security Council.
Peru supports the initiative to hold Security
Council consultations on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its application on the
ground. Such consultations would enable States to
obtain detailed information about progress, good
practices and difficulties related to the implementation
of the resolution. Furthermore, we believe it is
important that the Secretary-General report on progress
made in mainstreaming the gender perspective in
peacekeeping operations and that disaggregated
information be provided on types of violence —

26

including sexual and gender-based violence —
committed by parties to armed conflict. We are already
aware of tragic cases that have occurred in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Darfur, among
other places.
Finally, we believe it is important that the
international community support the national
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) as well as
the United Nations System-Wide Action Plan,
particularly by providing sufficient financial resources
in a timely and sustainable manner.
The work still lies ahead and must be tackled
jointly by States, the United Nations system and civil
society in order to strengthen follow-up and
accountability regarding the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
Mr. Spatafora (Italy): The presence of Minister
Osei-Adjei among us is an honour; it shows the
significance that the Ghanaian presidency attaches to
an issue of crucial importance, for reasons that we all
know.
I should like, first of all, to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his very focused statement. I also wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno for his
briefing. It would be very useful if we could have
copies of his talking points, because he discussed
several points that I have to build upon. I thank Special
Adviser Mayanja for the passion that she expressed in
her briefing, which I shall also revisit. I thank
Ms. Sandler, Ad Interim Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), for her briefing. Italy is a true believer in
and a strong supporter of UNIFEM, which is a shining
example in the galaxy of funds within the United
Nations system. If UNIFEM were not there, we would
have to create it. Finally, I thank Ms. Torry,
Coordinator of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, for her briefing, which was very
passionate. I will also come back to that in a
presentation that is cool, but all the more compelling
because of its coolness.
In view of the constraints on our time, I shall
touch on just a few points, dispensing with my talking
points.
One of the points made by Mr. Guéhenno was the
way in which we enhance and have clearly in mind the
relationship between protection and empowerment.

07-55817

S/PV.5766

That is a double track, and we must make progress on
both tracks. I will not elaborate on that here; it has
been very eloquently addressed by many preceding
speakers.
Another point — which, as we have heard from
those around this table, is very sensitive — is that, as
Mr. Guéhenno said, it is time to review the segmented
approach. We could also put it the way that the
Secretary-General and Ms. Mayanja did: we must
decide whether or not to create new bodies or new
mechanisms. I do not want to belabour this point. But I
fully agree that it is now time to review the segmented
approach. What we need is, to quote Mr. Guéhenno
once again, a mutually reinforcing, more coordinated
and integrated approach.
Thanks to the commitment of the SecretaryGeneral and the Secretariat, including, inter alia, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UNIFEM,
much progress has undoubtedly been made, as has been
pointed out. But, as has also been said, much remains
to be done. I think, however, that we have to go deeper
into this point — the relation between progress
achieved and what remains to do.
I am not so sure that I would agree with what
Ms. Sandler said, namely, that the presidential
statement that is to follow is a message of hope. It is,
of course, useful, but I wonder — looking at it and at
what we do from the point of view of those who are the
victims on the ground, of those who suffer — if, after
six or seven years, what we produce, namely,
presidential statements, meetings, plans of action and
so on — could be perceived as a message of
frustration, as a message of despair, rather than as a
message of hope, because what we manage to do is to
do only presidential statements.
What I think and hear — and I think Belgian
Special Envoy Chevalier hinted at this — is that we
know very well what have to do. In a certain way, we
do not need more information. Of course, I fully agree
that having more information is very useful. But if we
really wanted to, we could act today on the information
that we have. We do not need more information. We
need to know how we can have an impact on the
ground, because the benchmark of our credibility, the
benchmark of our success comes, as Ms. Torry has told
us, from the NGO point of view, that is to say, from the
ground. In the last six years has the suffering
diminished? Has the number of victims diminished? I

07-55817

am not so sure, listening to what has been said — and I
thank the French delegation for what we heard just
now. The number of victims in Kivu alone in just the
past few months is 27,000, if I remember well. Clearly,
I think, we have had a setback.
So, I think the prism through which we have to
look at what we must do is the awareness that there has
been a setback, notwithstanding everything that we
have done, or everybody’s efforts, or the evidence of
progress. But, at the end of the day, what counts is that
there has been a setback, seen from the point of view
of the people who suffer on the ground. It is from that
point that we will have to start to act.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ghana.
It is a great pleasure for me join the Council at
this meeting, which, in my view, has provided fresh
and welcome insights into how we can work together
to meet what we all agree is one of the foremost
challenges facing the world community in this century.
The vital role of women in building and maintaining
international peace and security has already been
forcefully brought home to us. Our shared goal remains
securing women’s full and meaningful involvement in
that enterprise. Therefore, I commend the Security
Council on its leadership and its determination to bring
to fruition the goals set out in resolution 1325 (2000)
of October 2000.
I further acknowledge the important steps that
have been taken by the Secretary-General to ensure
that not only does the United Nations remain a
pacesetter in gender-mainstreaming, but that it also
extends vital support to Member States in order for
them to fulfil their obligations under resolution 1325
(2000).
Ghana welcomes the commitment shown by the
Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women (OSAGI), the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), and
the various non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
and advocacy groups that are actively promoting the
objectives enshrined in the resolution.
Like other delegations, we also attach great
importance
to
the
issues
of
coordination,
accountability, monitoring and evaluation, both within

27

S/PV.5766

the United Nations system and in the context of
national action plans, in accordance with the
resolution. Therefore, we consider worthy of emulation
the example shown by those Governments that are far
advanced in developing national action plans aimed at
mainstreaming a gender perspective in the training of
military personnel, especially those sent on
peacekeeping missions.
Significantly, a gender perspective is also
increasingly being integrated into aid packages
designed for countries that have recently emerged from
conflict. These positive trends, in themselves,
demonstrate what could be achieved if Member States
were to commit themselves fully to the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). As has been
repeatedly stated, the resolution provides a workable
framework for action by all stakeholders.
Much as we are encouraged by the steady
progress that has been made since the adoption of the
resolution, we believe nevertheless that the challenges
and gaps that have been highlighted during this debate
deserve serious attention.
The apparent lack of political will on the part of
some Governments, coupled with genuine financial and
human resource constraints, has contributed to the
inadequate institutional response to resolution 1325
(2000) that has been observed by various speakers.
The Secretary-General has put forward several
concrete proposals in his latest progress report on
resolution 1325 (2000) touching on a number of
priority areas. Member States, the United Nations
system and civil society actors are all called upon to
intensify their efforts towards achieving tangible
results that would be reflected in the increased
participation of women in decision-making and peace
processes, and in the protection of women and girls in
conflict situations, inter alia.
Ghana has made considerable progress in
developing the necessary legal and institutional
frameworks that can facilitate the implementation of
the resolution, including the establishment of a
Ministry for Women and Children’s Affairs. Our
objective is to give due prominence and practical
meaning to the issues that remain at the heart of our
concerns. In the coming years, we shall be seeking
closer collaboration between Government and
Ghanaian civil society groups and with our respective

28

counterparts abroad. That is in recognition of the
benefits of global networking.
For its part, the Security Council should similarly
explore the feasibility of a follow-up mechanism that
would, in addition to the annual open debates, enable it
to monitor closely the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) in a more coordinated and systematic
fashion. As the organ with primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, the
Council has more than a functional interest in ensuring
the equal participation and full involvement of women
in all aspects of peace and security.
The preponderance of women and girls among
the victims of human rights abuses and gender-based
violence, both during and after conflicts, poses a direct
challenge to the authority of the Security Council, but
the situation also imbues the Council’s mandate with a
profound meaning. Indeed, the Secretary-General
eloquently summed it up in his 2004 report, entitled
“Women and peace and security” when he observed
that,
“Resolution 1325 (2000) holds out a promise to
women across the globe that their rights will be
protected and that barriers to their equal
participation and full involvement in the
maintenance and promotion of sustainable peace
will be removed. We must uphold this promise.”
(S/2004/814, para. 121)
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Bert
Koenders, Minister for Development Cooperation of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Mr. Koenders (Netherlands): Approximately one
third of all women in the Congolese province of Kivu
have been raped. In the Sudan, tens of thousands of
women in the last years have been molested, mutilated
and sexually abused, and not a single person has been
held accountable.
Recently, I visited the Democratic Republic of
Congo. Even though I knew all the statistics, I was still
horrified by what I saw in refugee camps and local
hospitals. Unfortunately, this pattern of abuse is found
in nearly all of the world’s conflict areas. Wherever
hostilities erupt, women and girls are most vulnerable.
In the former Yugoslavia, women were purposely raped
to bear the enemy’s children. In Central America,

07-55817

S/PV.5766

violence against women is increasing with dramatic
figures, and we find similar grave situations around the
world. The responsibility to protect is an urgent call
here.

States. We have already provided the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations with funds for gender
expertise in order to integrate a gender perspective into
peacekeeping operations.

Violence against women is more than a violation
of human rights. It is also a security issue, and that is
why we are here today. Over the last decade, violence
against women has become endemic in conflict zones.
It has become a weapon of modern warfare that
specifically and structurally targets women. That is
why it is so important that it be discussed here. Doctors
two weeks ago spoke to me about a horrible epidemic.
The United Nations Security Council took a big step
forward when it unanimously adopted resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security.

Second is the matter of empowerment. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, women risk their
own lives to encourage others to report sexual abuse to
the proper authorities. We need to create safe havens
for women who have suffered from violence and help
them reintegrate into their societies. As Council
members know, they are often isolated. We have to
support women who set up their own networks for
conflict prevention and for dealing with trauma. And,
even more, we need to ensure that women get the place
they deserve at the table in formal peace processes. In
Liberia, women played an essential role in the peace
process, bringing people together across factional lines.
I recently created a fund for women’s rights and
empowerment, and I hope other donors will follow this
example, so that we can really pool our efforts.

Violence against women is only one aspect of
resolution 1325 (2000) — although a very important
one — but it deserves the immediate and urgent
attention of everyone in this room, for it is the most
prominent aspect underlining the little progress we
have made since the adoption of the resolution in the
year 2000. We have been telling ourselves for seven
years now that it is more than words on paper. It is a
clarion call to arms, a catalyst.
In the Netherlands, we are developing a national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), in consultation with all relevant ministries and
civil society. I assure this Council that it will not
remain merely another piece of paper.
More than anything else, we need leadership. Let
us set an agenda for action here today — an agenda
that I believe should focus on four issues.
First, we need to include women in our security
strategies. This means investing more strongly in
security sector reform and in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes
in post-conflict countries to ensure that violence
against women does not continue after a conflict has
ended. I have seen the urgency of the need for this in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
If there is not more security sector reform, the
army indeed preys more on the population than it
protects the women. We need to train armies and
soldiers, making them aware that violence against
women is unacceptable and will not be tolerated. The
Netherlands will allocate extra funding for security
sector reform, DDR and training programmes in fragile

07-55817

Thirdly, I would like to call for the speedy
conclusion of ongoing consultations on the new gender
entity of the United Nations — it is taking a long
time — and to stress that this entity will have to make
violence against women an urgent issue. We should
also support United Nations agency programmes
directed at violence against women, especially the
United Nations Trust Fund to End Violence against
Women, administered by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM).
Finally, we have to stop impunity. The grave
violation of women’s human rights, through massive
rape and other sexual violence, requires the immediate
attention of organizations such as the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and other relevant tribunals. The
Security Council can play a role in this area by
referring such cases to the ICC. We have to give a clear
signal to the perpetrators that the international
community is no longer tolerating impunity for these
heinous crimes.
In conclusion, I would like to underline the
crucial role of the Security Council in addressing
violence against women in conflict situations. In this
respect, I would like to express my strong support for
the Secretary-General’s recommendation to establish a
dedicated monitoring mechanism to increase the
effectiveness of the Council’s contribution to

29

S/PV.5766

preventing and redressing violence against women in
armed conflict.
Last but not least, uncomfortable issues like rape
and other forms of sexual violence against women
should be openly discussed with and by Governments,
members of parliament, militia leaders and opinion
makers — by us. The Security Council has to raise its
voice on this issue. The “big silence” has to stop. I
hope that this debate in the Security Council will give a
clear message to the international community.
Let us join forces and implement resolution 1325
(2000). Let us end the abuse of women everywhere by
stopping this “big silence” today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): To save time, I will not
read the complete text of my intervention, which has
been distributed.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The candidate countries Turkey,
Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, and Serbia, as
well as Ukraine, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) is a
landmark along the road towards gender equality and
the full recognition of the role women play in society,
especially in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and postconflict situations.
The rights of women and girls, and gender
equality, are at the core of major international
instruments, such as the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and
Beijing + 5, and the 2005 World Summit Outcome. The
European Union abides by and seeks to promote the
full implementation of these international instruments,
not only within the EU membership but also in its
policies towards third countries. Commitments to
promote the role of women in peacebuilding and
enhance the implementation of Security Council 1325
(2000) are also reflected in the 2006 EU joint concept
for support to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and the communication on gender in
development cooperation.

30

Nowadays, gender equality concerns are
mainstreamed into our development and cooperation
policies and in the framework of the European Security
and Defence Policy (ESDP), as well as in other EU
projects and programmes. We wish to highlight the
three-year partnership with the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) launched in
April 2007 to build capacity and improve
accountability for gender equality in 12 countries, with
a specific focus on women in peacebuilding and the
implementation of Security Council 1325 (2000). Also,
the EU Conflict Prevention Network will be exploring
ways of assuring the effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) by the international community,
Governments and local civil society organizations.
The Council of the European Union has also
adopted conclusions on gender equality and gender
mainstreaming in crisis management, which are
currently being implemented at all levels of European
Security and Defence Policy (ESDP) missions. The EU
Council stressed the importance of fully implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) from the early planning stages
to the conduct and evaluation of ESDP missions and
operations.
Particular emphasis has been placed on the
inclusion of measures against sexual and gender-based
violence in transitional justice mechanisms, while
emphasizing that peacebuilding and reconstruction
plans should include comprehensive victim-protection
and support mechanisms. In that regard, the European
Union also welcomes the draft policy statement and
draft strategy on assistance and support to victims of
sexual exploitation and abuse by United Nations staff
and related personnel, as well as the upcoming work on
the criminal accountability of United Nations officials
and experts on mission. The European Union is
committed to working towards the creation of a clear
United Nations framework to respond to situations of
sexual exploitation and abuse, and will stay actively
engaged in the discussions of the Ad Hoc Working
Group.
On the other hand, we must not forget the
preventive dimension with regard to gender-based
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations. In the
European Union context, that includes the development
of rules of conduct — such as the generic standards of
behaviour, which are binding on ESDP staff and forbid
involvement in sexual exploitation, trafficking in
women and prostitution. The European Union would

07-55817

S/PV.5766

support the elaboration of corresponding rules and
practices for United Nations operations and missions.
The EU is deeply concerned about the continued
use of sexual violence against women in current
conflict situations — such as in the case of the
situation recently reported by Mr. John Holmes, UnderSecretary General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, and others, on the
appalling and unprecedented phenomenon of
systematic rape and brutality against women in eastern
Congo. Sadly, that demonstrates the importance of
furthering the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
We believe that the impact of violence against
women has manifest consequences for the success and
sustainability of peacebuilding efforts. That is a subject
that demands the attention of the Security Council. The
European Union would welcome a report by the
Secretary-General on the global problem of sexual and
gender-based violence in both conflict and postconflict situations, to highlight the implications and
consequences for peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities.
Support must also be directed to strengthening
judicial and legal systems, particularly in countries
experiencing protracted crises.
The European Union would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the Peacebuilding
Commission for the achievements of its first year of
work. We believe that the Peacebuilding Commission
is a most appropriate forum for addressing gender
equality and for contributing to the active participation
of women in post-conflict reconstruction and
institution-building processes, including in decisionmaking.
We recognize the efforts undertaken to consider
gender-equality issues in the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, both in country-specific work and in
thematic discussions, as was highlighted in the report
on its first session. As recognized in the reports on
Burundi and Sierra Leone, the European Union urges
the Commission to also consider gender equality as a
decisive cross-cutting issue in the integrated
peacebuilding strategies to be developed in the future.
In addition, it is crucial to include women in
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes, while taking into account the capacity of

07-55817

women to contribute to stability and decision-making
in society and the vulnerability and special needs of
women and girls. Let us also not forget the importance
of promoting men’s awareness of their role in turning
gender equality into a reality in every dimension of
life.
The European Union welcomes the work of the
Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women and its reports on the progress
made in the implementation of the 2005-2007 Systemwide Action Plan, the proposals for an updated plan for
the 2008-2009 period, and the collection of good
practice and lessons learned in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2005).
The European Union is aware that much remains
to be done, including at the national level, to ensure
that gender inequality is addressed. The EU also
supports the enhancement of mechanisms to further
advance the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Monitoring and reporting systems must be improved in
order to ensure enhanced accountability.
Moreover, additional efforts need to be
undertaken at the level of the United Nations to
increase the number of women in senior positions and
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions.
Cooperation is essential. We will continue to
actively work with United Nations agencies, regional
organizations — such as the African Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
and NATO — non-governmental organizations and all
relevant stakeholders. We also believe that it is of great
importance to provide information to the broader
public on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
We are ready to work together with the SecretaryGeneral and to take into account the recommendations
of his latest report on women, peace and security in our
policies and programmes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate, which we believe is very timely.
We are pleased that the Security Council is once again
comprehensively
addressing
the
effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security.

31

S/PV.5766

At the outset, I should like to say that Spain
associates itself with the statement just made by the
representative of Portugal on behalf of the European
Union.
Despite the positive steps that have to be taken
towards the effective implementation of the provisions
of resolution 1325 (2000), it seems to us that the
international community is moving ahead too slowly
when it comes to ensuring the participation of women
at all levels of peace processes and with regard to
ensuring effective protection for women and girls in
conflict situations. That is clear from the briefings
made this morning by various officials of the
Secretariat.
I should like to underscore that we are especially
concerned about ongoing grave violations of
international
law
—
including
international
humanitarian law and human rights law — perpetrated
against women and girls, including sexual exploitation
and the abuse to which they are subjected in situations
of armed conflict. That is something that many
speakers who have spoken before me have mentioned.
Resolution 1325 (2000) calls on States to make
efforts to implement the resolution at the national
level. Spain is committed to effective gender equality
as a priority of the Government. We have developed a
national action plan to implement resolution 1325
(2000) that focuses on the following basic goals.
First, it will strengthen the inclusion of a gender
perspective in all phases of our participation in peace
missions, from planning to conclusion, including the
reconstruction and peacebuilding processes. Secondly,
it will ensure that military and civilian police personnel
who participate in peace missions receive specific
training in matters of equality and in the various
aspects of resolution 1325 (2000). Thirdly, it will
guarantee women, adolescents and girls in areas of
conflict and post-conflict the full enjoyment of their
human rights, and encourage women’s participation in
the negotiation and implementation of peace
agreements. Fourthly, it will promote as a cross-cutting
issue the principle of equal treatment of women and
men in the planning and execution of activities in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants and their families. Fifthly, it will
encourage awareness and the dissemination of
resolution 1325 (2000), as well as the work of Spanish
civil society in regard to it.

32

In order to reach those goals, we have considered
actions not only at the national level, but also at the
heart of the regional structures to which Spain belongs,
such as the European Union, NATO and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
and especially and most importantly within the
framework of our participation in the United Nations.
In that regard, we are striving to contribute to the
promotion of gender equality policies in general, and in
particular in relation to women’s participation in peace
processes, from conflict prevention to peacebuilding.
At the national level, Spain is decisively
progressing towards the full integration of women into
its armed forces at the same level of opportunity and
well-being at work as men. In a very few years, we
have achieved second place in the European Union
with respect to the proportion of women in the armed
forces, through a decisive policy to make the military
attractive to women by promoting, among other
measures, the conciliation of work and family.
Spain understands peacebuilding as a broad
process in which development assistance is
fundamental. In that regard, Spanish official
development aid directed towards gender issues has
doubled from 2004 to 2007. In particular, we have
continued to work closely with the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and the International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women, providing Spanish cooperation funds for
peacebuilding, especially in Africa and Latin America.
Sector strategies for Spanish cooperation relating to
gender in the areas of development and peacebuilding
have also been approved, in which the promotion of
resolution 1325 (2000) is an immediate key priority. At
this very moment, a plan on women and peacebuilding
is being drafted for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), which will be directed towards all actors
of Spanish cooperation.
I do not wish to end my statement without
properly highlighting the important role that the
Peacebuilding Commission is being called upon to play
in issues of women, peace and security. We are
convinced of the need to integrate a gender perspective
into its work. That will surely result in better and more
fruitful developments in favour of peace throughout the
world. Spain is willing to work closely with the
Commission on that important issue and to continue
supporting the Peacebuilding Fund.

07-55817

S/PV.5766

Mr. Lidén (Sweden): Let me start by associating
myself with the statement just made by the
Ambassador of Portugal on behalf of the European
Union (EU).
The adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) seven years ago underlined the importance of
ensuring that the goal of gender justice and gender
equality permeates the work of the international
community in conflict prevention, conflict resolution,
reconstruction and peacebuilding processes. As we
have so often seen, the nature of modern armed conflict
is such that the civilian population and women are
particularly affected. Women must be involved in
resolving the armed conflicts affecting them, their
families and their communities. Women should take
full part in the creation and implementation of peace
agreements, and they must be able to participate
equally in political decision-making process. Efforts
such as security system reform should have a gender
and human security perspective.
We urge the Secretary-General, the Security
Council and all Member States to contribute to the
effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
including by increasing the number of women in senior
positions at field level.
Last year, Sweden launched a national plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
approach of the Swedish Government to resolution
1325 (2000) is based on a holistic view of security,
development and human rights. Agencies, ministries
and Government offices are working together to
achieve the goals of the resolution. As an active
Member of the United Nations and the European
Union, Sweden has an obvious interest in and
responsibility for the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) in United Nations peace support activities,
as well as in the European Union’s external relations.
The EU’s contribution to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) enhances its effectiveness and
credibility as an actor in crisis management. The EU
handbook on gender for the planning and conduct of
operations, as well as the fairly new feature of gender
advisers in EU missions, are some concrete measures.
The United Nations system has made
considerable efforts to implement resolution 1325
(2000). However, more needs to be done both in the
field and at Headquarters. Concerted and concrete
efforts by the Peacebuilding Commission and the

07-55817

Peacebuilding Support Office are called for. We are
also looking forward to new initiatives coming from
the Security Council, and we should like to have seen a
request for a special report on the situation of women
and girls as victims in armed conflicts.
We believe that the United Nations system needs
to redouble its efforts to counter violence against
women in conflict. It is also important to underline that
such violence rarely stops once the conflict is over. In
some cases, violence against women even increases.
The efforts to stop this kind of violence must not end
with a peace agreement or even after democratic
elections have taken place. The transition period
should be an opportunity to strengthen the rule of
law — and the law must protect women. For that to
happen, women must also be guaranteed full access to
justice. That very matter will be discussed today in a
meeting organized by the Partners for Gender Justice
Initiative, co-chaired by South Africa and Sweden.
In last year’s open debate on resolution 1325
(2000), Sweden underlined that we all have a
responsibility to provide ideas, initiatives and good
practices, and not to simply ask for reports and
proposals from others. The focus of the Partners for
Gender Justice initiative that I mentioned has been on
empowering women to participate in, and gain
improved access to, the justice sector. That work is an
important element for implementing resolution 1325
(2000). Sweden calls on other Member States and the
United Nations to carry it forward by initiating
concrete programmes in the area of women and justice.
More attention should also be paid to the pressing
issue of effectively incorporating women into
demobilization,
disarmament
and
reintegration
measures. Experiences from Sierra Leone and Liberia
show that women who are former combatants or have
been associated with fighting forces face more
difficulties in being accepted back into their
communities than men.
I will finish my statement by once again
underlining that we all have a common responsibility
to contribute to the experience-sharing that is needed
for the further implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Sweden attaches great importance to taking
into account gender perspectives in all areas of work,
nationally and internationally. It is my hope that this
debate will be a catalyst for further efforts in the
struggle to recognize and act on the legitimate

33

S/PV.5766

demands of women for full equality, justice and
opportunity, not only in armed conflicts, but in life
itself.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Klée (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We are grateful to the Ghanian presidency
for convening this annual meeting on women and peace
and security, which helps us further the work of
achieving the full and complete implementation of
Council resolution 1325 (2000).
This debate also allows us to consider the full
application of that important resolution. We are
convinced of the essential role played by women in the
prevention and settlement of conflicts, in the
promotion of justice and of reconciliation, support for
disarmament and demobilization and the reconstruction
of national institutions — all essential pillars for
peacebuilding.
We are also aware that women and girls suffer
from effects more devastating than those already
entailed by the conflict itself, especially owing to
increasingly widespread gender-based violence, rapes,
sexual exploitation, sexual slavery, undesired
pregnancy as a result of these heinous acts and the
stigma that those women and girls suffer in their own
communities. Those are all acts that affect their
psychological and emotional stability and even put
their lives at risk.
We shall not rest until we see that in the field, the
specific needs of women and girls are receiving the
special priority attention they deserve, with the active
cooperation of the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes that work on this issue and Member
States, with the support of non-governmental
organizations and civil society groups. In that context,
we want to recognize the important work being done
by the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) and the Office of the Special Advisor on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women. We urge
them to continue their contribution in view of the
major challenges that lie ahead.
In that connection, we support the creation of
effective institutions that ensure the promotion of the
rights of women and girls and the capacity-building
necessary to their inclusion, on an equal basis, in peace
process negotiations and at the decision-making level

34

in peacebuilding. The mainstreaming of the gender
perspective in national and international plans is vital
to achieving integral, balanced peacekeeping
operations.
We thank the Secretary-General for his annual
report (S/2007/567), which serves as a basis for this
dialogue, because it continues to update, monitor and
revise the previous Action Plan, for 2005-2007, and for
his presentation of the new, updated Action Plan, for
2008-2009, on the advances and obstacles in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Our delegation believes that the changes made in
the Action Plan for 2008-2009 are positive. The
re-shaping of the concept and the focus on five
thematic areas — of which prevention, participation
and protection are transversal, interrelated with other
thematic resolutions; relief and recovery emphasize the
concrete needs of women and children; and the
normative thematic area — will make it possible to
broaden the scope of efforts to apply resolution 1325
(2000) and will help States to meet their commitments
regarding equality between women and men and the
empowerment of women in the field of peace and
security.
As a country that has emerged from conflict, we
are aware of the importance of receiving help in
preparing national plans and strategies to coordinate
policies, because that is the most important time to
promote the application of resolution 1325 (2000).
At the national level, the Ministry of Defence of
Guatemala confirmed its commitment to the principle
of gender equality through a process that harmoniously
integrates women into military life. That has been
accomplished with respect for human rights and in the
context of the national and international legal order.
Since women were accepted in the military in
1996, there has been a yearly increase in the
participation of Guatemalan women in the army, as
cadets in the Polytechnic School. Currently, there are
59 women officers in active duty, which represents
4 per cent of the total. There are 604 women
specialists, which represents 18 per cent. There are 42
women who are commissioned officers, representing
almost 16 per cent. In summary, there are 955 women
in active duty, amounting to 7.17 per cent of the total.
Those woman have grades ranging from second
lieutenant to colonel, in areas such as army
administration, military police, war material,

07-55817

S/PV.5766

transmissions, navy and air force, and are all graduates
of the Polytechnic School.
In peacekeeping operations, we have maintained
an average of 11 per cent of female personnel in
contingents in the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), including military
observers. We will continue to broaden our policy of
including female personnel in each contingent.
Currently, in the military police unit in our
MINUSTAH contingent, a woman commands the
operational and investigation unit.
Allow me to refer to gender advisers, who should
be included in peacekeeping operations in the field.
Currently, 11 out of 18 active missions in the

07-55817

Department of Peacekeeping Operations include that
post. That is encouraging, but it is not enough. We
believe that every mission should incorporate that post.
Peacekeeping operations, in addition, can help
provide information on the violent acts committed
against women and girls. The basic thing is to know
exactly what is happening on the ground. As Minister
Koenders of the Netherlands rightly pointed out, it is
essential not to remain silent and not to allow silence
to become impunity.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. In view
of the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m. this afternoon.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

35
