A /68/PV.104

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

104th plenary meeting

Thursday, 17 July 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 63 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support
(a) New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and
international support
Draft resolution (A/68/L.41/Rev.1)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly considered, in a joint debate, agenda
item 63 and its sub-items (a) and (b) and agenda item
13, at its 36th and 37th plenary meetings, on 25 October
2013.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia to introduce draft
resolution A/68/L.41/Rev.1.
Ms. Vilaseca Chumacero (Plurinational State
of Bolivia): I have the honour to introduce, on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China, a draft resolution
entitled “New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international support”,
contained in document A/68/L.41/Rev.1, under agenda
item 63 (a). The Group of 77 and China would like
to express its appreciation to all delegations for their
constructive deliberations on and contributions to the
draft resolution.
The draft resolution presented today reaffirms
the support of the international community for the

implementation of the African Union’s New Partnership
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) and recognizes the
progress in its implementation. It also welcomes the
commitment of African leaders to Africa’s political,
social and economic integration agenda and to the
ideal of pan-Africanism and African renaissance, as
reaffirmed in the solemn declaration adopted in May
2013 on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the
Organization of African Unity/African Union. The
draft resolution also welcomes the progress made in the
development of the African Union Agenda 2063 as a
strategic vision and action plan for ensuring a positive
socioeconomic transformation in Africa within the
next 50 years, particularly through regional integration,
industrialization, diversification of the economy and
job creation.
With regard to the topic of governance, the draft
resolution welcomes the commendable progress that
has been achieved in implementing the African Peer
Review Mechanism, in particular the completion of
the peer review process in 17 countries, and welcomes
the progress in implementing the national programmes
of action resulting from those reviews. The draft
resolution also recognizes and welcomes the sustained
efforts of African countries in mainstreaming a gender
perspective and the empowerment of women in the
implementation of the New Partnership.
The progress made thus far by Africa must
continued to be supported by developed countries. In
that regard, the draft resolution expresses concern at
Africa’s disproportionately low share in the volume of

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U‑0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-47140 (E)

*1447140*

A/68/PV.104

international trade, which stands at approximately 3 per
cent, also expresses concern that official development
assistance to Africa fell in 2013, and further expresses
concern at the increased debt burden of some African
countries. In that context, the draft resolution presented
today calls for the fulfilment of the official development
assistance (ODA) commitments, including the
commitments to allocate 0.7 per cent of gross national
product to ODA.
Finally, Africa’s efforts to eradicate poverty and
hunger, create jobs and ensure sustainable development
must be completed by sustained support from developed
partners. In that vein, the draft resolution urged the
international community to give due attention to the
priorities identified in the context of NEPAD in the
formulation of the post-2015 development agenda.
The President: I call on the representative of
Kenya to make an oral revision to draft resolution
A/68/L.41/Rev.1.
Mr. Ogweno (Kenya): At the outset, I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
adoption of a very important draft resolution on the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD).
Similarly, I thank you for giving me the opportunity, in
my capacity as the facilitator of the draft resolution, to
deliver this statement.
The core mandate of NEPAD is to facilitate
and coordinate the implementation of regional and
continental priority programmes and projects and to
push for partnerships, resource mobilization, research
and knowledge management. It is a mandate that all
African States take very seriously and for which they
seek the support of all development partners towards
its full realization. Accordingly, the NEPAD resolution
has always been negotiated and adopted by the General
Assembly by consensus.
I am pleased that the same procedure has been
followed in that regard today. As facilitator of the
draft resolution, I take this opportunity to thank all
delegations for their constructiveness and flexibility
during the entire negotiating process. I am particularly
grateful to all participants for providing me with the
delicate compromise reached in elaborating the draft
resolution.
Turning to paragraph 39 of draft resolution
A/68/L.41/Rev.1, I wish to state that it has been the most
difficult paragraph to resolve. Irrespective of the fact

2/5

17/07/2014

that it contains agreed language that was borrowed in
its entirety from previous and current trade resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly, it has brought into
sharp focus some issues currently being deliberated
in Geneva in the context of World Trade Organization
negotiations.
For close to a month, a compromise on the
paragraph seemed almost elusive. We eventually
reached the conclusion that paragraph 39 must neither
divide us nor scuttle our collective efforts, since our
core focus remains the full and effective support of the
implementation of NEPAD programmes and projects.
Consequently, I wish to make an oral revision to
paragraph 39 to have it end after the word “negotiations”
and to delete the subsequent wording. The revised
version of paragraph 39 would therefore read:
“Notes the progress made at the Ninth Ministerial
Conference of the World Trade Organization, held
in Bali, Indonesia, from 3 to 7 December 2013,
and looks forward to the timely implementation of
the ‘Bali package’, including the trade facilitation
agreement, and calls for a balanced, ambitious,
comprehensive and development-oriented outcome
of the Doha Development Agenda multilateral
trade negotiations”.
I wish to state that the revised paragraph 39, as I
have read it out, is agreed language in the context of
previous General Assembly resolutions on this item, but
because we sought consensus agreement, we requested
the oral revision that I have just proposed.
I also wish to clarify that this is the agreed win-win
solution for all. In that connection, I would add that
the consensus on paragraph 39 was reached on the
understanding that the paragraph, as it stands with the
oral revision I have just read out, shall not be used to
prejudice either future negotiations in the context of the
World Trade Organization or resolutions on trade issues
negotiated and adopted by the General Assembly. In
other words, the amendment is NEPAD-specific and
does not set a precedent for resolutions addressing
future agreements.
In conclusion, I wish to share with the Assembly a
Swahili proverb of wisdom, which says that it is useless
for me to recognize a person who does not recognize
me. I thank all delegations for recognizing each other’s
red lines and for adjusting accordingly, particularly on
paragraph 39. I also thank all for the trust bestowed
on me as facilitator of the draft resolution and for the

14-47140

17/07/2014

A/68/PV.104

support rendered for its successful conclusion and
adoption.

for a term of office beginning on 18 October 2014 and
ending on 31 December 2017.

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/68/L.41/Rev.1, entitled
“New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support”, as orally
revised.

Accordingly, may I take it that the General Assembly
wishes to re-elect Mr. Joan Clos as Executive Director
of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme
for a term of office beginning on 18 October 2014 and
ending on 31 December 2017?

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of
A/68/L.41/Rev.1: Austria, Estonia, France, Hungary,
Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Montenegro, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Slovenia and Turkey.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/68/L.41/Rev.1, as
orally revised?
Draft resolution A/68/L.41/Rev.1, as orally revised,
was adopted (resolution 68/301).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 63 and agenda item 63 as
a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Election to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(e) Election of the Executive Director of the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme
Note by the Secretary-General (A/68/915)
The President: Members will recall that, by
its decision 64/428, of 25 August 2010, the General
Assembly, on the proposal of the Secretary-General,
elected Mr. Joan Clos (Spain) as Executive Director of
the United Nations Human Settlements Programme for
a term of office of four years, beginning 18 October
2010 and ending on 17 October 2014.
In accordance with resolution 56/206 of 21 December
2001, the Secretary-General nominates Mr. Clos for
re-election by the Assembly as Executive Director of
the United Nations Human Settlements Programme

It was so decided.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya): I have the honour to make
this statement on behalf of the Group of African States.
At the outset, the Group thanks you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate in order to take action
on the important agenda item before us.
The Group reaffirms its continuing support to
the United Nations Human Settlements Programme
(UN-HABITAT). In that regard, the Group takes
note of the appointment of Mr. Joan Clos for a second
term as Executive Director of the Programme. The
Group also reiterates the important mandate vested
in the Programme and the need for it to fully and
effectively implement the mandate. The mandate will
be increasingly relevant in the future given the evergrowing global population and the challenges it will
create in both rural and urban areas around the world.
In that regard, the Group remains keen to strengthen
the Programme in the context of the Third United
Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban
Development, to be convened in 2016. This is critically
important for all Member States given that urbanization
has become a global priority with benefits and
challenges alike. The Programme will therefore have to
be strengthened if it is to help Member States respond
sufficiently to the challenges of human settlements and
urbanization in the twenty-first century.
Because of this, and mindful of some advantages
that could be derived from the exercise of this
mandate, the Group has therefore decided to accept
the reappointment of the current Executive Director.
However, this does not mean that we are fully satisfied
with the current performance and governance of the
entity. We have serious concerns and wish to point them
out for consideration and so that appropriate solutions
can be found as a matter of urgency.
The first concern regards the expansion of
UN-HABITAT’s programmatic footprint. The Group

14-471403/5

A/68/PV.104

notes with deep concern the shrinking programmatic
footprint of UN-HABITAT. We say this because some
programmes supported until now by UN-HABITAT
in African countries have been discontinued under
the current management. This is clearly unacceptable
as the relevance of the programmatic activities of the
Programme are mainly in the developing world, where
the challenges of human settlement and urbanization
continue to increase.
In a similar vein, we are concerned with the
opening and/or the relocation of some UN-HABITAT
offices, in particular to European cities. While we
may not challenge the intention of such moves, as
UN-HABITAT was created to help with capacitybuilding in all States, the Group disagrees with the
unilateral approach adopted by the management in that
regard.
We say this because the relocation and/or opening
of new offices have programme budget implications that
impinge on day-to-day management, governance and
the utilization of available financial resources. Needless
to say, such initiatives should never be undertaken in a
manner that undermines the core headquarters functions
of the Programme in Nairobi. We therefore reiterate
that such weighty decisions pertaining to governance
arrangements of the Programme must be taken only in
full consultation with and with the endorsement of all
Member States.
The second concern centres on the Group’s
disappointment with the current handling of human
resources development and personnel at UN-HABITAT.
While we acknowledge that the Programme has
experienced some financial challenges in the recent
past, we are nevertheless not in favour of certain
measures that have been or are being taken to keep
it in a good financial state. The Group disapproves
in particular of the retrenchment initiatives targeting
personnel mainly from developing countries, as well as
the lack of promotion and/or sidelining in key positions
at the Programme.
In that regard, we emphasize the need to strike a
balance between North and South, especially regarding
the recruitment and/or promotion of staff to positions
that influence key policy issues and decision-making
at the Programme. Resolving that important issue in a
professional and politically acceptable manner is very
important if UN-Habitat is to effectively respond to the
settlement challenges facing the developing world.

4/5

17/07/2014

The third concern regards mobilization of
adequate and predictable financial resources for the
effective running of the Programme. We know that
the allocation of financial resources from the United
Nations regular budget is hardly enough for the full and
effective operational and programmatic activities of
the Programme. That is why extrabudgetary resources
have continued to play a very important role.
We are, however, concerned that the current
mobilization of financial resources from sources other
than the United Nations regular budget has dropped
significantly in the past couple of years. We note with
concern that the convening of the most recent session
of the Governing Council of UN-Habitat was made
possible only courtesy of the support of one of our own
African countries. While the Group appreciates the
generous support of our brotherly State in that regard,
we are concerned that the failure of management to
mobilize financial resources from traditional partners
and other stakeholders does not augur well for the
future of the Programme. We therefore encourage
the Executive Director to continue reaching out to
traditional partners for resource mobilization.
Finally, the Group reiterates its commitment to the
Programme and will continue to do everything possible
to ensure that it fully executes its mandate. The African
Group also stresses that the issues it has raised must be
addressed effectively and as a matter of urgency. We
shall therefore continue to follow up on the progress
made in that regard and hope that the Executive
Director, following his appointment, will effectively
address those concerns.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (e) of agenda item 115?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(j) Appointment of members and alternate members
of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee
Note by the Secretary-General (A/68/940)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly decided to include this sub-item in the
agenda of the current session at its resumed ninetyninth plenary meeting, on 3 July 2014. Members will
14-47140

17/07/2014

also recall that, at that same meeting, the Assembly,
taking into account that the Fifth Committee had
concluded its work for the resumed part of the session,
and without setting a precedent, decided to consider the
sub-item directly in the plenary meeting.
As indicated in document A/68/940, the SecretaryGeneral has received notification of the resignation
of Mr. Gerhard Kuntzle of Germany from the United
Nations Staff Pension Committee, effective 16 June
2014. The Assembly will therefore be required to
appoint at this current session a person to fill the
vacancy for the remaining period of the term of office
of Mr. Kuntzle, which expires on 31 December 2016. It
is also indicated in that document that the Government
of Germany has nominated Mr. Jörg Stosberg to fill the
vacancy arising from the resignation of Mr. Kuntzle.
The Secretariat was informed by the Chair of the
Group of Western European and Other States that the
candidature of Mr. Stosberg has been endorsed by that
Group.
May I therefore take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to appoint Mr. Jörg Stosberg as a member

A/68/PV.104

of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee for a
term of office beginning on 17 July 2014 and ending on
31 December 2016?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (j) of agenda item 116?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The President: I should like to inform members
that consideration of draft resolution A/68/L.54, entitled
“Modalities for the overall overview by the General
Assembly of the implementation of the outcomes
of the World Summit on the Information Society,”
submitted under agenda item 16, entitled “Information
and communications technologies for development,”
is postponed to a later date to be announced. The
document will be reissued for technical reasons.
The meeting rose at 3.35 p.m.

14-471405/5
