156

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

1. Notes the efforts made thus far by the SecretaryGeneral with a view to the establishment of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women;
2. Requests the Secretary-Gener~l to cc_mtinue thosc
efforts and to prepare, in consultat10n w1th the competent bodies of the host country, the compctent organs
and institutions of the United Nations system and thc
regional commissions concern~~- a draft do_c~~1~nt describing the structure, compos1t1on, respons1b1ht~es ~nd
programme of thc Institute, as well _as the co-ordmation
of the activities of the Tnstitute w1th those of the organizations concerned, particular)y the Unit~d _Nations
Development Programme, the reg10nal comm1ss10ns and
the regional research centres for the adva1;-cement of
women, having regard to the recommcndat10n~ of the
Group of Experts set forth in the rcpor~ subm1tted ?Y
the Secretary-General to the Econmmc and Social
Council at its sixtieth scssion;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to ~he
Economic and Social Council at its sixty-fourth sess1on
on the progress achieved towards the establi~h~ent. of
the Institute, including substantive and ~dmm~strative
preparations, and to submit to it for co~s1deratlon an~
adoption the draft document referrcú to m paragraph above.
l 05 th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
32/138.

lnteragency prograrnrne for the United
Nations Decade for W ornen

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 Deccmber 1975, in which it proclaimed the period from 1976
to 1985 United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peacc, to be devoted t? effectiv_e and
sustained national, regional and internat1onal act1on to
implement the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's
Year 92 and related resolutions 9 H adopted by the World
Conference of the International Women's Year,
Recalling further that in its resolution 31 / 136 of 16
December 1976 it approvcd the Programme for the
United Nations Decadc for Women94 which focused on
the first half of the Decade, 1976-1980,
Noting that the joint interagency programme for the
integration of women in development, whose establishment was called for in paragraph 5 ( b) of General Assembly resolution 3520 (XXX), has become an interagency programme for the United Nations Decade for
Women based on the implementation of the World
Plan of Action, for the formulation of which the
Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs serves as focal point,
Noting also that this programme was drawn up in
July 1977 in the context of the conceptual framework
and the co-ordination of ongoing activities and planned
activities of the agencies concerned,
92 Report of the World Conference on the Internatimw/
Women's Year (United Nations publica,tion, Sales No.
E. 7 6.IV. 1 ) , cha p. II, sect. A.
93 /bid., chap. III.
94 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-second Session, Supplcment No. 3 (E/5909), annex V.

Notinr; further that this programme, which should
be brought up to date cvery two years, i~ currently the
subject of a study which is to be cons1~ered by. the
special interagency meeting on the Umted Nat,ons
Decade for Women to be held in July 1978 with a
view to preparing for thc World Confcrence of thc
United Nations Decade for Women,
l. Notes the measures already taken by the Secretary-General to implement the Programme for the
Unitcd Nations Decade for Women; 95
2. Emphasizes that constant and increasing efforts
must he madc at the national, regional and international lcvels to attain the objcctives of the Dccade;
3. Requests the Secretary-Gcneral, in consultation
with all the interested agencies and organizations of the
Unitcd Nations to submit to the General Assembly at
its thirtv-third s~ssion, through thc Economic and Social
CounciÍ, thc study of the intcragency programmc accompanied by the observations formulated by the Council with regard to it;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to transmit to Govcrnments every two years thc study of the
intcragcncy programme for the Decade;
5. Urges the interested agencies and organizations
of the United Nations system to identify and undertakc
as quickly as possible projects to be executed jointly.
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/ 139.

Plerlµ;ing confereuee for the
Nations Decade for W ornen

United

TI//' General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/137 of 16 December
1976, in which it requested the Secretary-General to
convene during the thirty-second session of the General Assembly a pledging conference for contributions
to be made to the Voluntary Fund for the United
Nations Decade for Women and to the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women,
Noting with satisfaction the results of the first Pledging Conference for the United Nations Decade for
Women, held at the Headquarters of the United Nations
on 8 November 1977,
Convinced that the Programme for the United Nations Decade for Women,11<1 if it is to be fully effcctivc,
must be translated into the greatest possible number of
projccts and programmes at the national, regional and
interregional levels,
Also convinced that the speedy establishment of the
Jnternational Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women will contribute substantially
to thc attainment of thc research and training objectivcs
of the World Plan of Action for the Implcmentation of
thc Objectives of the International Women's Year,n 7
1. Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General for
having convened the first Pledging Conference for thc
United Nations Dccade for Womcn;
nr. A/321175.
96 Official Rccords of the Economic ami Social Council,
Sixty-secoll(/ Scssion, Supp/emcnt No. 3 (E/5909), annex V.
97 Report of the World Conference on the Internationa/
Womc11'.1· Ycar (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.TV.l ), chap. 11, secl. A.
