A/RES/74/123

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
22 January 2020

Seventy-fourth session
Agenda item 25
Social development

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 18 December 2019
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/74/391)]

74/123.

Persons with albinism
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 and recalling relevant
international human rights treaties, including the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, 2 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, 2 the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, 3 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 4 the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 5 and
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 6
Reaffirming also the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and the
Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social Development 7 and the further
initiatives for social development adopted by the General Assembly at its twentyfourth special session, 8 and the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled
Persons, 9
Recalling its resolution 72/140 of 19 December 2017 and its previous
resolutions on persons with albinism,

__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
4
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
5
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
6
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
7
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
8
Resolution S-24/2, annex.
9
A/37/351/Add.1 and A/37/351/Add.1/Corr.1, annex, sect. VIII, recommendation 1 (IV).
1
2

19-22043 (E)

230120

*1922043*

A/RES/74/123

Persons with albinism

Recalling also Human Rights Council resolutions 23/13 of 13 June 2013 on
attacks and discrimination against persons with albinism 10 and 24/33 of 27 September
2013 on technical cooperation for the prevention of attacks against persons with
albinism, 11 as well as resolutions 28/6 of 26 March 2015 12 and 37/5 of 22 March 2018
pertaining to the mandate of the Independent Expert on the enjoyment of human rights
by persons with albinism,
Recalling further its resolution 69/170 of 18 December 2014, by which the
General Assembly decided to proclaim 13 June as International Albinism Awareness
Day, with effect from 2015,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the social development
challenges faced by persons with albinism 13 and the recommendations contained
therein,
Recalling the report on persons with albinism submitted by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to the Human Rights Council
at its twenty-fourth session, 14 and recalling also all the reports of the Independent
Expert on the enjoyment of human rights by persons with albinism to the General
Assembly and to the Human Rights Council,
Recalling also African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights resolutions
263 of 5 November 2013 on the prevention of attacks and discrimination against
persons with albinism and 373 of 22 May 2017 on the Regional Action Plan on
Albinism in Africa (2017–2021), and the Pan-African Parliament resolution on
persons with albinism in Africa of 18 May 2018,
Expressing grave concern at all attacks against persons with albinism, including
women and children,
Welcoming the steps taken and the efforts made by the countries co ncerned,
including the initiation of legal action against perpetrators of attacks against persons
with albinism, public condemnation of attacks against persons with albinism and
public campaigns to raise awareness,
Expressing concern that persons with albinism are disproportionately affected
by poverty, owing to the discrimination and marginalization they face, and in this
regard recognizing that there is a need for resources to develop and implement
programmes to prevent and combat prejudice, to foster inclusion and to create an
environment conducive to respect for their rights and dignity,
Expressing concern also that women and girls with albinism may face multiple
forms of discrimination, and a higher risk of sexual abuse, especia lly in communities
where they are falsely perceived to have the power to cure HIV and AIDS, including
being targets of witchcraft-related attacks,
Recognizing that persons with albinism continue to face environmental,
structural and attitudinal barriers that prevent their full participation in economic,
social, political and cultural life,
Recognizing also the need to address the root causes of attacks and
discrimination against persons with albinism, particularly the interrelated factors,
including the mythologization of albinism and the related lack of understanding of
__________________

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/68/53), chap. V, sect. A.
11
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
12
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53), chap. III, sect. A.
13
A/74/184.
14
A/HRC/24/57.
10

2/4

19-22043

Persons with albinism

A/RES/74/123

the scientific bases of the condition, poverty, discrimination and economic and social
marginalization, witchcraft practices and other aggravating factors, which contribute
to the ongoing outbreaks of attacks and discrimination against persons with albinism,
particularly on the African continent,
Recognizing further that implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development 15 will contribute, inter alia, to the promotion of socia l inclusion of
persons in vulnerable situations, including persons with albinism, and reaffirming that
Member States, in implementing the 2030 Agenda, should, inter alia, respect, protect
and promote human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, including persons with
albinism, without discrimination of any kind,
Expressing concern about the continuing lack of information and disaggregated
data on the status of persons with albinism, which are important to inform appropriate
policy responses by Member States and the United Nations system, while
acknowledging that some Member States have examples of good practices of
collecting disaggregated data on persons with albinism,
Recognizing that access to full and productive employment and decent work is
an important aspect of participation in social and economic life,
Reaffirming the need for the participation of persons with albinism in
development efforts at the local, national, regional and international levels, and in
this regard stressing the need to strengthen the effectiveness of national, regional and
international policy and development programmes related to persons with albinism,
1.
Urges Member States to continue to meet their obligations to uphold the
human rights of all persons, including persons with albinism, including the rights to
life, liberty, security of person, education, work, an adequate standard of living and
the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health;
2.
Encourages Member States to adopt, if necessary, national action plans
and legislation, as appropriate, on the rights of persons with albinism, in conformity
with their international human rights obligations and commitments, notably the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 2 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities 4 and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination; 3
3.
Also encourages Member States to address the root causes of discrimination
and violence against persons with albinism, including through awareness -raising
campaigns, the dissemination of accurate information on albinism and other measures,
such as the integration of albinism into education curricula, and to collaborate with
organizations representing persons with albinism, including civil society organizations,
as appropriate, in their efforts to drive public awareness on albinism;
4.
Further encourages Member States to end impunity for violence against
persons with albinism, including sexual and gender-based violence, by amending
laws, where applicable, and by bringing perpetrators to justice;
5.
Calls upon Member States to work to ensure accountability through the
conduct of impartial, speedy and effective investigations into crimes and attacks
against persons with albinism falling within their jurisdiction, to hold those
responsible accountable and to ensure that victims, survivors and family members
have access to appropriate remedies, as well as accessible therapy and psychosocial,
socioeconomic, legal and medical support, as appropriate;
__________________
15

19-22043

Resolution 70/1.
3/4

A/RES/74/123

Persons with albinism

6.
Encourages Member States to take effective steps to promote regional
cooperation for the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution and punishment
of cross-border crimes affecting persons with albinism, notably trafficking of persons,
children and body parts;
7.
Calls upon the international community to provide financial and technical
assistance to Member States, upon their request, in support of measures to prevent
and combat discrimination against persons with albinism, including strengthening the
capacity of their health-care systems to provide affordable dermatological and
ophthalmological services;
8.
Encourages Member States and relevant United Nations agencies to
collect, compile and disseminate disaggregated data on persons with albinism, where
applicable, to identify patterns of discrimination and to assess progress towards the
improvement of their status;
9.
Encourages Member States to develop, if necessary, policies and measures
to address the social development challenges faced by persons with a lbinism, who
may require assistance in order to enjoy equal access to benefits and services, notably
in the fields of education, employment and health, and to promote their participation
in political, civil, economic, social and cultural life;
10. Calls upon Member States to support the participation of persons with
albinism in social, economic, political, civil and cultural life, as well as their
consultation and active involvement in the design, implementation and evaluation of
laws, policies, campaigns and training programmes, and further urges Member States
to implement, if necessary, national measures to ensure that persons with albinism are
not left behind, recognizing that persons with albinism are often disproportionately
affected by poverty, discrimination and lack of decent work and employment, and to
commit to working towards the social integration of persons with albinism;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to present a report to the General
Assembly at the main part of its seventy-sixth session, under the item entitled “Social
development”, on the various social development challenges faced by persons with
albinism, taking into consideration the specific needs of women and children,
including those related to social inclusion, health, educatio n and employment, and
measures taken, with recommendations for further action to be taken by Member
States and other relevant stakeholders to address identified challenges, and
encourages the Secretary-General to collect information from Member States and all
relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations system in the preparation of
the report;
12. Decides, taking into account the multifaceted nature of the challenges
faced by persons with albinism, to consider the issue of persons with albinism at its
seventy-sixth session, under the item entitled “Social development”.
50th plenary meeting
18 December 2019

4/4

19-22043
