IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Institute for Training and Research to attend its annual international law courses and providing facilities for seminars
organized by the Institute in conjunction with the Academy
courses;
7. Notes with appreciation the contributions made by
the Hague Academy of International Law to the teaching,
study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international
law and calls upon Member States and interested organizations to give favourable consideration to the appeal of the
Academy for adequate assistance to solve its financial
problems;
8. Urges all Governments to encourage the inclusion
of courses on international law in the programmes of legal
studies offered at institutions of higher learning;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to publicize the Programme and to invite periodically Member
States, universities, philanthropic foundations and other interested national and international institutions and organizations, as well as individuals, to make voluntary contributions
towards the financing of the Programme or otherwise assisting in its implementation and possible expansion;
10. Reiterates its request to Member States and to interested organizations and individuals to make voluntary
contributions towards the financing of the Programme and
expresses its appreciation to those Member States which
have made voluntary contributions for this purpose;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the implementation of the Programme during 1982 and 1983 and,
following consultations with the Advisory Committee on
the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, to submit recommendations regarding the
execution of the Programme in subsequent years;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled ''United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law".
92nd plenary meeting
JO December /981

36/109.

Measures to prevent international terrorism
which endangers or takes innocent human lives
or jeopardius fundamental freedoms and study
of the underlying causes of those forms of terrorism and acts of violence which lie in misery,
frustration, grievance and despair and which
cause some people to sacrifice human lives, including their own, in an attempt to effect radical changes

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3034 (XXVII) of 18 December
1972, 311102 of 15 December 1976, 32/147 of 16 December
1977 and 34/145 of 17 December 1979,
Recalling also the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, 31 the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security, 32 the Definition of Aggression 33 and the
Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949, -~ 4
Deeply concerned about continuing acts of international
terrorism which take a toll of innocent human lives,
31

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
Resolution 2734 (XXV).
33
Resolution 3314 (XXIX), annex.
34
A/32/144, annexes I and II.
32

241

Convinced of the importance of international co-operation
for dealing with acts of international terrorism.
Reaffirming the principle of self-determination of peoples
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the inalienable right to self-determination and
independence of all peoples under colonial and racist
regimes and other forms of alien domination, and upholding
the legitimacy of their struggle. in particular the struggle
of national liberation movements, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter and of the Declaration
on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations.
Having re-examined the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on International Terrorism to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session. 1 ~
Having also examined the report of the Secretary-General. 11'
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Re-endorses the recommendations submitted by the
Ad Hoe Committee on International Terrorism to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session relating to practical
measures of co-operation for the speedy elimination of the
problem of international terrorism; n
3. Calls upon all States to observe and implement the
recommendations of the Ad Hoe Committee;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to follow up the implementation of the above-mentioned recommendations and
to submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirtyeighth session;
5. Decides to include the item in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-eighth session.
92nd plenary meeting
JO December /981

36/110.

Peaceful settlement of disputes between States

The General Assembly,
Having examined the item entitled "Peaceful settlement
of disputes between States".
Deeply concerned about the continuation of conflict situations and the emergence of new sources of disputes and
tension in international life. and especially about the growing tendency to resort to force or the threat of force and to
intervention in internal affairs. and about the escalation of
the arms race. which gravely endanger the independence
and security of States, as well as international peace and
security.
Taking into account the need to exert utmost efforts in
order to settle any situations and disputes between States
exclusively by peaceful means and to avoid any military
action and hostilities. which can only make more difficult
the solution of existing problems.
Also taking into account the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations concerning the peaceful settlement of
disputes between States,
Considering that the adoption of a declaration on the
peaceful settlement of disputes between States could contribute to the elimination of the danger of recourse to force
or the threat of force and. therefore, to the strengthening
of international peace and security.
"Official Records o{the Cinwral Assemhfr. Thirfl•-fimrth s,,ssio11, S11p
plement No 37 (A/34/37).
0
'
N.,61425.
" Official Records of the General Assemh/_\·. Thirtv-fourth Se.r.,-io11, Supplement Nr> 37 (A/34/J7). para 11 ~

242

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Taking note of the reports of the Special Committee on
the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening
of the Role of the Organization 38 and of the Working Group
on the Peaceful Settlement of Disputes, 39
Taking note also of the progress made in the Special
Committee and in the Working Group in the elaboration of
the draft Manila declaration on the peaceful settlement of
international disputes,
Taking into account the opinions expressed during the
examination at its thirty-sixth session of the question of the
peaceful settlement of disputes between States,
l. Calls again upon all States to adhere strictly in their
international relations to the principle that States shall settle
their international disputes by peaceful means in such a
manner that international peace and security and justice are
not endangered;
2. Considers that the question of the peaceful settlement
of disputes should represent one of the central concerns for
States and that, to this end, the efforts for examining and
further developing the principle of peaceful settlement of
disputes between States and the means of consolidating its
full observance by all States in their international relations
should be continued;
3. Considers also that the elaboration, as soon as possible, of a declaration of the General Assembly on the peaceful settlement of international disputes is likely to enhance
the observance of the principle of peaceful settlement of
disputes and to contribute to the strengthening of the role
of the United Nations in preventing conflicts and settling
them peacefully;
4. Requests the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of
the Organization to finalize the draft Manila declaration on
the peaceful settlement of international disputes with a view
to its consideration and adoption by the General Assembly,
and to submit it to the Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
5. Refers to the Special Committee the report of its
Working Group on the Peaceful Settlement of Disputes, as
well as the views expressed at the thirty-sixth session of the
General Assembly on the contents of the declaration;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Peaceful settlement
of disputes between States".
92nd plenary meeting
JO December 1981

36/111.

Consideration of the draft articles on mostfavoured-nation clauses

The Gereral Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/139 of 19 December 1978
relating to the report of the International Law Commission
on the work of its thirtieth session, 40 in particular section
II of the resolution,
Recalling also its resolution 35/161 of 15 December 1980,
entitled "Consideration of the draft articles on mostfavoured-nation clauses",
Reaffirming its appreciation of the high quality of the
work done by the International Law Commission in elaborating a series of draft articles on most-favoured-nation
clauses,

Bearing in mind the importance of facilitating international trade and development of economic co-operation
among all States on the basis of equality, mutual advantage
and non-discrimination in the establishment of the new
international economic order,
Having considered the item entitled ''Consideration of
the draft articles on most-favoured-nation clauses", including the report of the Secretary-General 41 and the analytical
compilation of comments and observations from Governments, organs of the United Nations which have competence
in the subject-matter and interested intergovernmental organizations, 42 submitted pursuant to paragraphs 3 and 4 of
General Assembly resolution 35/161,
Taking note of the comments and observations submitted,
in particular those relating to outstanding issues,
Aware of the fact that more replies from States and interested intergovernmental agencies are needed,
I. Requests the Secretary-General to reiterate his invitation to Member States, relevant organs of the United
Nations, such as the regional commissions and the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law, as well
as interested intergovernmental organizations, to submit or
bring up to date, not later than 30 June 1983, any written
comments and observations which they deem appropriate
on chapter II of the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its thirtieth session, in particular on:
(a) The draft articles on most-favoured-nation clauses
adopted by the International Law Commission;
(b) Those provisions relating to such clauses on which
the International Law Commission was unable to take a
decision;
and also requests States to comment on the recommendation
of the International Law Commission that those draft articles
should be recommended to Member States with a view to
the conclusion of a convention on the subject;
2. Decides to consider the substance of the draft articles
on most-favoured-nation clauses, together with any amendments thereto, at its thirty-eighth session with a view to
taking a decision thereon;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled •'Consideration of the
draft articles on most-favoured-nation clauses" and to consider it as a matter of priority.
92nd plenary meeting
JO December 1981

36/112.

Review of the multilateral treaty-making process

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that multilateral treaties are an important
primary source of international law,
Conscious, therefore, that the process of elaboration of
multilateral treaties, directed towards the progressive development of international law and its codification, forms
an important part of the work of the United Nations and of
the international community in general,
Recalling its resolution 35/ 162 of 15 December 1980, in
which it invited Governments and international organizations to submit their observations on the report of the Secretary-General submitted to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fifth session, 43 as well as their comments on any other
aspect of the subject.

38

lbid., Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/36/33).
A/C.6/36/L.19.
40
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. JO (A/33/IO).
39

41
A/36/145.
" A/36/146.
" A/35/312 and Corr. I.
