18

General Auembly-Se,,enteenth Seaaion

Recognizing that the training of national technical
personnel should be an integral part of national econ omic and social development plans and should be
carried out having regard to current and long-term
n eeds for specialists in connexion with those plans,
R ecognizing also that the training of national technical personnel should be carried out mainly in the
developing countries themselves whenever possible,
Noting with sa.tisfaction that the United Nations and
the agencies concerned, in implementing their programmes of technical assistance, are paying increasing
attention to the p roblem of training national technical
personnel in the developing countries,
1. Considers it desirable to intensify the work of
the Committee for Industrial Development with regard
to assistance to the developing countries in training
national technical personnel, so that further concrete
measures within the framework of the United Nations
system and recommendations for the Governments
concerned may be elaborated in this field;
2. Reqiiests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Governments of Member States and in consultation with the Technical Assistance Board, the
Special F und, t he United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the International
Labour Organisation and the other specialized agencies,
to prepare a report, which would include :
(a) An estimate of the requirements of the developing countries, whenever possible according to their
development plans, for technical personnel of the intermediate and higher levels and an. estimate of the
available possibilities for training such personnel in
those countries, using, inter alia, the methodology and
techniques for assessing those requirements the formulation of which is envisaged in the programme of
work in the field of industrialization of the Committee
for Industrial Development;
( b) Information concerning methods of training national technical personnel in various countries, taking
into account the experience of States with d ifferent
social and economic systems ;
(c) Information concerning the progress being made
in the training of technical personnel for the developing countries in the industrially advanced countries,
and the methods employed;
( d) Proposals for measures within the United
Nations system and recommendations to the Governments concerned with regard to intensifying the training, and improv ing the facilities for the training, of
national intermediate and higher technical personnel in
the developing countries and, where appropriate, on an
intra-regional basis;
3. Invites the Committee for Industrial Development to give special consideration at its forthcoming
sessions to the need for intensifying the training of
technical personnel in the process of industrialization,
and to assist the Secretary-General in preparing the
above-mentioned report;
4. Invites the Economic and Social Council to consider the Secretary-General's report and the results
of the discussion thereof in the Committee for Industrial Development, and to submit to the General
Assembly, at its nineteenth session, for consideration
within the framework of the problems of industrialization, a progress report on the implementation of the proposals and recommendations approved by the Council ;

5. Urges the United Nations organs which carry
out the programmes of technical assistance, the regional
economic commissions and the specialized agencies
concerned to increase their efforts in developing both
national and regional projects aimed at promoting the
training of national technical personnel for industry ;
6. Urges 1lember States to develop their educational svstems to meet the needs of industrialization,
particularly as regards the supply of personnel at the
secondary, technical and higher levels.
1197th f>lc11ary meeting.
18 December 1962.

1825 ( XVII) . World Food Programme
The General .1ssembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1496 (XV ) of 27 October
1960 and 171-+ (XV I) of 19 December 1961,
Bearing in mind its resolution 1710 (XVI) of
19 December 1961 on the United Nations Development
Decade, and in particular the reference to the need
to eliminate illiteracy, hunger :md dis<'ase.
1. E.i:presses its satisfaction that, following J0111t
action by the Economic and Social Council and the
Council of the Food and Agriculture O rg;rnization of
the United Nations, pursuant to resolutions 1496 (XV)
and 1714 (XVI ), a United Nations/FAQ 'Norld
Food Programme was established which will play a
vital role in the efforts of member countries to meet
the need for food supplies in the event of emergencies
and to assist those countries in their economic and
social development ;
2. Notes with a/>{1reciation that thirty-nine States
1v1embers of the United :'Jations and members of the
specialized agencies have pledged more than $8X.7
million in cash, services and commodities for thl! experimental three-year period of the \:Vorld Food
Programme;
3. Invites other States Members of the United
Nations and members of the specialized agencies to
give further consideration to making pledges to the
'vVorld F ood P rogramme in order to attain as soon
as possible the goal of $100 million envisaged in resolution 1714 (XVI) for the experimental three-vear
period;
,
4. Urges all member countries to giYe their support
to the World F ood Programme in order that it may
fulfi l its objectives.
1197th plenary meeting.
18 December 1962.

1826 ( XVII) . Establishment of a United Nations
capital development fund
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 520 A (VJ) of 12 January
1952, 622 A (VII ) of 21 December 1952. 724 B
(VIII ) of 7 December 1953, 822 (IX) of 11 December
1954, 923 (X) of 9 December 1955, 1030 (XI) of
26 February 1957, 12 19 (XII) of 14 December 1957,
1240 (XIII) of 14 October 1958, 1317 (XIII) of
12 December 1958, 1424 (XIV) of S December 1959,
1521 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and 1706 (XVI )
of 19 December 1961 , on the basis of which preparatory
steps have been undertaken during the last decade
with a view to the establishment of a special United
Nations fund for economic development,
