General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

(d) To report on the progress made in the economic
situation of Djibouti and in organizing and implementing
the special programme of economic assistance for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session.
I 09th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/154.

Assistance to the Comoros

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/212 of 17 December 1981 and
its previous resolutions on assistance to the Comoros in
which it appealed to the international community to provide
effective and continuous financial, material and technical
assistance to the Comoros in order to help that country
overcome its financial and economic difficulties,
Taking note of the special problems confronting the Comoros as a developing island country and as one of the least
developed countries,
Noting the priority which the Government of the Comoros
has assigned to the questions of infrastructure, transport and
telecommunications,
Noting also the economic difficulties arising from the
country's scarcity of natural resources, compounded by recent drought and cyclones,
Noting further the grave budgetary and balance-ofpayments problems facing the Comoros,
Aware of the intention of the Government of the Comoros
to convene a donor's conference in the first quarter of 1983,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General, 62
to which was annexed the report of the review mission which
he sent to the Comoros in May 1982,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance to the
Comoros;
2. Notes with satisfaction the response by Member
States, organizations of the United Nations system and other
organizations to its appeals and those of the SecretaryGeneral for assistance to the Comoros;
3. Notes with concern, however, that the assistance thus
far provided continues to fall short of the country's urgent
requirements and that assistance is still urgently required to
carry out the projects identified in the annex to the report
of the Secretary-General; 62
4. Appeals to those States and organizations invited to
the donors' conference to be held in the Comoros early in
1983 to respond generously to the programme of assistance
that will be presented by the Government of the Comoros
at that time;
5. Renews its appeal to Member States, the appropriate
organs, organizations and programmes of the United
Nations system, regional and international organizations and
other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations, as well as international financial institutions,
to provide the Comoros with assistance to enable it to cope
with its difficult economic situation and pursue its development goals;
6. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to increase their
current programmes of assistance to the Comoros, to cooperate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an
effective international programme of assistance and to report

periodically to him on the steps they have taken and the
resources they have made available to help that country;
7. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to the Comoros;
(b) To keep the situation in the Comoros under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and the international financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council,
at its second regular session of 1983, of the current status
of the special programme of economic assistance for the
Comoros;
(c) To report on the progress made in the economic
situation of the Comoros and in organizing and implementing the special programme of economic assistance for
that country in time for the matter to be considered by the
General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session.
109th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/155.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/210 of 17 December 1981 and
its previous resolutions on the reconstruction, rehabilitation
and development of Chad and emergency humanitarian
assistance to that country,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Chad63 and on the work of the Office of the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator in this regard, 64
as well as of the Co-ordinator's statement, 65
Noting with satisfaction that the stability of the situation
in Chad has enabled the Secretary-General to organize an
international conference on assistance to Chad in late November 1982 at Geneva, in close co-operation with the
Organization of African Unity and the Government of Chad,
A ware that serious destruction of property and extensive
damage to the economic and social infrastructure of Chad
over more than fifteen years, together with the effects of
natural disasters, have placed the country in a situation of
dire need,
I . Expresses its satisfaction to the Secretary-General on
the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for Chad;
2. Expresses its gratitude to all States, international
organizations and other agencies that have provided assistance to Chad;
3. Renews its appeal to all States, the appropriate organs, organizations and programmes of the United Nations,
regional and international organizations and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, and the
international financial institutions to contribute to the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of Chad through bilateral
or multilateral channels, as appropriate;
4. Notes with satisfaction that the International Conference on Assistance to Chad was held at Geneva on 29
and 30 November 1982 and invites the States and agencies
which participated to honour as soon as possible the commitments they entered into at that Conference;
A/37/125 and Add. I.
See A/37/235 and Corr. I, annex I.
65
Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-seventh Session.
Second Committee, 27th meeting, paras. 1-9.
63

64

62 A/37/128.

Special economic assistance to Chad

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

5. Notes that the Government of Chad has expressed its
appreciation of the activities undertaken by the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator in Chad and requests the
Co-ordinator to continue his emergency relief activities in
Chad;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Chad;
(b) To keep the situation in Chad under constant review
and to report to the Economic and Social Council at its
second regular session of 1983 on the status of the assistance
provided for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of Chad;
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
of Chad and the progress made in organizing and executing
the special programme of economic assistance for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session.
J09th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/156.

Special economic assistance to Guinea-Bissau

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/95 of 5 December 1980, in
which it reiterated its appeal to the international community
to provide continuous financial, material and technical assistance to Guinea-Bissau to help it overcome its financial
and economic difficulties and to permit the implementation
of the projects and programmes recommended by the
Secretary-General in his report of 21 August 198066 submitted in response to General Assembly resolution 34/ l 2 l
of 14 December 1979,
Recalling also its resolution 36/217 of 17 December 1981,
Recalling further its resolution 3339 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, in which it invited Member States to provide
economic assistance to the then newly independent State of
Guinea-Bissau, and its resolutions 32/100 of 13 December
1977 and 33/124 of 19 December 1978, in which it, inter
alia, expressed deep concern at the serious economic situation in Guinea-Bissau and appealed to the international
community to provide financial and economic assistance to
that country,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General of
15 October 1982, 67 to which was annexed the report of the
mission which he sent to Guinea-Bissau in response to General Assembly resolution 36/217,
Recalling that Guinea-Bissau is one of the least developed
countries,
Noting with concern that Guinea-Bissau continues to be
beset by a wide range of economic and financial difficulties,
Noting that Guinea-Bissau will continue to be dependent
in the years to come, for its public capital expenditure, on
external sources of financing,
Also noting with concern the chronic deficit in the balance
of payments of Guinea-Bissau, the substantial increase in
its loans and the inordinately low level of its foreignexchange reserves,
Noting that Guinea-Bissau is experiencing difficulties,
aggravated by irregular rainfall, in its agricultural production and that it needs emergency food aid,
Noting that the Government of Guinea-Bissau, in view
of the seriousness of the economic situation, decided to
66

67

A/35/343.
A/37/137.

127

implement an economic and financial stabilization programme, the main purpose of which is to remedy the economic situation,
Noting further that the Government of Guinea-Bissau is
preparing a first four-year development plan 1983/1986 and
proposes to hold a round table of donors during the first
half of 1983,
Bearing in mind the results of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, particularly the
Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the
Least Developed Countries, 68
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance to GuineaBissau;
2. Endorses fully the assessment and recommendations
contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-Genera.167
and draws the attention of the international community to
the requirements for assistance for the projects and programmes identified therein;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those States and organizations that have provided assistance to Guinea-Bissau
in response to appeals by the General Assembly and the
Secretary-General;
4. Calls upon Member States and the international organizations concerned to be generous in granting GuineaBissau the food aid it needs;
5. Renews its urgent appeal to Member States, regional
and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental
bodies to continue providing financial, material and technical assistance to Guinea-Bissau to help it overcome its
economic and financial difficulties and to permit the implementation of the projects and programmes identified in the
annex to the report of the Secretary-General;
6. Appeals to the international community to contribute
to the special account established at United Nations Headquarters by the Secretary-General, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/100, for the purpose of
facilitating the channelling of contributions to Guinea-Bissau;
7. Invites the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World
Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to bring to the attention of their governing bodies,
for their consideration, the special needs of Guinea-Bissau
and to report the decisions of those bodies to the SecretaryGeneral by 15 July 1983;
8. Requests the appropriate specialized agencies and
other bodies of the United Nations system to report periodically to the Secretary-General on the steps they have
taken and the resources they have made available to assist
Guinea-Bissau;
9. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Guinea-Bissau;
(b) To keep the situation in Guinea-Bissau under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member States,
the specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental organizations and the international financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social
Council, at its second regular session of 1983, of the status
of the special programme of economic assistance for GuineaBissau;
•• Report of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries, Paris, 1-14 September 198/ (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.82.1.8). part one. sect. A.
