United Nations

A/RES/64/168

General Assembly

Distr.: General
22 January 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 69 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2009
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/64/439/Add.2 (Part II))]

64/168. Protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1
0F

Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, 2
1F

Reaffirming the fundamental importance, including in response to terrorism
and the fear of terrorism, of respecting all human rights and fundamental freedoms
and the rule of law,
Reaffirming also that States are under the obligation to protect all human rights
and fundamental freedoms of all persons,
Reiterating the important contribution of measures taken at all levels against
terrorism, consistent with international law, in particular international human rights,
refugee and humanitarian law, to the functioning of democratic institutions and the
maintenance of peace and security and thereby to the full enjoyment of human
rights, as well as the need to continue this fight, including through international
cooperation and the strengthening of the role of the United Nations in this respect,
Deeply deploring the occurrence of violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the context of the fight against terrorism, as well as
violations of international refugee and humanitarian law,
Noting with concern measures that can undermine human rights and the rule of
law, such as the detention of persons suspected of acts of terrorism in the absence of
a legal basis for detention and due process guarantees, the deprivation of liberty that
amounts to placing a detained person outside the protection of the law, the trial of
suspects without fundamental judicial guarantees, the illegal deprivation of liberty
and transfer of individuals suspected of terrorist activities, and the return of suspects
_______________
1
2

09-47191

Resolution 217 A (III).
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

*0947191*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/168

to countries without individual assessment of the risk of there being substantial
grounds for believing that they would be in danger of subjection to torture, and
limitations to effective scrutiny of counter-terrorism measures,
Stressing that all measures used in the fight against terrorism, including the
profiling of individuals and the use of diplomatic assurances, memorandums of
understanding and other transfer agreements or arrangements, must be in
compliance with the obligations of States under international law, including
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law,
Recalling article 30 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and
reaffirming that acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations are activities aimed at the destruction of human rights, fundamental
freedoms and democracy, threatening the territorial integrity and security of States
and destabilizing legitimately constituted Governments, and that the international
community should take the necessary steps to enhance cooperation to prevent and
combat terrorism, 3
2F

Reaffirming its unequivocal condemnation of all acts, methods and practices of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever
committed, regardless of their motivation, as criminal and unjustifiable, and
renewing its commitment to strengthen international cooperation to prevent and
combat terrorism,
Recognizing that respect for all human rights, respect for democracy and
respect for the rule of law are interrelated and mutually reinforcing,
Reaffirming that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any
religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group,
Emphasizing the importance of properly interpreting and implementing the
obligations of States with respect to torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, and of abiding strictly by the definition of torture
contained in article 1 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 4 in the fight against terrorism,
3F

Recalling its resolutions 57/219 of 18 December 2002, 58/187 of 22 December
2003, 59/191 of 20 December 2004, 60/158 of 16 December 2005, 61/171 of
19 December 2006, 62/159 of 18 December 2007 and 63/185 of 18 December 2008,
Commission on Human Rights resolutions 2003/68 of 25 April 2003, 5 2004/87 of
21 April 2004 6 and 2005/80 of 21 April 2005, 7 and other relevant resolutions and
decisions of the General Assembly, the Commission on Human Rights and the
4F

5F

6F

_______________
3

See sect. I, para. 17, of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World
Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993 (A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III).
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
5
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 3 (E/2003/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
6
Ibid., 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II, sect. A.
7
Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.

2

A/RES/64/168

Human Rights Council, including Council decision 2/112 of 27 November 2006 8
and Council resolutions 7/7 of 27 March 2008 9 and 10/15 of 26 March 2009, 10
7F

8F

9F

Recognizing the importance of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, adopted on 8 September 2006, 11 reaffirming that the promotion and
protection of human rights for all and the rule of law are essential to the fight
against terrorism, recognizing that effective counter-terrorism measures and the
protection of human rights are not conflicting goals but complementary and
mutually reinforcing, and stressing the need to promote and protect the rights of
victims of terrorism,
10F

Recalling Human Rights Council resolution 6/28 of 14 December 2007, 12 by
which the Council decided to extend the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism,
1F

Reaffirms that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat
1.
terrorism complies with their obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law;
Deeply deplores the suffering caused by terrorism to the victims and their
2.
families, expresses its profound solidarity with them, and stresses the importance of
providing them with assistance;
Expresses serious concern at the occurrence of violations of human
3.
rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as international refugee and humanitarian
law, committed in the context of countering terrorism;
Reaffirms that counter-terrorism measures should be implemented in
4.
accordance with international law, including international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law, thereby taking into full consideration the human rights of all,
including persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities, and in this regard must not be discriminatory on grounds such as race,
colour, sex, language, religion or social origin;
Also reaffirms the obligation of States, in accordance with article 4 of the
5.
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 13 to respect certain rights as
non-derogable in any circumstances, recalls, in regard to all other Covenant rights,
that any measures derogating from the provisions of the Covenant must be in
accordance with that article in all cases, and underlines the exceptional and
temporary nature of any such derogations, 14 and in this regard calls upon States to
raise awareness about the importance of these obligations among national
authorities involved in combating terrorism;
12F

13F

_______________
8

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53),
chap. I, sect. B.
9
Ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. II.
10
Ibid., Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/64/53), chap. II, sect. A.
11
Resolution 60/288.
12
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. I,
sect. A.
13
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
14
See, for example, General Comment No. 29 on states of emergency adopted by the Human Rights
Committee on 24 July 2001.

3

A/RES/64/168

6.

Urges States, while countering terrorism:

(a) To fully comply with their obligations under international law, in
particular international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law, with regard to
the absolute prohibition of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment;
(b) To take all necessary steps to ensure that persons deprived of liberty,
regardless of the place of arrest or detention, benefit from the guarantees to which
they are entitled under international law, including the review of the detention and
other fundamental judicial guarantees;
(c) To ensure that no form of deprivation of liberty places a detained person
outside the protection of the law, and to respect the safeguards concerning the
liberty, security and dignity of the person, in accordance with international law,
including international human rights and humanitarian law;
(d) To treat all prisoners in all places of detention in accordance with
international law, including international human rights and humanitarian law;
(e) To respect the right of persons to equality before the law, courts and
tribunals and to a fair trial as provided for in international law, including
international human rights law, such as the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, and international humanitarian and refugee law;
(f) To protect all human rights, including economic, social and cultural
rights, bearing in mind that certain counter-terrorism measures may have an impact
on the enjoyment of these rights;
(g) To ensure that guidelines and practices in all border control operations
and other pre-entry mechanisms are clear and fully respect their obligations under
international law, particularly international refugee and human rights law, towards
persons seeking international protection;
(h) To fully respect non-refoulement obligations under international refugee
and human rights law and, at the same time, to review, with full respect for these
obligations and other legal safeguards, the validity of a refugee status decision in an
individual case if credible and relevant evidence comes to light that indicates that
the person in question has committed any criminal acts, including terrorist acts,
falling under the exclusion clauses under international refugee law;
(i) To refrain from returning persons, including in cases related to terrorism,
to their countries of origin or to a third State whenever such transfer would be
contrary to their obligations under international law, in particular international
human rights, humanitarian and refugee law, including in cases where there are
substantial grounds for believing that they would be in danger of subjection to
torture, or where their life or freedom would be threatened in violation of
international refugee law on account of their race, religion, nationality, membership
of a particular social group or political opinion, bearing in mind obligations that
States may have to prosecute individuals not returned;
(j) Insofar as such an act runs contrary to their obligations under
international law, not to expose individuals to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment by way of return to another country;
(k) To ensure that their laws criminalizing acts of terrorism are accessible,
formulated with precision, non-discriminatory, non-retroactive and in accordance
with international law, including human rights law;
4

A/RES/64/168

(l) Not to resort to profiling based on stereotypes founded on grounds of
discrimination prohibited by international law, including on racial, ethnic and/or
religious grounds;
(m) To ensure that the interrogation methods used against terrorism suspects
are consistent with their international obligations and are reviewed to prevent the
risk of violations of their obligations under international law, including international
human rights, refugee and humanitarian law;
(n) To ensure that any person whose human rights or fundamental freedoms
have been violated has access to an effective remedy and that victims receive
adequate, effective and prompt reparations, where appropriate, including by
bringing to justice those responsible for such violations;
(o) To ensure due process guarantees, consistent with all relevant provisions
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 and their obligations under the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Geneva Conventions of
1949 15 and the Additional Protocols thereto, of 1977, 16 and the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees 17 and the 1967 Protocol thereto 18 in their
respective fields of applicability;
0H

14F

15F

16F

17F

(p) To shape and implement all counter-terrorism measures in accordance
with the principles of gender equality and non-discrimination;
7.
Encourages States, while countering terrorism, to take into account
relevant United Nations resolutions and decisions on human rights, and encourages
them to give due consideration to the recommendations of the special procedures
and mechanisms of the Human Rights Council and to the relevant comments and
views of United Nations human rights treaty bodies;
Acknowledges the adoption of the International Convention for the
8.
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance in its resolution 61/177 of
20 December 2006, and recognizes that the entry into force of the Convention and
its implementation will be an important step in support of the rule of law in
countering terrorism;
Recognizes the need to continue ensuring that fair and clear procedures
9.
under the United Nations terrorism-related sanctions regime are strengthened in
order to enhance their efficiency and transparency, and welcomes and encourages
the ongoing efforts of the Security Council in support of these objectives, including
by continuing to review all the names of individuals and entities in the regime,
while emphasizing the importance of these sanctions in countering terrorism;
10. Urges States, while ensuring full compliance with their international
obligations, to ensure the rule of law and to include adequate human rights
guarantees in their national procedures for the listing of individuals and entities with
a view to combating terrorism;
11. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the
promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while
_______________
15

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
17
Ibid., vol. 189, No. 2545.
18
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
16

5

A/RES/64/168

countering terrorism to continue to contribute to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, including by raising awareness about the need to
respect human rights and the rule of law while countering terrorism;
12. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on protecting human
rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism 19 and the previous
work of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights
and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism undertaken in accordance
with his mandate, based on Commission on Human Rights resolution 2005/80 of
21 April 2005,7 and Human Rights Council resolutions 5/1 and 5/2 of 18 June
2007 20 and 6/28 of 14 December 2007;12
18F

1H

19F

2H

13. Welcomes the ongoing dialogue established in the context of the fight
against terrorism between the Security Council and its Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the relevant bodies for the promotion and protection of human
rights, and encourages the Security Council and its Counter-Terrorism Committee to
strengthen the links, cooperation and dialogue with relevant human rights bodies, in
particular with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, other relevant special procedures
and mechanisms of the Human Rights Council, and relevant treaty bodies, giving
due regard to the promotion and protection of human rights and the rule of law in
the ongoing work pursuant to relevant Security Council resolutions relating to
terrorism;
14. Calls upon States and other relevant actors, as appropriate, to continue to
implement the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,11 which, inter
alia, reaffirms respect for human rights for all and the rule of law as the fundamental
basis of the fight against terrorism;
3H

15. Requests the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force to continue
its efforts to ensure that the United Nations can better coordinate and enhance its
support to Member States in their efforts to comply with their obligations under
international law, including international human rights, refugee and humanitarian
law, while countering terrorism;
16. Encourages relevant United Nations bodies and entities and
international, regional and subregional organizations, in particular those
participating in the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, which provide
technical assistance, upon request, consistent with their mandates and as
appropriate, related to the prevention and suppression of terrorism to step up their
efforts to ensure, as an element of technical assistance, respect for international
human rights, refugee and humanitarian law, as well as the rule of law;
17. Urges relevant United Nations bodies and entities and international,
regional and subregional organizations, including the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, within its mandate related to the prevention and suppression of
terrorism, to step up their efforts to provide, upon request, technical assistance for
building the capacity of Member States in the development and implementation of
programmes of assistance and support for victims of terrorism in accordance with
relevant national legislation;
_______________
19

A/64/186.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53),
chap. IV, sect. A.
20

6

A/RES/64/168

18. Calls upon international, regional and subregional organizations to
strengthen information-sharing, coordination and cooperation in promoting the
protection of human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of law while
countering terrorism;
19. Requests the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism to make
recommendations in the context of his mandate, with regard to preventing,
combating and redressing violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in
the context of countering terrorism;
20. Requests all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur
on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism in the performance of the tasks and duties mandated, including
by reacting promptly to the urgent appeals of the Special Rapporteur and providing
the information requested, and to give serious consideration to responding
favourably to his requests to visit their countries, as well as to cooperate with other
relevant procedures and mechanisms of the Human Rights Council regarding the
promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism;
21. Welcomes the work of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to implement the mandate given to her in 2005, in resolution 60/158, and
requests the High Commissioner to continue her efforts in this regard;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation
of the present resolution to the Human Rights Council and to the General Assembly
at its sixty-fifth session;
23. Decides to consider at its sixty-fifth session the report of the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism.
65th plenary meeting
18 December 2009

7
