...--

United Nations

299\t,h

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PI,ENARY MEETING
JP'ednesday, 1 lVovember 1950, at 3 p.JIn.

FIFTH SESSION
Official Records

Flushing Meadow, New ¥oJ,.k

-----------------------------------------_.....
CONTENTS
Page
291

Statement by the Secretary-General

United action for peace: reports of the First Committee (A/1456) and the
Fifth Committee (A/1463)
292
Reparation for injuries incurred in the service of the United Nations: report
304
. of the Sixth Committee (A/1420)
Permanent invitation to the Arab League to attend sessions of the General
304
Assembly: report of the Sixth Committee (A/1442)
United action for peace ( c.ontinued)

304

President: Mr. Nasrol1ah ENTEzAM (Iran).
Statement. by the Secretary-General
1. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I am grateful for
the confidence in me that is reflected in the decision
taken this morning [298th meeting]. I understand
your vote to be a reaffirmation by the General Assembly of the independence and integrity of the office
of Secretary-General of the United Nations. In the
present circumstances, I feel that I am under an obligation to the United Nations not to refuse your mandate
continuing me in office· for a period of three years.
2. When I assumed the office to which the General
Assembly appointed me on 1 February 1946, I took this
oath:
" ... to exercise in all loyalty, discretion and conscience the functions entrusted to me as SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, to discharge those
functions and regulate my conduct with the itlt~rests
of the United Nations only in view, and not to st:.(~k or
accept instructions in regard to the performance of
my duties from any government or other authority
external to the Organization."
.
3. I have tried, in all sincerity and with all the energy
~t m:¥ ~ommand, to carry out that pledge in letter and
In splnt, to uphold the Charter of the United Nations,
to act in accord~nce with the decisions of all its organs,
and to use the Influence of my office· always in support
of peace and the authority of the Organization..
4. The United Nations cannot function effectively
unl~s.s the Secretariat acts in loyal conformity with the
dec!slons and recommendations of the organs of the
United Nations. The United Nations cannot function

effectively unless the Secretariat acts in the collective
interest of the United Nations as a whole, and in the
collective interest only.
5. You may be quite sure that my action~ and the
actions of my staff will continue in the future, as they
have in the past, to be governed strictly by these considerations and by the oath to which we have all
pledged our faith.
.
6. I am grateful for the many courtesies and friendly
co-operation that have been extended· to me by the
delegations during the past five years and for the many
ways in which they and the Member governments have
assisted me in the performance of my duties as Secretary-General.
7. I shall do my part towards the maintenance of similar relations with all the Member governments-without
exception-during the next three years.
8. This is not the time to embark upon a review of the
many trials and tribulations through which the United
Nations has passed during the past five years, or to attempt to forecast what lies ahead. Now I shall say
only that my faith in the United Nations as the right
road to peace has been made stronger rather than
weaker by every crisis through which the world has
passed since 1945.
9. I further believe that there is still time for mankind
to choose the right road to peace-the United Nations
road-and thus to prevent the disaster of. a third world
war. The United Nations road to peace requires universal col1ective security against armed aggression.
That we must achieve and I believe We shaH achieve it.
The Member nations have been taking historic strides

291
. A/PV.299

292

General Assembly-Fifth Seseion-Plenary Meetings

in that direction before and during this session of the
General Assembly.
....
10. But more is required than this, ess~ntial as it is.
Force alone will never be enough to preserve peace.
There must be steady, persistent, continuous effort to
bring about a reconciliation, one by one, of the con:flict~
ing interests that divide the world. I have worked hard
during the last five years for the reconciliation of these
conflicting interests. I shall continue to do so.
11. The combination of conciliation and force in sup~
port of peace is also not enough. The United Nations
must develop a bold and statesmanlike programme on a
.world scale that will bring reasonable hope for an adequate standard of living and a decent life to the twothirds of the world's people who do not have either
today.
12. These are United Nations goals for which I shall
work during the next three years. With the support of
the Member governments and the hopes and prayers of
all humanity urging us on, I firmly believe that the
United Nations will succeed if we follow this roadand there is no force in the world that can stop us.

United action for peace: reports of' the First
Committee (A/1456) and the Fifth Committee
(A/1463)
[Agenda item 68]
Mr. T-hors (Iceland), Rapporteur, presented the
report of the First Committee and the accompanying
draft resolutions (A/ 1456).
13. Mr. THORS (Iceland), Rapporteur of 'the First
Committee: The question now before the Gencf01 As~
sembly for discussion and consideration bears th~ title
HUnited actio~n for peace". People all over the world will
place ~.reat hope in any genuine united action for peace,
a{nd will wholeheartedly welcome any such action. lv.Iany
will be (mcourag~d by the unanimity achieved for the
draft resolution of Iraq and Syria, recommending to the
permanent members ()f the Security Council that they
should meet and qiscuss all problems which are likely to
threaten ~!lternational peace and which are 'likely to
hamper the activities of the United Nations, with a
view to .solving their fundamental differences and
reaching agreement in accordance with the spirit and
letter of the Cha,rter. Let us hope that subsequent actiOl~s
will not cat,se disappointment, and that the noble hope}.,
of all people all over the world may come true. .
14. The PRESIDENT (translated from the French) :
In addition to the First Committee's report, the As~
sembly has before it the Fifth Committee's report
[A/1463] on the financial implications of the draft
resolutions submitted for its consideratiol1. The report
is self-;.explanatory: I do not think it is necessary to ask
the Rap~orteur. Ot the Fifth Committee to present it.
In additIon to the reports of the First and the Fifth
Committees, the Assembly has before it some amend~
ments rA/1465 and A/1466] and a draft resolution
[A/146"7], submitted by the USSR.
15. Should the Assembly wish to proceed to a discussion, I would ask representatives wishing to speak
to bear all these documents in mind and to refer to them
now, if they so desire, so that it will not be necessary to
revert to them later or to reopen the debate..
16.---Althotlgh I have no doubt that the General As~
sembly desires to discuss this issue$ I must, in order to

comply with the provisions of rule 67 of the rules of
procedure, ask whether it is the As,Cjembly's wish to
air;cuss the First Committee's report.

It was decided, by 27 votes to 21 with, 10 abstentionsl
to open the debate on the First Comm1'ttee's report.
17. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The Assembly has just decided in favour of a general
discussion. A vote of one-third of the members for the
motion would in fact have been sufficit.mt.
18. Mr. ARMAND UGON (Uruguay) (translated
from Spanish): The debates held in the First Committee1 on this important draft resolution were chiefly
devoted to a discussion of legal problems bearing on the
constitutionality or unconstitutionalit~r of this proposal
in terms of the Charter. Our delegatk'l1l considers that
that necessary and most useful discussion has demonstrated the complete conformity of the draft with the
provisions of the Charter and with the distribution of
powers set forth therein. Consequently we do not believe that it is necessary to dwell upon this legal discussion, but will confine ourselves to what we said in
. the First Con,nnittee. On the other hand, the legal discussion, although indispensable in view of the legal
aspects of the draft resolution, has to a certain extent
obscured consideration of the political and constitutional
significance of the step about to be taken by the
United Nations.
19. If we take a more general view, and consider the
draft in a wider context, we find that this measure
represents the most decisiv2 progress yet made by man
in the ot:ganization of peac~ and security. It is beyond
any doubt the most constructive step taken since San
Francisco. If the fourth session of the General Assembly of the United Nations could be called the "Peace
Assembly", these reasons justify us in calling the fifth
session the "Assembly of collective security", as its
President, Mr. Entezam called it in a memorable speech

[295th meeting].
20. This resolution, once it has been adopted, will em-

power the organized, international community to take
the enforcement measures indispensable to repel aggression, a power which the League of Nations n~ver
acquired. We have benefited from our experience in
Korea and broadened its application to build a practical,
realistic and world-wide system of collective security,
the most advanced yet known.
21. This system is not a substitute for, but rather an
addition to, the 011e alreud:;4' irL existence. It is not designed to replace the secud{y system envisaged at San
Francisco and hinging on the Security Council. It is
designed to operate in the event of a flaw or breakdown
in the Security Council system of security. The Security
Council retains the vast powers conferred upon it by the
Charter. The big five Powers continue to bear the
heavy weight of primary responsibilities conferred
upon them by that document. The new system merely
gives to the Assembly and the smaller States a responsibility for collective security in addition to that of the
Council and the big five.
22. The new system will come into play whenever the
Security Council is unable to act because of the veto,
or the misuse of presidential powers, or any other
hindrance due to disagreement among the great Powers.
1 See Official Records of the General Assembly~ Fifth Session~ First Committee~ 354th to 371st meetings inclusive.

299th Meeting-l November 1950
23. . No revision of the Charter is involved; what is
proposed is a remedy, within the system of the Charter,
for the inactivity of the Security Council. In the opinion
of our delegation the essential part of this draft resolution is the provision for calling, for the first time in
international history, upon the smaller States to take
decisions on collective security and contribute towards
it.
24. Hitherto the maintenance of collective security
has been the affair of the great Powers, which arrogated to themselves the function of preserving peace in
the Holy Alliance, in the Concert of Europe, in the
C(lur~dl of the League of Nations-as permanent members, in the Security Council-also as permanent members, and finally in the transitional system envisaged in
Article 106 of the Charter and which was apparently
intended to become permanent. Now, however, the
smaller Powers are ~alled upon to contribute, at the
international level, to the maintenance of collective security.
25. We have here, for the first time in history, a
system of collective security based on the contribution
of all States, large and small, in proportion to their
economic and military mc~ans.
26. As Uruguay pointed out at San Francisco, 2 we
are sure that this clarion call to the small States will be
of fundamental importance and will serve to strenr(.~len
peace and security.
.7

27. Lacking in strong military forces, but likewise
lacking in designs for conquest and aggrandisement, the
small countries represent an untapped force for peace
and international justice, since all of them hope for the
reign of law and cannot but reject aggression, threats
and violence. It follows that, in the organization of
world security, these nations without designs or plans
for conquest can and must be regarded as a powerful
force servin~ the p?-ce-loving community of nations,
the rules of mternatlonallaw, and the ethical and legal
principles of civilization. As between. what is just and
what is unjust, they will choose justice; as between
what is legitimate and illegitimate, they will choose law'
and as between violence and security, they will choos~
the maintenance of peace.
28. To call upon geographically small and militarily
weak countries to co-operate in the maintenance of
international peace and security means to employ a
new force !o establish effective ~nd solid guarantees
for the achleye~ent ?f the e~sentlal and supreme aim
of the Orgamz.atton: mternabonal peace and solidarity.
T~~ c?-operatlon of a.ll the nations, large and small,
nllhtanly weak or strong, .whatever their creed race
or po~itical organization, will make it possible to' build
a lasting world peace, a peace which will not consist
merely of the absence of war, but which will be founded
on justice, law, liberty and the well-being of all mankind.
Those are the objectives of this draft resolution.
29.. One. point, however, deserves particular attention.
Whl1e thiS draft resolution. calls upon the small States
!o play.an active part in maintaining peace and security,
It. ~l~o Imposes upon them grave and weighty responsi~lht1es already laid down in the Charter. In voting for
2.See Documents of the United Nations Conference on 17dern4"1t~onal Organisation, San Francis ~o 1945, Vol. I, document
2 I' PIB.

293

this draft resolution, everyone of us will shoulder a
serious obligation, a heavy re~ponsibility. Every 00(": of
us must return to his country conscious. of his duty to
do his utmost for the adoption of the legal, economic
and military measures required to place our countries
in a legal and material position to discharge, whenever
necessary, the responsibility which we are assuming in
this historic hour.
30. We have been called upon to participate in the
organization of security because of the failure of the
great countries brought about by the recalcitrant attitude of one of them. We must not let a security based on
the co-operation of all the countries, large and small, fail
because of the indifference, unconcern or inertia of the
small countries. We have criticized the failure of the
great Powers so much that we dare not fail ourselves.
The draft resolution will very greatly strengthen the
international solidarity which is required for safeguarding peace and law. It is simply a stage in the fulfilment of the obligations and responsibilities enacted
and laid down in the Charter. Nothing new is being
added here that is not specifically mentioned in the
Charter. The Charter provides that enforcement action,
based On a pooling of economic and military forces,
should always be ready to contain international aggression, violation of the sovereignty of peoples and threats
to the peace. The draft resolution reaffirms and ratifies
those aims. For the first time in the history of the world
an impressive majority of Powers emphatically decides
to vote for a recommendation of the. General Assembly
so that the principles of the Organization may be safeguarded firmly in all the continents. Henceforth the
United Nations stands also for the united continents,
because bnth the Members of the former and the countries of the latter are convinced that the obligations laid
down in the present recommendation flow from respect
for, and observance of, the duties' imposed by the
Charter. With this draft resolution we are taking a
firm step towards the maintenance of security with
Justice.
.
31: !vIr. DULLES (United States of America) : The
First Committee has brought us a proposal whi~h we
can accept as a good policy of insurance a.gainst a third
world war. The terms of this proposal are in themselves
nothing novel. It is the Charter programtlle of seeking
to deter aggression by being able quickly to expQse and
to suppress aggression. That Charter programme in
turn was based upon the experience of the world during
the decade of the 1930's.
32. You will recall, I am sure, that series of events:
Japan's attack on Manchuria in 1931 and the League's
decision after three months to send a commission to
investigate, ~hen ten months of investigation, and then
Cl reportS which, after five more months, was adopted by
the League,4 a report which condemned the Japanese
but which invoked no restraining action. But, by then
eighteen m.onths after the initial aggression had oc~
curred, the tide of Japanese aggression had rolled on and
the initial breach of the peace could not be localized.
33. Other ambitious despots 'cook note and followed
suit. In 1935 Mussolini attack\,:,.~ ,md conquered Ethiopia.
~ See League of NatirnsJ Report of the Commission of Enqu~r:y (Lytton)J document C.663. M. 320.1932. VII, and annexes

Series L.o.N. VII. Political, 1932. VII. 12 and 14
J
<1. See League 0/ N ationsJ Report on the Work 0/' the League
since the !hirteenth Sessian of the Assembl:VJ ~ocume:nt A.6.
1933., Senes L.o.N., General, 1933.2., page 32.

294

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

peace depends not merely on security arrangements but
In 1938 Hitler seized first Austria and then Czechoslovakia. In 1939 Hitlerite Germany and the Soviet) also upon the observance of human rights and the promotion of economic well-being. That, I know we all
Union combined to seize and divide Poland.
realize is an essential reminder. Too often in the past
34. That was the succession of events which touched
men h~ve taken the false and superficial view that peace
off the Second World War. In the First Committee I
depends merely upon maintaining the .statlts quo. 'J?he
quoted Marshal Stalin's words of March 1939, and
reality is that repression produces vlOlent exploslOn
they are words that deserve repetition. He said at that
unless the efforts at maintaining a peaceful order go
time: "The non-aggressive States, primarily England,
hand in hand with efforts which advance the material,
France and the United States of America ... rejected
intellectual and spiritual welfare of mankind. This draft
the policy of collective security, the policy of collective
resolution commits us to that enlightened way.
resistance to the aggressors, and have taken up a posi40.
In addition to the principal draft resolution, to
tion of non-intervention ... consequently, transforming
which I have already referred, there is another important
the war into a world war." Those words proved too
draft resolution which was initiated by Iraq and Syria
true and six months later it was indeed world war.
and which recommends to the permanent members of
35. Those who founded the United Nations were
the Security Council that they should meet and discuss,
determined not to repeat that mistake. So as a very first
collectively or otherwise, problems likely to threaten
point in the Organization's statement of pUl'poses th~y
international peace. That draft resolution was approved
wrote "effective collective measures" for the suppresunanimously. The United States was happy to support
sion of aggression. But for five years our Security
it for, as Secretary of State Acheson said in the course
Council proved unable to vitalize those words. Then
of
our general debate [2 79th meeting] and as President
came the armed attack on the Republic of Korea and
Truman
told us last week [295th meeting], the United
it seemed that the pattern of 1931 had in fact begun to
States
will
always be ready and willing to negotiate with
repeat itself and that the third world war might be in
a
sincere
desire
to solve problems.
the making. And that might have been-and I think it
would have been-had it not been for a series of acci41. It should, I think, be borne in mind that what this
dental circumstances which made it possible to improvise
draft resolution refers to as the fundamental difference
collective resistance to that aggression.
which now dangerously divides the world is not a difference of a kind on which the so-called great Powers
36. Today the aggressors are largely broken and we
can readily' compromise, for that fundamental issue
surely breathe more freely than we did on Sunday, 25
deeply concerns others, and most of all it concerns the
June. But our respite may be short if we go on trusting
smaller
nations.
to luck. We must organize dependably the collective
will to resist-aggression. If the Security Council does
42. The United States has no national ambitions which
not do so, then this Assembly must do what it can by
clash at any point with the welfare of the Russian people,
invoking its residual power of recommendation. That is
and between our nations there are no territorial diswhat we shall do by adopting the first draft resolution
putes and no commercial disputes. The Soviet Union,
submitted by the First Committee.
to be sure, has not yet settled its lend-lease account
with us, but no one anywhere thinks that the United
37. That draft resolution provides for procedures for
States will go to war to collect its debt. The issue on
observation in areas of tension so that potential aggressors will know in advance that any aggression would I which we part -is not that kind of issue. The issue on
be instantly detected and labelled as such. The draft I which we part is the issue of whether freedom a~d
diversity in the world shall be systematically stamped
resolution makes it possible for the General Assembly
out and replaced by enforced conformity with the patto meet at twenty-four hours' notice in emergency
) special session if the Security Council is prevented, as I tern of Soviet totalitarianism:
by veto, from acting. It invites Member States at once
43. That basic issue does not concern exclusively, or
to create and maintain armed forces so trained, organized
even primarily, the United States. If the United States
and equipped that they could promptly be made availgave way on that issue, it would be the smaller nations
able for service as United Nations units, and it provides
which would first pay the price, for they cannot survive
for further study of ways of fulfilling the task of organizunless there is collective support of a system of tolerance.
ing collective resistance to aggression.
That is th~ basic issue from which stem the particular
controverSIes that create the danger points.
38. If, in response to om resolution, the Member
States do actually establish a system which ensures that
44. Let us take situations such as exist in Austria,
aggression will be promptly exposed, if they maintain
Germany and Korea. It would be possible to reach
a collective strength, and if they have both the will and
agreement at any time if we accepted conditions which
the way to use that strength promptly in case of need,
would subject all Austrians, all Germans and all Ko\ then a third world war may be permanently averted." reans to dictation and servitude such as are now imThat is so plain that the First Committee, by the votes
posed O? P~les and Czechs. Also, all who have followed
of fifty members, with only the Soviet block in opposith.ose sltuatlOns closely know that nothing less would
tion and three abstentions, approved the first draft
Wl11 USSR agreement. 'Why is that? It is because as
resolution. It would be vastly reassuring to all who
!Jarshal Stali~l has put it, Soviet Union foreign pa'licy
love peace if here we could adopt unanimously a pro)~, "the most mternationalist of all", because it seeks to
gramme which only aggressors need fear.
amalgat;1ate" all the various nationalities into "a single
State U111on". The USSR is, he says, "the living proto39. There is a further part of that draft resolution to
type of the future union of nations".
which I would allude. It is part E, which derives from
what was originally an independent Chilean proposal.
45. Already.the So",:iet Uni.on has gone far in achieving
That part reminds the Member nations that enduring
the goals of Its foreIgn poltcy. The official newspaper

I

299th Meeting-l November 1950
Izvestia, ip its new year's editorial of 1 January 1950,
listed what is called the H camp" growing up around
the USSR. It said that the forces of this camp were
multiplying day by day, and it went on to list Poland,
Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary, Albania,
North Korea, Mongolia, the Chinese People's Republic
and the Eastern German Democratic Republic as members of that "camp". It conduded: HCommunism is conquering; communism will triumph I" If any nation
really wants to join that camp and add its name to
Izvesticls next new year's list of "conquered", it is free
to do so. But no people yet have freely made that choice.
No people y~t have come under the yoke represented
by the USSR brand of imperialist communism except
by violent coercion. The United States will not be a
party to that programme and thus, so long as it remains
the programme of the Soviet Union, the possibilities of
negotiation are limited. I say "limited", which is not to
say that the possibilities are non-existent.
46. The basic problem, as we see it, is to create enough
collective strength to protect the ft:eedom of the people
who want to be free. The United States is willing to
contribute to that strength, and indeed we have already
contributed largely.We do so because we do not believe
in a "one VIi'orld" of enforced conformity. We believe
that peace does not depend upon forcibly ironing out
differences, but that peace should permit people to
respond in their own distinctive ways to their own
distinctive needs and aspirations and, for example, to
practise socialism, private enterprise or even communism, if they desire. The people of the United State~ feel
a sense of common destiny with other free peoples, even
though we disagree with them. That is the key to an
understanding of our foreign policy.
47. Of course, when a materially strong Power like
the United States contributes preponderantly to a
common cause, that fact automatically exposes it to the
charge of seeking to dominate and extend its power in
the world. No one who knows the people of the United
States, no one who takes into account our record as a
major victor in two world wars, credits those charges.
But many do not know of their own knowledge, and
they are misled by false propaganda.
48. That fact is an added reason why the United
States wants· the new conditions which would be
created by the main draft resolution now before the
General Assembly. Under that resolution, if implemented, the defensive power of the free world will be
more evenly distributed, so that there will not be so
great a dependence upon one or two; each Member
nation will maintain some forces available to serve as
United Nations units. Of course, in many cases that
force would be small, but the total would be large and
its com.posite character would itself bear eloquent testimony to the collective will behind it.
49. Then, too, under that resolution, the direction of
concerted action will be more securely lodged in the
United Nations, so as to reduce the risk that force might
be used to promote distinctly national ambitions. As
!he :"orld moves in the path that this resolution defines,
!t Will move nearer and nearer to the Chart.~r ideal, the
~deal. of impressing armed force, with a truat, so that
It W1ll ';'lot be used, as our Charter says, save in the
com~on interest, a common interest as found by a body
that IS respon~ive to the ml.)ral judgment of mankind.

295

50. The step marked by this draft resolution is along
a path that is as yet untravelled. We are explorers, but
we can proceed, confident that we are taking a historic
step towards reaching the great goal of a peace that wilJ
be both durable and just.
51. General ROMULO (Philippines) : Few draft res..
olutions have been debated so minutely and exhaustively in committee as the first draft resolution now before the General Assembly. This is only as it should be.
I doubt whether any single act of the United Nations,
other than the adoption of the Charter, will loom so
large and'vital as this in the history of the Organization.
52. The draft resolution now before the General Assembly has· been attacked on legal and constitutional
grounds. The argument that, by the terms of the resolution, the General Assembly would usurp the functions
and powe,rs of the Security Council., was advanced in the
First .committee with great force and skill by Mr.
Vyshinsky and others. I am sure it will be repeated
here again. That argument was met with the explanation that no such usurpation is intended or, indeed, will
ever take place, and that the sole aim and purpose of the
proposal is to enable the United Nations, through its
most representative organ-the General Assembly-to
consider breaches of the peace and acts of aggression
and to make suitable recommendations thereon whenever the Security Council is prevented from taking
action by reason. of the veto.
53. The principle bears repeating: while the Security
Cotmcil has primary responsibility for the maintenance
of peace and security, this responsibility is not exclusive, and the General Assembly may, in default of a
decision by the Security Council, make appropriate
recommendations to the Member States to curb a breach
of the peace Of &n act of aggression. This authority
springs from the broad powers of the General Assembly
under the Clmrter, from the United N".ations' inherent
right of survival and from its supreme responsibility to
all the world'g peoples to preserve the peace. No legal
technicality. however brilliantly advanced, can prevail
against the overriding force of this threefold principle.
54. The argument based on the principle of the inviolability of the Charter must be rejected as a pretext
once it can be shown, as indeed it has been shown, that
the proposal before us, far from nullifying the Charter,
seeks rather to give it life and to make it work. The
whole purpose of this proposaJ rests upon a reasonable
in~erpretation of our fundamental law.
55. The struggle which hati become familiar in the
political histories of most countries, between a strict
and a liberal. }nterpretation of the constitution, is now
being re-enacted among us with equal bitterness and
tenacity of purpose. However, reason and common 5ense
must prevail, for growth is the genius of life, and those
who stultify life are sundered and broken in the end.

56. Among nations, as among men, the first law is the
law of survival. Long ago, it was said that the Sabbath
was made for man and not man for the Sabbath. VIe say,
with equal conviction, that the nations· were not made
for the Charter but the Charter for the nations which
desire peace with all their hearts. To hold a contrary
view would· be~ as it was two thous~.nd y·ears ago, to
betray a certain poverty of conscit'tl1ce and ,imagination,
for it was intended from the vety beginning that the

296

General Assenlbly-Fifth

Charter should be much more than a mere instrument
for the adjustment of the rival political claims and ambitions of the'great Powers, a tool to be cast aside at the
first sign of disagreement among them. The Charter was
and is a covenant. among the peoples of the world, by
which they have resolved to abolish the scourge of war.
57. We are committed to this world-embracing purpose, with the support of all the great Powers if possible, but without the sanction of any of them if
necessary.
58. The Charter is a bulwark of peace and not an
advancing forest which conceals aggression and war.
It is difficult to escape the feeling that the opposition
to this draft resolution is inspired by the desire to conceal aggressive aims, to nourish them in secret and to
pursue them by stealth. Nobody can reasonably suggest
that this resolution will encourage breaches of the peace
and acts of aggression. No amount of ingenious argumentation' and no tricks of. casuistry c::m turn this resolution upon its hea\d, twist its meaning and so misrepresent its purpose that it can be said in any manner or form
to foment war and encourage aggression.
59. The whole purpose of this draft resolution is,
first, to uncover aggression, 'alld, secondly, to repel
aggression. This twofold purpOs\~ is writ clear upon its
face. Therefore those who oppose it on narrow technical
grounds lay themselves open to the suspicion either that
they have no interest in curbing aggression or, what is
worse, that they themselves harbour l;Lggressive designs
directly or through their friends. Although the inference
maybe unfounded-and I Jn0pe it is unfounded-it is
nevertheless inescapable.
60. We have heard :Mr. Vyshinsky affirm repeatedly,
and always eloquently, that die Soviet Union desires
peace. Whenever Mr. Vyshins1.w speaks of peace, he
rises to heights of eloquence wpich have earned for him
the reputation of being the unrivallea master in dialectics
in this Assembly. By all the rules of logic, therefore, this
draft resolution should enjoy his full endorsement and
1\
support.
61. It is significant that, while the USSR ha~ sought
membership in the' proposed peace observation commis-'
sion, it has refused to concur in the measures which,
upon failure of the Security Council to act, the United
Nations may take to halt and repel any aggression which
that commi~lsion may uncover. The Soviet Union holds
that action t\gainst such aggression may be taken only
by the Security Council where, as a permanent member,
the USSR has the right of veto. It cannot accept the
view that sueh a situation should in any circumstances be
submitted to the judgment of the veto-free General Assembly-that is to say, to the judgment of the rank and
fil/l of the nations, particularly the small nations, whose
abhorrence and fear of war cannot be less than that of
the Soviet Union.
62. Mr. Vyshinsky is sharply aware of the fear of
war which bedevils the small nations, or else he would
not so persistently play upon it as he so effectively does.
If, then, ~e knows how deep our apprehensions are and
how amclOusly we 3.ope that war may be avoided, why
sh0!lld the USSR dIstruct or fear the judgment of our
nations?
'
~3. If further pro?f is ne<:ded of the peaceful inc1inatt?ns of our ~ountrIes, let hIm consider the votes in the
FIrst CommIttee on the second and ,third draft resolutions.
,

tm~-Plenary Meetings

64. 'Let him note how the but slightly amended USSR.
draft resolution, asking .the Security Council to perform
its functions under the Charter, and in particular the
early application of the articles regarding· the placing of
armed forces of Member States at the disposal of the
Council and the functioning of the Military Staff
Committee, was approved by 49 votes, .1)nly one vote
less than was received by the first draft. resolution.
65. Let him note further
third draft resolution,
originally sponsored by yria and Ira u,rhich requests
c nsu ting with one anthe great Powers to co'
other in an effort to resolve their fundamental differences, was adopted unanimously by the First Committee.
66. Does the Soviet Union rGquire more proof of
our peaceful intentions ? We supported its proposal
affirming the primary responsibility of the Security
Council for the maintenance of international peace and
security. We echoed its hope that the Security Council
and the Military Staff Committee may reach agreement
at last on concrete measures which will enable the
United Nations to deal effectively with breaches of the
peace and acts of aggression. We agreed that the organ
in which the USSR wields the supreme prerogative of
the veto should be requested' once again to set itself to
these tasks. We recognized the right of the Soviet
Union to a place on the peace observation commission.
67. Having given these proofs of our intentions, have
we not in turn the right to expect that the USSR should
agree to a proposal which seeks to develop a secondary
line of defence against aggression, a measure of safety
on which we could fall back in the event of the failure
of the Security Council to take necessary action? We
realize-and how well do we realize-that there is one
missing ingredient: the element of mutual trust. Let us
admit frankly that the distrust is mutual. The Soviet
Union distrusts the motives of the free countries. But
to show whether this suspicion has any basis in fact, let
Mr. Vyshinsky prove that any State covets a single inch;
of Soviet territory or seeks to subvert by violence the .
institutions of the USSR. On the other hand, our dis- '.
trust of the Soviet Union is based on facts of bitter'
experience. It is based on recent events in Iran, Greece,
Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Berlin and Korea.
68. Is this chain of menace and subversion ended at .
last ? We should like to think so, and we pray God it is ;
so, but dare not. We still are waiting for a si,gn that the,
USSR has decided to let its deeds comport with its
words, and that it has finally discarded the systematic
programme of political subversion and terror that so '
long has had the whole world in its grip.
69. By its vote on the first draft resolution, we shall
know whether or not the sign has been given, the sign .
by which alone we can conquer fear, breed confidence
in one another and set ourselves to the tasks of peaceful
reconstruction for the benefit of all our peoples.
70. Mr. KANELLOPOULOS (Greece): At the
present meeting of the General Assembly we are caIled.
upon to take a step-an important step forward-in the
life and scope of the United Nations. We are caIled
upon to reduce the power of negation and to reinforce .
the power of truth. The veto, and especially its abuse; is
negation. Truth resides in the free conscience and will of'
the great majority of the nations.
71. The road leading to the draft resolution which
we are enjoined to adolPt today was opened to us in no

jiiU $_,.,

I

,m·""""

297

299th Meeting-l Novembe.. 1950
upcedain or indefinite manner by the blood which had
>been shed, and is still being shed, in Kotea. It is indeed
a grievous shame that mankind shGuld require the sacrifice of the blood of the innocent in order to arrest the
violenee of the guilty and to impose justice. But so it is;
and now, for the first time in history, under the aegis
of a world organization, the law of collective security
has been enforced automatically, swiftly) and effectively.
72. But the question arises: has thIS happened in a
way offering a sure guarantee for the futut'e? Can we
say with certainty that collective security will surely
function in the same effective manner should a situation
similar to that in Korea present itself again? Unfortunately the answer is "no".
73. If the Security Coundl was able, last June, to
take the decision it took, this was of course due partly
to the will of those who voted for it and, more particularly, to the fact that at last responsible ,and decisive
world leadership has come into being, but partly also to
chance or to luck, as Mr. Dulles ,said. For assur~dly it
. was a stroke of fortune that a {;erfain great Power which
makes a .systematic and et,aggerated use of the veto
was absent f'rom the decisive meeting of the Security
Council. Had it been· present, a decisi'on which was
hailed with enthusiasm by the men ahd women of the
free world would never have been taken.
74. I presume that this was the thought which led the
delegation of the United States to make ~he proposal
which was discussed and elaborated in the First Committee and upon which we are now called upon to take
a decision.
75. The first draft resolution under discussion of
course solves the problem within the framework of the
basic rules adopted at San Francisco. The Security
Council remains the sole organ which, in the event of a
threat to peace, is empowered to take decisions legally
bil1ding on the United Nations. However, without
changing this basic principle, the proposed draft resolution constitutes a signal advance in the moral field, the
political effects of which cannot but be most beneficial.
76. If, in any part of the world, 'the illegal violence of
the powers of darkness tqanifests itself,. then, under this
resolution, the General A~sembly is summoned immediately and has the power, by placing itself on the side of
the. yictim, to render any veto in the Security Council
pohbcally and morally diffi.cult. In other words, we hope
that the power of the democratic will of the majority
of the free nations-.and that will is the essence of the
mattefl-·proves itself stronger. than that of legalisdc
procedure in any form. .
77. If, after a decision has been rendered by the
Gener~l Assembly by a great maj?rity, the Security
Councd, by reason of the veto of a smgle Power, is not
able to respond to the mandatory will of the nations,
then automatically the question of' the survival of our
Organizatio~ will arist', This could only be solved by
the predommance of the. will of the overwhelmingly
large number of the free nations which demand not
, only t~e continuance ~f our Organization', but also the
. essenttal fulfilment of Its purpose.
7~. It is in this. sense that the Greek delegation salutes
1th .a dee~ feebng of confidence the progress that the
ssembly IS about to make today or tomorrow in
adopting the decision of the First Committee on the
l'Jmteq St~tes pr(jpos~l. By this act our Assembly win

,A

most fittingly and constructively celebrate the fifth
ar"niversary of the coming into force of the Charter· of
the United Nations.
79. However, on this occasion, I think it indispensable
to draw your attention to a critical subject indissolubly
bound to the draft resolution under discussion. During
the ,last few years-and I am sure this has not escaped
the' attention of any among you-there has mysteriously
appeared: under the surface of conventional historical
processes a radical change in the acceptance of war as
an international phenomenon.
80. International warfare was once considered to be
warfare waged between States. Consequently the implication of aggression-an aggressor being one who has
disturbed the pe~ce in contravention of international
law-was associated with the status of a politically constituted and independent State. But the events of the
last twenty years, so deeply influenced by the totalitarian ,regimes and their movements, have brought
about a fundamental change in .the essence of this
problem•
81. War as an international phenomenon has taken
on a new shape. If, for example, in 1934 the coup d' etat
of the Austrian National Socialists in Viennaiilad sue...
ceeded, and these had assumed power after the assassination of Dollfuss, it would have appeared naive to say
that the tragedy was one of civil strife and internal in
character. Dollfuss' assassins were allegedly the Austrian vanguard of a for~lgn Power and a foreign army.
82. The totaUtadans have invented and brought into
history the contrivance of the fifth column, which does
not operate on the. basis of the nationality of those who
constitute it. Those who 'belong to the fifth columh
have, morally and p)1itically, severed their a~sociation
with their natural nationality and are exclusively identified with the nationality of the foreign State of which
they are the creatures and tools. Therefore any warlike
activity or manifestation of violence on the part of fifth
columnists constitutes an international and not a national phenomenon.
83. If we overlook this fact,if we refuse to acknowledge
this reality, then we leave open a wide field of action
for any Powet which~ after organizing a fifth column
in other countries, will nqt need to assail the peace of
the world overtly. by mC'itls of its forces, but will none
the less assail it in a,~ underhand manner through the
fifth column under its control.
84. For instance, let us suppose that in Korea the geographical partition of the 38th parallel-that extraordinary historical paradox-h~d never existed; even .so,
the war that has broken out there ought still to be considered anintemational and not a civil war. Suppose
that inste~d of the North Koreans attacking the South
Koreans~ the "Reds" had come down from the mountains, where they had been secretly trained and artned,
and had invaded the cities and the plain[$. This difference would in no wise have altered the character of the
aggression and the war ·as an international phenomenon.
85. In recent years we in Greece were subjected to
aggression· in this £orm. But because, in the conscience
of the nations, the significance of international warfare
in its contemporary form had not yet crystallized, we
were deprived of the benefits which the application of
the principle of collective security would n~ve ~fforded

.

C

u~,

29~8_...--

86

G::::en:e::r::al:...:A.::s=8=em=.=b:.::ly~--=F:.:i:.:ft=h=-=S..:.e8::.::8.:..,io. . .u ___I_)I_eo_8_r..:y.·...._M_e_e_ti_n..::g~8

Fortunately we did not need them. We fought

al~ne, and we are happy an~ proud that! with the mOJ~al

support of the United Nattons, and w1th the mater1al
aid of generous friends, we won the battle alone. We are
prQud because we have been able to present to the world
the spectacle of a virile democracy undaunte~ by feara democracy which knows how to fight for 1tS 1deals.
87. But suppose the Greek democracy had not been
able to emerge victorious and had succ~mbed beneath
the weight of so harsh a struggle, ought 1t then to have
been abaudoned and to have been sacrificed on the altar
of dubbus sanctity dedicated to antiquated concepts
regarding war? 'Alas, upon this altar other peoples
have been sacrificed.
88. Let us th~refore beware for ~he future and show
ourselves worthy of the demands of history. Its message
is clear but we have not alway:; ears to hear it. History
require~ .tha~ we'should be ever. vi~i.i(m~, re.solute, bold
and uny1eldmg where democrattc faith 1S at stake. Let
us dedicate ourselves to this high purpose on the present
solemn occasion for our own sakes and for the sake of
the free men and women throughout the world.
89. Mr. DONGES f!I.1!ion,o,f South ,Africa): The
First Committee has presented to us three draft reso"
lutions, namely, the draft resolution jo~ntly: sponsored by
several delegations, the draft resolutton mtroduced by
the Soviet Union and amended in committee and the
draft resolution introduced by the delegations of Iraq
and Syria and revised in collaboration with delegations
which had introduced amendments. All three draft
resolutions were discussed exhaustively in the Committee and there can be little new which could be added
to what was stated during those discussions.
90. The justification for my intervention is, however,
twofold. In the first place, there is the necessity for a
final definition of the considerations which will govern
our voting on the different provisions of the:s.e. draft
resolutions to which I have referred. In add1tton, I
Crave the indulgence of the Assembly to accord me ~he
privilege of making my maiden speech on such an 11].1portant subject before this august Assembly. •
91. When the draft resolutions were voted on in the
l':i'irst Committee, the Soutl,1 African delegation voted
affirmatively on the joint draft resolution as a whole,
although we expressed' certain misgivings as to the
necessity of some of its provisions and although we had
abstained on part E, the text of which we regarded as
extraneous to the main issue raised in the draft reso. lution.
92. The South A~rican delegation voted affirmatively
on the other two draft resolutions, that is, the one presented by the USSR delegation, as amended, and the
one introduced by the delegations of rraq and Syria, as
revised. The South African delegation wiil again vote
affirmatively on the first draft resolution as a whole.
We shall also vote in favour of the other two draft
resolutions as they stand at present.
93. In defining briefly, for the information and records
of this Assembly, the considerations which will govern
our voting and the South African Government's interpretation of some of the provisions, I shall deal, first
of all, with the first draft resolution.
94. As was explained in the Committee, it is the 'view
of my government that the primary function of the

--_

United Nations is the maintenance of international
peace and security. It i~ al&o the view of my g:over1?'ment
that if the OrganizatlOn does not fulfil th1S prlma~y
function satisfactorily, it c~nnot hOp'e to b~ su~cessfullU
its other varied and essential purs\.l1ts. If 1t falls to protect the world against armed aggression, another holo"
caust will inevitably ensue, an? whatever ma~ have been
achieved in regard to the soc1al and econom1c, a;dvanc~­
ment of peoples will disappear and the world wdl agalU
become a place of material and spiritual destructionthat is, if our modern society and civilization. are not
destroyed complrtely. Therefore, unl~ss the Vntted Nations is willing ,and is able to. ensur~· mternatlO~al peace
and security, its value and 1tS mam purpose m 111ternational life will be of little account.
95. The position which now faces the Organization
is that the procedures which we have developed in
terms of the Charter for the maintenance of peace and
security are such that our ma;chine~y cannot be relied
upon to act quickly and effectively 111 the ~vent of any
State deciding to break the peace by resortmg to armed
force. This machinery, as employed hitherto, does ~ot,
therelfore, afford the world a safe guarantee agamst
aggr(~ssion and war.
'
96. The reasons for this impotence of our Organization have been explained at length in the Committee
as well as by previous speakers in the present debate,
and it is not my intention to dwell on them. The facts
are clear. It is now generally accepted that the abuse
of the rule of unanimity can effectively prevent the
Security Council from. taking: acti?n-certainly from
taking early and effective action-m the event of an
armed threat to the peace. This is a fact-a fact which
we must all now accept.
'
97. On the other hand, we have seen that if the Security
Council is permitted to function as originally. intende?,
this Organization can act with great effectiveness 111
the event of 'an armed attack by one country upon another. The manner in which the' Organization intervened
in the Korean conflict furnishes us with the clearest
:possible. demonstra~ioi1 of this. Tha;t the ~nited Nations,
if perm1tted, can 111tervene effectively m the event of
armed aggression must therefore also be accepted as a
fact.
98. The third fact is the'danger of war. The threat
of war is constantly casting its shadow over a world
which, five years ago, emerged from an armed struggle
that had all but destroyed it. War has already been the
fate of Korea, and this Organization is still engaged
upon a struggle with the aggressor from beyond the
38th parallel. The f~ar of W(J-f and the overriding consideration of averting armed conflict obtrude themselves
constantly into our discussions and our resolutions.
They form the sombre background of much of what
we hear, of what we read and even of what we think.
99. It is this state of emergency that we are called
upon to meet. It is this overriding consideration of
safeguarding our peoples against armed aggression t~at
has forced us to seek ways and means of renderIng
aggressiol) un.?ruitful and dan~erous to the aggressor,
of enabling us to present a untted front to anyone who
should decide to break the peace by resorting to armed
force.
'
100. It is true, of course, that the United Nations
Charter provides ample measures for dealing with

299th Meeting-l November 1950
ordinary disputes. It is, how~ver, in the emergency of
aggression or imminent aggression that the Organiza..
tion is or may be impotent; and it is intolerable that
this Organizatiqn, which was cre~ted primarily for the
preservation of peace and securl~y, should condemn
itself to impotence itl such an emergency because of
the wilful persistence of anyone Power in the abuse
of its. rights under the Charter.
101. A number of speakers in the Committee argued
cogently that our present efforts should not in any way
impair the provisions of the Charter for dealing with
ordinary disputes, and that the procedures which have
now been evolved in the first draft resolution should
not be permitted to overlap or supplant those Charter
provisions. This is a fact, which I would emphasize,
for it is also the understanding of my government.
102. Other representatives have also expressed the
view that it should be emphasized that the proposals
put forward in the draft should in no way derogate
from the place accorded by the Charter to. the Security
COU~lCi1 in the maintenance of peace and security.· The
draft resolution clearly recognizes the position of the
Council, for it is only when the Council has found
itself incapable of action that the measures and pro'cedures which are now being created will be invoked.
103. In the circumstances, it is the wish of my government that I should take this opportunity of again stating clearly the understandings which, a::i far as the
Union of' South Africa is concerned, are implicit in my
government's acceptance of the draft resolution.
104. First, it is our understanding that armed force
will be used only in circumstances where armed aggression has taken place or is imminent, arid Where the
Security Council is not able to take action.
105. Secondly, it is the understanding of my government that the words "breach of, the peace or act of
aggression", in part A, paragraph 1 of the draft resolution, will signify exclusively a breach of the peace
or an act of armed aggression as between States.
106. Thirdly, it is the understanding of the Government of the Union of South Africa that the reference
to a "t~reat to the peace", in the same' paragraph, and
any action by the Assembly under that paragraph 'irising from such a "threat to the peace", are rega·rded
as being limited to circumstances of extreme g~ iJ':,vity
and urgency in which the danger of armed aggrcl'dl0n
as between States is considered to be imminent and
unavoidable. I must repeat that my governmenl, considers that there is ample other provision in the Charter
t~ deal with ordinary dispu~es not likely to "..ad irrmedlately to an act of aggressIon, and that the machmery
provided by this resolution should not be· applied to
such classes of disputes.
107. It is on these understandings that the delegaHon
of the Union of South Africa will vote affirmatively on
the first draft resolution as a whole.
.
~O8. The second draft resolution which is before us
IS t~e one which was originally introduced by the Soviet
Umon delegation and which was amended in the First
Committee. There is, of course, nothing that we can
say ~gailJ-st this draft resolution apart from the fact
that It reIterates what has been stated so often, namely,
that the Powers concerned should endeavour to implement the. provisions of the Charter which were de-

299

'V'ised for the purpose of enabling the United Nations
to deal, in terms of the Charter, with threat~ to the
peace, bre~~hes of the peace, acts of aggressIon and
disputes or situatious likely to endanger the maintenance
of international peace and security. We can only hope
that the intl"oduction of this draft resolution by the
USSR delegation will be followed up by a sincere effort
to co-operate with the other permanent members in an
effort to achieve the aims of their own draft resolution.
My delegation will 1vote in favour of this draft resolution.
109. L~etly, tb,\;re is the draft resolution introduced
by the d~elegations of Iraq and Syria, as revised in the
First Committee. It is true, of course, that similar
appeab\ to resolve their differences have in the past
been addressed to the permanent members of the Security Council. It is.. also true that the big Powers must
be acutely aware of the fears which their continued
differences are engendering among the smaller countries of the world, which have followed these differences
with great concern and apprehension. While their true
causes have been apparent for a considerable time, the
draft resolution is wisely silent on the question of blame,
for it is important that the appeal should not be a
source of further diffei<;nc~s and of offence to any
one of the perm8lttent members concerned.
110. It is to them-or, at any rate, to those of them
which sincerely desire international co-operation-that
we leave the final decision in this draft resolution as
to when further negot~ation with a view to unanimity
will be possible. The delegation of the Uniol1. of South
Africa wHl therefore also vote in favour of this draft
resolution.
111. I trust that the members of this Assembly will
not regard it as presumptuous or inopportune if I make
use of this, my first opportunity of addresGing the Assembly, to make a few general observations. on. the
principles underlying and the aims motivating the draft
resolutions now before us.
112. A reference to Article 1 of the Charter show!s
that the maintenance of international peace and security
and the suppression of acts of aggression are placed in
the very forefront of the purposes of the United Nations.
I venture to predict that the verdict of history on the
United Nations will be mainly determined by the me,asure of success achieved in the attainment of this purpose.
113. I believe that the first draft resolution now be:fore
the Assembly is a step in the direction of ensurilng a
favourable verdict from history. It envisages a pJ:actical and realistic approach to the problem of cheltking
the aggressor and ensuring international peace. .
114. The whole world realizes that the determil1lation
to suppress aggression from whatever source; tranldated
into immediate and effective action in the case of :Korea,
has done more than anything else to revitalizle the
United Nations. But we realize equally well that, ()wing
to imperfections and shortcomings in the machinery
of the United Nations, immediate and effective alction
would have been rendered impossible in the c~,se of
Korea but for certain fortuitous circumstances which
were present when the Security Council tool<: its fateful decision in June 1950.
115. We desite in these draft resolutions to mode~rnize
our machitlery' in the light of what might so· easily ha,,:~

300

General A~l!entbly-Fifth Selssion-Plenary Meetings

been ou.t tragic experience, ~nd the first draft resolu~
tion is designed specifically to remedy a proven defe~t
in our machinery for suppressing acts of aggression..
It is being perfected, so fal' as we can judge at th(~
moment, to meet any potential menace of aggression.
116. The small nations see in a United Nations
equipped with the necessary power, and imbued with the
, proper will, the best guarantee of security against aggression~ whether directed from outside or generated from
within their borders. For them it is a national insurance policy for which they are prepared to pay' the
appropriate premium in certain circumstances. They
VV';ant, however, to be satisfied that the policy covers
the risks against which they wish to be insured, and
that their· support in building up the great insurance
comnany and the premiums they pay, and will continue
to pay, will not be utilized for ulterior purposes or turned
against themselves as an instrument of interference in
their domestic affairs. If they have these guarantees,
-their enthusiasm and continued support is assured.
117. But we must face the fact that the small nations
are not without misgivings and doubts on this score.
The fear of the Frankenstein monster is ever-present.
My government, however, has indicated by its active
support in Ko,~ea that its hopes are for the present
triumphant over its fears. I trust that its great act of
faith, supplemented and confirmed by its action today,
will in the event be fully justified, and that even during
this session of the United Nations it will have proofs
which will foster and strengthen that faith.
118. Mr. CHAUVEL France (translated from
Frenc:
e ra t resolution before us, of which
France was one of the sponsors, was discussed at length
in the Fil'st Committee. I do not propose to revert to
the iegal and political arguments which were then .?ut
forward, but as my delegation took part in draf~ing
the text it might be well to recall the general principles
which guided its action.
.

119. On 27 September last [286th meeting], Mr.
Robert Schuman, speaking from this rostru1l1) referred
to the speech made [279th meeting] by the Secretary
of State of the United States, head of the United States
delegation, and expressed satisfaction at the speed with·
which the Security Council had taken its decisions and
at the effectiveness of the' measures taken to put them
into effect. He voiced the hope that the United Nations
would act with the same speed and efficiency should
the occasion arise in the future. He associated himself
with the views set forth by Mr. Acheson. At the same
time he emphasized that in a matter of such importance
it was necessary to proceed methodically, first forming
a clear picture of the ends it was desired to achieve
and, having done that, to select the means best adapted
.
to attain them. This is what has been done.
120. The objectives are clear, and I gladly avail myself
of this opportunity to say that France supports the
Chatler......the whole Charter. It supports the principles
which have been given pride of place in the Charter.
It supports international co-operation, the development
of friendly relations based on respect for equal rights
and the self-determination of peoples, and the maintenance of international peace and security. Since these
are the objectives sought, we hold that all the power
and authority of the Charter should be brought into
action. Wher~ peace and security are at stake, Fr~n.<;~

considers that the General Assembly and the Security
Council should assume all the r~sponsibilities laid upon
them by, the Charter.

121, Yet what do we see? The Security Council has
the p1'imary respons\ibility for the mainteljance of peace
and security, and it has corresponding :powers of deci~\ion. Military acti\Jn for the maintenance of peace
and security is decided upon by the Council and organized ttpon its responsibility and under its supervision.
122. . The Assembly is compete.ntto discuss any ques- .
tions or any matter within the scope of'the Charter.
It· is therefore competent to deal with subjects relating
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
123. As the Security Council has the primary responsibility in that field, the Assembly has only a secondary.
responsibility, with corresponding powers of recommendation. It is furthermore stipulated that it shall
not make any recommendations while the Security
Council is exercising, in respect of any dispute or situation, the functions assigned to it in the Charter, unless
the Security Council so requests. That is all perfectly
clear and simple.
124. If we pass from texts to facts, however, we note
first of all that the Security Council's power of decision
has been hampered in some forty-five cases. by the veto
imposed by one of the permanent members of the Coun':'
cil on proposals supported by the other four permanent
members. I am not recalling this very well known fact
in a contentious spirit. I am recalling it simply to show
that the assumption upon which the Charter was drafted
at San Francisco, namely, that there would be continued
co-operation and understanding among the five permanent members of the Security Council, has not been
borne out by the facts.
125. We further note that,. for the same reason, the
military forces which were to support United Nations
action and, if need be, to enforce it, have not been established.
126. Finally, we note that the General Assembly meets
in regular annual sessions and that under its rules of
procedure it· may meet in special session within fifteen
days of the receipt by the Secretary-General of such a
request.
I

127. Thus an issue could well arise which jeopardized
peace and security, but in which the Security Council,
because of disagreement among its permanent members,
was unable to take the decisions called ior. To convene
the General Assembly in special. session 'Would take a
fortnight. Furthermore, should the General Assembly,
when convened, be able to agree on a recommendation
entailing military as well as political action by the Member States which were prepared to support such a 'de.cision, there would be no organized means for taking
such a~tion with the speed and effectiveness which the
circumstances required.
128. Inasmuch as the hypothesis on which the Charter
W;:I,S founded has not proved accurate, the Charter could
thus remain a dead letter ill an issue jeopardizing the.
maintenance of peace and security, which is its primary
objective. Our methods, our rules, the interpretation
so far given to the texts governing. our activities, lead
Us to this lawentabl~ conclusion. It is not l\ mere theo'
I

j

299th Meeting-l November 1950

I

retical conclusion. On the contrary, in the light of recent
experience it appears to have been verified in actual fact.
129. The Council acted swiftly and effectively in the
Korean question. It might not have 'been able to do
so, however, if all five permanent members had been
present at its meetings. And it can be safely said that,
if the United States, because of circumstances extraneous to the issue, had not had substantial forces in the
immediate vicinity of Korea and had not used them to
support the Council's decision, the absence of military
forces, the organization of which is provided for in the
Charter, would have made it impossible to take international action, in sufficient time for it to be effective.
130. The Korean affair has yielded another finding-affirmative this time. The presence on the spot of a
United Nations commission made it possible for the
Security Cot{1I1cil to have first-hand information on the
,fact.s of the case immediately available. It is easy to
im...gine situations arising in other places and involving
a threat to peace and security. ThGlse situations might
continue for some time. As the Charter now stands,
there is no convenient arrangement for keeping such
situations under continuous observation and sending
observers to the spot at the request of a State which
feels itself threatened. The United Nations is thus in
danger of being taken unawares by sudden and unexpected developments,and of taking decisions without suf:rciellt knowledge of the essential facts of the
problem.
.
131. France, I repeat" stands for the Charter and for
the whole Charter. Its policy is founded on the rights
and guarantees laid down in the Charter and also on
the obligations it entails. It appears inconcc1vable to
my delegation that tho~e rights and guarantees, those
obligations, the very Charter itself, should laps~ into
impotence and ineffectiveness. It is unthinkable that
this entire machinery, designed to ,safeguard the p~3ce
and security of the world, should remain inactive when
there is a threat to peace and security. And if, as I
have shown to be the fact, there is a real danger of
such inactivity, then we must revise our customs, our
111ethods, our rules and our interpretations. \Ve 1l1ay
even have to revise the Charter.
132. It is in that spirit that the French delt:\gation
studied the statement made here by the United States
Secretary of State. It is with that desire, to ensure the
,effective application of the Charter, that my delegation
co;operated in drafting the proposal which is now sub111ltted to the General Assembly. My delegation felt, in
so ~oing, that it was unnecessary to revise the Charter,
W~IC~ itself afforded th.e means o! ensuring that its
prmclples should be apphed. It consIdered that it would
be sufficient in some respects to adjust our customs
and rules, in others to augment the means laid down
fr0111 year to year by which the United Nations could
111eet .i!s obligations; elsewhere to provide interim and
tranSItional measures' until those laid down in the
Charter had been made effective.
133. .The. draft resolution does not infrin~e upon
the SecurIty Council's competence, responsibilities or
p0'Yers. The Council should fulfil its role; if it does
so. It will be adequate, as .it has been. in the past. If,
ho~ever, fOF som~ reason, It does not fulfil its role, the
Um!ed Nabons wdl not thereby be paralysed. A special
sessIon of the General Assembly can be convened within
twenty-four hQurs and the Assembly, on a procedural

........

301

decision (.)f the Council, can discuss and adopt any
recommelL1dations which appear necessary for the main...
tenance IOr re-establishment of peace and security.
134. The United Nations will have at its disposal a
new instrument to keep it informed concerning any
incidents which' may occur-the Peace Observation
Commnssion.
135. In order to contribute to United Nations action
pending the conclusion by the Security Council of
agreements relating to armed forces, Member States
will survey the resources at their .dispo~al and maintain within their national forces elements which can
be made available to take part in any possible collective
intetvention:
,
136. In conclusion, the draft resolution states that
no mea.sure, however good, will of itself suffice to ,en..
sur1e peace; the will of men is needed and that will-which inspired the joint draft resolution submitted by
Iraq and Syria and unanimously adopted by the First
,Committee-must be demonstrated by the observance
of the principles and rules established in common, and
by respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
which in turn presuppose the attainment of decent ~co­
nomic and social conditions in all countries. No reminder
could be more timely or more consistent with the spirit
of the Charter; which is designed to remove ~he scourge
of wa1;',» to reaffirm the dignity and worth of the hU11'la!1
person, a'~ld to establish and maintain justice, progress,
freedom and tolerance, without which there is no liberty.
137. .such is our draft; such is the'spirit which has
motivated it. Much has been f?id about total war; let
us speak of total peace. It is to that f!pQ.ce that France
is commi~ted, it is that peace which Franeellopes will
be estabhshed and extended. In that hope the Frerwh
'delegation commends this draft to the General A,ssembly.

138. Mr. BEBLER Vu oslavia (translatt~d from
e raft resolution we are discu~ising is
Frenc :
of great importance in the history of our Otganization. It suggests new methods which are designed to
strengthen international security, and in which tbe
Assembly is called, on to play a preponderant part. '
139. Does the draft reflect discerningly the present
international situation? Does it provide for th.e measures
which should be taken in the face of this situation to
lessen the danger, or rather the dangers, threatening
the world at the present time? Those are the questions
which occur to every Member of the United Nations
'
and to which we must reply.
140. Yugoslavia is a profoundly peaceful country. Our
peoples are jealous of their independence and have
never, coveted the territory of others. Never at any
moment in its history has Yugoslavia been an aggressor.
To?ay, aft~r suffering the nazi-fascist aggression, after
seemg theIr country devastated by a war which was
imposed on them, the peoples of Yugoslavia are pursuing the enormous task of economic reconstruction
and cultural rehabilitation. It is natural in these circumstances that the peoples of Yugoslavia should be
more attached than ever to the cause of peace. Our
people's attachment to the cause of peace and their profound desire to preserve their country from the horrors .
of a new war have found adequate expression in our
~o"ern~ent's fort:ign P?licy in every aeve~opment in
mternatlonaJ relatIons sInce the last great w~r•

302
---_._-

General Assembl~r-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

141. It is pi"obably not superfluous to point out what
our foreign poHcy has been since the time when a particularly strong: tension became manifest in our part
of the world. The causes of that tension are generally
known. They ate aggressive pressure against my country, accusations that it is preparing to invade neighbouring countries, systematically organized frontier incidents, and so on.
.
142. In these circumstances, our' government is doing
everything possible to pre:vent that tension from becoming worse and the provocations from having any serious
consequences. It has retained its presence of mind and
. has abstained from any action which might even indirectiy increase the tension created by others in the
Balkans.
.
143. Furthermore, as our Foreign Minister, Mr.
Kardelj, stated in the course of the general debate at
this session of the General Assembly [282nd meeting],
our governmetit has declared its readiness to conclude
agreements for lasting peace and non-aggression with
each one of our neighbours.
144. In the same statement, Mr. Kardelj proposed a
principle, which is enunciated in a special draft resolution [A/1399] , under which any State finding itself
engaged in hostilities with another State would be required to declare itself ready to cease fire within a
period of not more them twenty-four hours if the other
party did the same. The adoption of such a principle
would create a fresh obstacle to aggression.
145. Mr. Kardelj added that Yugoslavia was ready
to put that principle into practice, whether or not it
was adopted by the General Assembly as a rule applicable t9 all.
146. I believe that by all the acts I have enumerated,
and also by others, Yugoslavia has clearly proved that
it intends to remain strictly and unequivocally faithful
to its policy of peace and its obligations under the
Charter.
147. On the other hand, our government IS perf;ctly
conscious of the gravity of the international situation
and of the obligations both towards our own peoples and
towards the international community which that situation imposes on it.
148. Seen from that angle and in the light of our own
experience, the draft resolution obviously has solid
advantages. The action so far taken by the United
Nations, while constituting a serious check on tendencies
dangerous to the peace, has not been able to prevent the
growth of international tension from year to year until
this year, when it attained disquieting proportions. This
summer saw the outbreak of a war which, although the
military operations have been local, has had world-wide
repercussions and increased the general anxiety to a
point not previously experienced. The situation is certainly grave, and, the draft resolution before us proposes
that we should so direct our efforts th:lt a country which
intended to threaten or break the peace or to commit an
act of aggression would be confronted not only by the
means at the disposal of the Security Council under
Chapter VII of the Charter but also by new means at
the disposal of the Assembly. .
149. The most serious objection so far made to the
draft is that it provides a procedure which is politically

--

unsound since it is allegedly contrary to. that policy of
understa.nding among the' great Powers' of which the
legal eJ/;pression is paragraph 3 of Article 27 of the
CharteJ: ; that is the paragraph which establishes the rule
of una'llimity among the permanent members of the
Security Coun~il or, in other words, the right of veto.
150. 'The absolute need for harmony, understanding
and cO:\1certed action among the great Powers cannot be
doubted. None can deny that an understanding among
the great Powers based on respect for the principle of
the equlal rights of States, great and small, and on re~
spectfor the equal rights of peoples arid theh' right to
self-det~~rmination, is the solid basis of, a lasting peace.
Nevertheless, facts must be seen in their true light. If we
want to stop this slide down a dangerous slope which
may lea/cl us toa new great war, immediately- attainable
solutions must be sought for present problems.
151. 'The fact that there is disagreement among the
great Powers has been demonstrated so often that it cannot be denied. We have to take that fact into account if
we wish our decisions tG. be more than empty words.
What the sponsors of the draft resolution had in mind
was to take steps to ensure that this disagreement among
the: great Powers did not pave the way to another war.
The possibility they envisaged was that aggression might
take place in circumstances such that the lack of agreem(:nt among the great Powers prevented the Security
Council from taking action. Were they justified in envisaging such a possibility ? Would such a hypothetical
case cover a wide category of possible armed conflicts?
We believe so.
152. An unprejudiced view of the activity of the Security Council and of the present international situation
shows us that the Council has been and will be able to act
with. some effectiveness only in the case of purely local
wars-by which I mean wars local both in form and in
content, such as the wars in Palestine, Indonesia and
Kashmir. On the other hana, it is evidently improbable
that the Security Council could ever act in the case of
a war which was local only in form and essentially
affected to any degree the interests of one or other of
the great Powers. In such a case the Council would
probably be divided and unable to take appropriate decisions. Such a war would constitute a much greater
danger to the general peace than would a purely local
war. If. the present system were retained, the role of the
Security Council would become nonexistent at precisely
the time when the danger of a general conflagration was
greatest. The United Nations would thus be reduced to
observing passively the conduct of the local war and
its spread to other areas.
153. It is objected that the majority, when dealing
with the question in the General Assembly, might dic..
tate a recommendation and impose it on the minority,
which in the Assembly has not the defensive weapon of
the veto which it has in the Security Council.
154. In our opinion, the opportunities available to the
minority in the Councjl and those available to t1}e majority in the Assembly are very similar. In both case~
the parties concerned can in some measure dictate their
wishes. The veto enables a minority in the Coum,'iil to
dictate inaction; the majority in the Assembly ma.kes it
possible to dictate some action.
155.. The majority in the Assembly might, of course,
make biased recommendations harmful to the cause of

303

299th Meeting-l November 1950

,....-..---..-----..---..-----------------

de 43 of the Charter. For five years the Security Council has been unable to implement Article 43; to wait
until Article 43 was put into eff~ct would be tantamount
to agreeing to resign out'selves to the absence of those
(armed forces and to let the United Nations remain in
the future as impotent as it has been so far and as impotent as was the League of Nations.
161. Secondly, it is suggested that, in the event of aggression and failure of the Security Council to act, the
General Assembly should be convened only a fortnight
latl~f instead of within twenty-fo1,1r hours. That proposal
of the Soviet Union is cert~inly. especially negative, not
to say astounding. Why sh(lUld there be such a delay,
during which the United N~.tiollS would be compietely
passive, in case of aggression? Whom could it benefit,
the aggressor or the victim of aggression? The answer is
clear. Has the USSR delegation forgotten the advance
of Hitler's army during the two weeks which followed
the attack against the Soviet Union in 1941? That army
went from Warsaw to Bialystok and occupied a territory equal to that of several smalll coun.tdes put wgether.,
162. We have not heard a single ~01lvincing.argu11lent
in the Council in favour of that proposal. That is hot
surprising, as there is not and cannoti~be such an ~rgu­
ment. It is therefore quite natural thai a USS:f,t amendment of such a kind should be unacceptable tCI llS.
163. Our delegation proposed certain ameudinents to
the draft resolution at the beginning of the dil~cussion
in the Committee; two of those were amendments of
principle.
164. The first amendment was to the effect that it
should be clearly stated in the resolution that the General Assembly would consider recommending the use of
armed forces only in case of armed aggression and not
in cases of threats to the peace, that is, cases where the
158; Furthermore, if there is real faith in the' concept
potential
aggressor had 110t yet committed an act of
of the United Nations, and belief that its very existence
armed violence. The aim of that amendment was to prerepresents an important step in the' development of cooperation among peoples in the sense of making inter- . vent the resolution from· being construea as permitting
national relations progressively more democratic, it . any measure which might in practice amo.unt to preventive war. The sponsors of the draft resolution and the
mu~t also be believed that the Gener~l Assembly, in
Committee acted very wisely in accepting our amendwhich all the States Members of the Umted Nations are
ment and including'lt in the text which is being disrepr~sented ona basis of equal rights, is much better
cussed in the General Assembly today.
qualIfied than any other organ of the United Nations to
exp.ress the general will of the peoples of the world, who
165. Our second amendment [A/C.1/582] was to the
deSire ~eace. and not war. The peoples ex~ect us to do
effect that the following paragra,ph should' be included
every~hmg m our power to strengthen mternational
i1'1 the preamble of the draft resolution:
security and to lessen the danger of aggression and of
itRecognizing
on the one hand, that the Charter
a ne'! war. The resolution which we are to adopt undoes
not
authorize
the United Nations to intervene
questI?nably represents an attempt to achieve that end.
in
matters
which
are
essentially within the domestic
T~at IS why we voted for the draft in the First Com:jurisdiction of any State and, on the other hand, that
mlttee, and that is why we shall do the same in the
every
activity of the United Nations should be based
~en~ral Assembly. We shall do so with all the more conon
respect
for the principle of equal rights and selfviction because it is the only concrete and practicable
determination
of peoples, and that consequently every
p!oposal for the strengthening of international secumeasure of collective security' should be in harmony
rulty, whereas the counter-proposals embodied in the
with these principles."
'
.SSR a~endment~ do. not represent the smallest practtcal'$tep m that directIOn.
Our inttl"ntion in proposing that amendment was that
the
General Assembly should explicitly guarantee that
159.. What is the substance of the main amendments . the new
machinery would never be used to contravene
subnlltted by the .Soviet Union?
the two· principles of the Charter mentioned above, i11
16£0' In !he first pl~ce, we.are asked to reject that part
other words, that it would not be used in connexion
o the draft resolutIon which recommends "that States
with a civil war or a war of national liberation in a nonsh?uld e~tablish, within their national arriiiesJ armed
self-governing country. We believe that the authors of
ntts ~hlch w(.'t.tld be at the disposal of the United l~athe draft resolution and the Committee itself acted
i
Ions 111 ca~e of a..~gression, and to do nothing in that
wisely in introducing one of the above-mentioned princii respect until the Security Council has carried out Artiples into the revised text, by adding to the original draft
peace. But it would obviously be mistaken to state that
the majority must necessarily be wrong and "requires
the guardianship of the Security Council in all circumstances. In substance that statement would be equivalent
t(\ maintaining that the very idea of the United Nations
is a mistake, that the principle of the sovereign equality
of States has no practical meaning, and that the privilege of the veto should be the supreme law of the inter.national community, to which even the intere~.ts of
general peace should be subordinated.
156. The dilemma, however, is not really to decide
which of our two principal organs, the Assembly or the
Council, deserves most confidence when it is a question
of taking wise-and timely-decisions with the object of
checking actual aggression. The dilemma is to determine which is the better course if there is actual agression and the permanent members of the Cou~llcil cannot
agree-action or inaction on the part of the Assembly.
157. Clearly in such circumstances it woul<fl be prefer-'
able to give the Assembly the right and the power to
take action, for the other alternative would mean that
our Organization would have no means of ensuring collective security. That was what Mr. Kardelj, the head
of our delegation, had in fnind when he stated in the
First Committee, during the discussion of this draft
resolution, that Yugoslavia would prefer even a somewhat defective system of international. security to no
system at all. In making that statement, 1\11'. Kardelj
of course had in mind the fact that the Security Council had already shown its impotence in that respect by
failing to fulfil its duty under Article 43 of the Charter,
which instructs the Council to negotiate special agreements with the object of having armed forces placed at
its disposal.

J

r

L

-304

General 'A8eeDihJ,y-Fifth Seeeion-Plenary Meetinge
,'I

_,

what is now the second sub..paragrallh of the first para..
graph of the preamble, which sim!)ly repro~uc~s t~e
text of Article 1, paragraph 2 of the Qlarter./Nabtrah}?
we regret that the principle of non-interfer€lrlCe in the
internal·afl.'~Jrs of a country has not been explicitly mentioned. It would have made the resc)lutior,t clearer.
Nevert'hdes\s, the amendments which were introduced
did add to the clarity of the text, precisely it'~ respect of
th~ points about which we had made reservations at the
tieginning of the discussion in the Committee.
166. For all these reasons, the Yugoslav delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution submitted by
the First Committee; it will vote for the individual parts
of the draft and for the draft as a whole.
167. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We have on our agenda two items on which the Sixth
Committee has submitted reports. As long as those
~ items have not been disposed of, the Sixth Committee
. cannot meet and its members have no choice but to attend our meetings. If th~ Assembly agrees~ we shouM
be able, I hope, to dispose of these two 'items within a
few minutes.

b,.

Reparation for injuries incurred
the semce of
the UnitMl Nations: report of the Sixth Committee (A/1420)
[Agenda item 50]

168. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The first item concerns reparation for injuries incurred
in the service of the United Nations. It will be seen from
the Sixth Committee's report that the draft resolution
was adopted in that Committee by 48 votes to none, with
3 abstentions. I shall put to the vote the draft resolution
submitted by the Sixth Committee [A/1420].
The draft resolution was adopted by 48 votes to none.
Permanent invitation to tlte Arab· League to attend
sessions of the General Assembly: report of th3.
Sixth Committee (A/1M2)
.
[Agenda item 58]

"

Mr. Kural (Turkey), Rapporteur, presented the report of the Sixth Committee and the accompanying draft
resolution (A/1442).
The draft resolution was adopted by 49 votes to l J,
with 5 abstentions.

Unitedaetion for peace (c()ntinued)
169. . Mr. MICHALOWSKI ,{Poland): At the last
stage"M ffie'diScusslOn oo""what iSkiiown as the Acheson
plan, we find ourselves almost at the same point where
we were at the beginning of our long discussion in the
First Committee.
170. The first draft resolution before us is bad. It not
only violates the law, but it is illegal as well as harmful
and dangerous for the future of our Organization.
171, Before the voting machine is put into motion
and before you put the stamp of doubtful lega.lity on
this draft resolution, the Polish delegation deems it its
duty to raise its voice once more in protest and in warning. We shall briefly reiterate our 'Viewpoint because
our arguments, in our opinion; prove irrefutably the
unacceptability of this draft resolution, and explain our
negative attitude to it.

172. We had the opportunity to state our arguments
very extensively during. the discussions in the First
Committee. Wc heard there from many delegations
crushing and irrefutable legal criticisms of the principles
of the draft resolution, Even in the speeches of those
representatives who on the last day mechanically raised
their right hands in affirmation or cautiously retired be..
hind the safe position of abstention, we could hear
expressions of uncertainty and anxiety, expressions of
doubt and reservations.

173. Our arguments have not been refuted by the
sponsors of the draft resolution. The doubts have not
been dispelled; they have merely been belittled through
phraseology and false pathos. Art~ieties have not been
allayed,' they have been si~enced by pressure and
strangled by threats. It could not be otherwise. This
draft resolution was intended to heal (lur Organization
and to d~minish the international tension, but if it is
erron~ous and illegal, it is so first of an because i,t is
based on a false evaluation of the reasons of the political
tension, and on a lack of correct diagnosis of the sickness which is to be cured.
174. The threat of a new war which hangs over mankind did not develop; spontaneously. It was built up by
the spreading of false ideas: for instance,) the idea of the
impossibility of political'and economic co-operation between two different systems, namely, socialism and
capitalism. It was built up by harmful myths, for instance, the myth that the "American way of life" must
be imposed upon all the ,nations of the world. It was
built up by the breaking of mutual understandings and
agreements forged in the fires of the last just war; thus,
for instance, the four-,Power agreement for the control
of Germany ha,s been broken and the agreements on the
liquidation of 'Che consequences of the war, on demilitarization, on denazification and on democratization have
been violated.
1

I

175. The spark of a new conflict has been fanned on by
efforts to subordinateeconOthically the major part of
the world to one big Pmyer, to one centre of political
control. The Marshall Plan, the loans with political
strings attached to them, the discrimination in international trade are well known facts. Furthermore, the
creation of a military bloc, the North Atlantic Treaty
and projects of new pacts, the enormous programme
of armaments within the United States, the thrusting
of armaments .programmes on other nations, the promotion of war hysteria, warmongering, the threats to use
the atomic and hydrogen bombs and, finally, the open
aggression on Korea-all these are but a short enumeration, but a part of those facts' and actions which have
resulted in the tense situation in which we find ourselves
at present.

176. Mr. Acheson did not remember-or rather he
preferred not to remember-all those facts while drafting his resolution. Instead, we were given today by
Mr. Dulles, s}l?eaking on behalf of the United States
delegation) a striking example of distortion of history;
I refer to his false statement about events in 1939 when
Poland became a victim of Hitlerite aggression, and his
false, untrue and slanderous insinuations concerning
friendly and fraternal relations between my country and
the Soviet Union. These are only two examples of this
distortion of the facts of history which are really below
the level of serious polemics.
'

299th Meeting-l November 1950

305
.....

-

--------------------.;;;,.-.---------------------~-----.
-.'.....

183. As we have heard it stated here within the frame..
work of Mr. /Acheson's total dip~omacy-the princip1e
of understandings based on the might of one side and
the total capitulation of the other-we say that this is
not a diplomacy of peace. In fact, this is not diplomacy
at all. This policy is wholly unr~alistic since it is based
on the mistaken premise that tht other party will yield
to intimidation. This plan of ~J.fr. Acheson's. is completely
alien to the spirit of the Charter and to the ideals of our
Organization, and that is why all efforts to implement it
by means of the draft resolution which we are now con..
sidering should be branded for what they really are and
categorically rejected.
178. Let us return once more" briefly, to the para184. I wish now to pass to a third major reason for
graphs of the draft resolution. Let us look calmly and
rejecting the United States plan, namely, that military
realistically at this black magic of the American witch
forces
would be placed at the disposal of the General
doctors.
Assembly. At~ we stated in the First COlnmittee, such a
provision would amount to a violation at one blow of
.·179. First of all, the draft resolution very substantially
thirteen articles of the Charter, and primarily of Articles
impairs the importance, the role and the prestige of the
43 and 106. Thl~ draft resolution ignores the special
most vital organ of the United Nations, the Sec1.1.rity
agreements which are necess~Liy for the creation of these
Council. By depriving it of the primary responsibility for
forces and, what is more imlportant, it ignores the fact
the maintenance of international peace and security, arid
that, under the Charter, th~: sole organ authorized to
by depriving it not only of a decisive voice in these
deal with these forces and to use them in circumstances
matters but also of control of the military forces of the
provided for in the Charter is the Security Council.
United Nai:ions, the resolution would reduce the Security Council to the role .of a debating society-a
185. What the sponsors of the draft resolution are
society which is limited to taking stock of the opinions
trying to create is not a military force serving the United
of its eleven members in order to refer problems to the
Nations, but an instrumertt to divide and disunite the
"proper" tribunal, the General .Assembly. But the
nations of the world, an instrument of the imperialistic
General Assembly is not the proper tribunal; it has no
policy of the United States. In actual fact, it would be
authority to intervene in cases of a threat to international
the enlarged army of the Atlantic bloc, working for
peace and security; it cannot replace the Security Counobvious aims and in an obvious direction.
cil because it lacks the competence of that body,
186. It would doubtless bear a very dose resemblance
180. Articles 10, 11 and 14 of the Charter leave no
to those .forces which are today in Korea illegally
doubt on this point. Th~se two organs, the Security
usurping the United Nations flag. What these forces
Council and the General Assembly, cannot be substiare actually doing under this flag is imposing despised
tuted one for the other; they merely complement each
rulers upon the people of Korea, colonizing the country
other. All efforts to violate this legal construction
and creating. one more base for the United States imamount to open and flagrant violations of the .Charter.
perialism in the Far East. That this operation could be
Moreover, they constitute a violation of one of the
carri.ed out under the banner of the United Nations has
fundamental-principles of our Organization-the principroved a great convenience for United States politicians.
ple of the unanimity of the great Powers. I do not think
187. Obviously~ however, the scope of this operation is
that there is any necessity to stress the importance of
too
small for them, the contribution of otlher nations. too
this principle or to repeat all the arguments by which,
limited,
the price paid in American blood too high. These
from the days of the San Francisco Conference until
politicians would therefore have us create for them an
now, the necessity for the faithful implementation of
international
force-on a much larger scale-to· be
this principle has been confirmed.
used whenever a nation aspires to rise in defence of its
own freedom and sovereignty.
181. Secondly, the necessity to find a compromise and
to reach understanding, to conciliate divergent interests
188. I should like to ask all the representatives who
and to find grounds for common decisions by the great
are voting on this draft resolution to consider its fuU
Powers in the interests of mankind, is self-evident.
consequences and how far it will lead us; Let them reThroughout the war, and even during the years which
member that he who sows the wind reaps a tempest.
followed, we had ample evidence of the possihility of such
189. The fourth reason why the United States plan is
co-operation..The difficulties which arose are not and
wholly
unacceptable is the illegality and harmful charcannot be looked upon as proof that this conception is
acter of the creaHon of the so-called collective measures
wrong. These difficulties should be overcome by new
'committee. It is planned that this organ, which was
and increased efforts towards conci1i~Ltion, by the exnot envisaged in our Charter, should illegally co-operate
haustion of all the possibilities of compromise decisions,
in the •unlawful disposition of military forces by the
and by a better understanding of each other's viewpoints.
General Assembly, and that it should, at th~ same time,
182. However, if an attempt is made to substitute' the . constitute a body competitive with the Military Staff
Committee. The' Military Staff' Committee provided for
~u~e ?f t~e mechanical. ~3;jority .for that of unanimity,
IntimIdatIon for concIlIation, d~ktat for compromise,
in the Cha;rter has been constitute<rand is functioning.
capitulation for mutual concession, interVeJ.l.:ion for
In these CIrcumstances, the proposed new committee is
sovereignty and pax amel'icana for world peace, then,
obviously absurd and harmful, because it ·violates the
We say, this is not a vocabulary of peace.
law, infringes the authority of the Security CounCil,
177. A cure whicQ is not based upon a correct diagnosis
automatically falls into the category of quackery. The
draft resolution before us proposes to cure the deficiency
in international co-operation in this unscientific manner.
The cures prescribed for the world by the American
quack doctors deal with the delicate organs of our Organization and the whole system of collective security~
which is one of its1'bases, in a brutal and harmful manner. The juggling with the rules and paragraphs of the
Charter warps the whole structure of the United Nations which was painstakingly and unanimously erected
in San Francisco.
.

~

306\~

General Assembl,r--Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

indirectly violates the principle of the unanimity of the
big Powers, and facilitates the imposition of the will of
one big Power upon anot~er.
190. All the points which I have just outlined can lead
to only one conclusion, a conclusion which can be
summed up simply in this sentence: the United States
plan is an ill-concealed attempt to alter the Charter..
Unable or unwilling to utilize the legal means provided
in Article 108 of the Charter, the United States and a
number of other countries are attempting to effectuate
the. change under camouflage. This is a step in international relations which is unacceptable atld highly
dangerous.
191. I wish to stress here that, even if the provisions
of the draft resolution were not so wrong and harmful as
they in fact are, and even if its aims were not so obviously dangerous to international co-operation, the
-Polish delegation would still, for reasons of principle,
have the strongest objections to this weakly disguised
attack upon the Charter; for we take a very firm stand
on the inviolability of international treaties, on respect
for the signatures affixed thereto, and on the loyal fulfilm~nt ()f the obligations undertaken therein. Those
who wish any clauses of a given treaty to be changed
must make use of the special provisions of the law.
This procedure is acknowledged by international law
and accepted principles of justice and is commonly
enforced in international practice.

192. As our delegation stated at the very outset of the
discussion on this question, we approached the United
States plan in a very realistic mood. We tried to find in
it those positive elements which could help our Organiza:tion and which we could accept. That is why we supported the provisions in the draft resolution for the convening of a special session of the General Assembly
when necessary and for the creation of a kind of patrol
commission. This is evidence of our realistic approach
and attitude to the work of the United Nations. This is
proof that vl:'e consider draft resolutions upon their
merits and not from the viewpoint of political sympathies
for their authors. This cannot be said of certain of the
other 4elegation~ which usually vote against any draft
resolutton suhlDltted by the USSR, Czechslovakia or
Poland, even when they openly admit that they consider
such proposals correct.

......

193.. But our support for two sections of this draft
reso1ution does not weaken in any way our negative
attitude to the draft resolution as a whole. In our
opiniorl, it is wrong, harmful, illegal and dangerous.
In the cocktail which Mr. Acheson is concocting for us,

Printed in U.S.A.

we find too little ambrosia an[l much too much hemlock
for our taste. This is a dati;gerous. drink which could
poisoll-international relatiori~. Possibly it. may be extremely convenient at the present time for the United
States, in order to carry out its own political goals, to
weaken our Organization. But wc: ask the General Assembly to 1001<: ahead to what would be the eventual results of such a violation of the Charter, of the law and
of the whole structure of our Organization;
194. A sharp line must be drawn between the positive
and useful aspects of this draft r~s?lut~on and its harmful and illegal part. In our opullon, the amendments
offered by the Soviet Union draw this line. If the
stipulations concerning the transfer of competence from
the Security Council to the General Assembly were
deleted and also the provisions regarding the placing
of military forces at the disposal of the General Assembly. and the 'collective me('.Lsurescommittee, the draft
resolution would be clea,used of the illegal and harmful
elements which I have described. The resolution thus
constructed wI;>uld constitute a real achievement for this
session of the General Assembly. It would improve our
system of collective security and peaceful relations between the nations and be~ween political systems.
195. In addition, the Polish delegation considers that
it would be a very useful contribution to our common
cause to accept the draft resolution of the Soviet Union
[A/1467] which recommends that the five permanent
members of the Security Council should implement
Article 106 of the Charter, that is, should initiate consultations in order to ag:ee upon common action to
maintain international peace and security. For notwithstanding the difficulties experienced in recent years, the
unilateral decisions and the faits accomplis, we still consider that in order to diminish international tension and
to agree upon crucial questions it is necessary to initiate
harmonious collaboration among the big Powers based
upon sound compromises, justice and :t;espect for the
United Nations Charter. Moreover, we are certain that
the possibilities for such an understanding exist.
196. That is why, instead of voting for proposals that
would create international tension, that would render
international cpllaboration more difficult, and that would
impair the strength of our Organization, we ha\f) to
direct all our efforts towards its consolidation. We have
to work for the conciliation of the differences and for
the strengthening of international collaboration. Only
in this way shall we be working for the idea which binds
all the nations of the world, without exception-the
idea of world peace.
.
.

The m~eting rose at 5.55 p.m.

A-40464-November 1950---3,600
