United Nations

S/PV.6656

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6656th meeting
Friday, 11 November 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cabral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Portugal)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-58922 (E)

*1158922*

S/PV.6656

reached the village of Goli, located 25 kilometres north
of Abyei town. The entire group, numbering several
thousand people, with hundreds of thousands of heads
of cattle, is expected to reach the Kiir/Bahr el-Arab
river by the end of December.

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of South Sudan and the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Hilde
Johnson, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Special
Representative Johnson, who is joining today’s
meeting via video teleconference from Juba, South
Sudan.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Hervé Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the situations in the Sudan and South
Sudan. Given the critical issues facing both countries
and the significance of the peacekeeping operations
there, I decided to conduct my first field visit to the
Sudan and South Sudan, from 30 October to
6 November, in my capacity as Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations. My visit gave
me an opportunity to meet with the most senior
officials from both Governments and President Mbeki,
who, as the Council is aware, is the Chair of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel.
I will begin by discussing the situation in Abyei.
As Council members are aware, the North-South
migration has begun and, for the first time, will involve
crossing an international border. Specifically, the
annual migration of the Misseriya nomadic community
through Abyei has begun. Some members of the group,
herding approximately 2,000 head of cattle, have

2

Given the ongoing presence of the Sudanese
Armed Forces in Abyei, there is a real risk of serious
violence during this year’s migration if returning
internally displaced persons attempt to prevent the
migration. While President Salva Kiir assured me that
his Government would guarantee the peaceful
migration of unarmed nomads, there are signs that
other officials in the south do not want the migration to
take place, especially given the ongoing presence of
the Sudanese Armed Forces in Abyei.
I visited Abyei and was deeply concerned by the
extent of the destruction in the wake of the occupation
by the Sudanese Armed Forces in May. At the same
time, I was very impressed by the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) Force
Commander and his staff. UNISFA has been fully
deployed, with 2,894 military personnel, including the
full troop strength of the second battalion. The
deployment of the battalion’s equipment and the
construction of its company operating bases in the
Northern Sector are progressing, while its personnel
are facing extensive demining and engineering work.
The Force’s engineers have rebuilt the Banton
bridge, which I inaugurated on my way to Abyei. This
has restored a key crossing point between Agok and
Abyei town, which had been destroyed during the
fighting in May and which will facilitate the return of
displaced persons, humanitarian access and UNISFA
operations. I should report, however, that President
Al-Bashir has stated that the Sudanese Armed Forces
would withdraw only following the establishment of
the Abyei Area Administration.
(spoke in English)
With respect to the situations in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile, the Government of the Sudan
has accused South Sudan of fuelling the fighting and
providing direct support to the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army (SPLA)-North, warning that
continued support would have grave consequences for
bilateral relations. President Kiir has denied support
for the SPLA-North and has accused the Government
of the Sudan of supporting insurgent groups in South
Sudan.

11-58922

S/PV.6656

During my visit, I of course strongly urged both
sides to address those issues through peaceful
negotiations and to make the compromises necessary to
resolve them. I expressed the deep concern of this
Council and of the Secretary-General over the recent
increase in North-South tensions, as well as the
continued lack of progress on Abyei and other postComprehensive Peace Agreement issues. I stressed to
them, as was noted by Special Envoy Menkerios
yesterday, that the only course of action available is to
recommit to a peaceful negotiated settlement of
outstanding issues and to an immediate de-escalation
of the current tensions.
However, recent reports of bombings in the
border area between Upper Nile and Blue Nile states,
and of a cross-border attack today in Kwek, in Upper
Nile, have added to these tensions. On 9 November, the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS) was informed by Government of
South Sudan officials that up to nine bombs had been
dropped in the area of New Quffa and Yafta, in Maban
county, Upper Nile state, very near the border with
Blue Nile State. The areas are gathering points for tens
of thousands of refugees from the fighting in Blue Nile
state. Humanitarian partners report that approximately
55,000 people, including refugees, returnees and
internally displaced persons, are currently on the move
as a result of the bombing.
Yesterday, UNMISS confirmed that the Sudanese
Armed Forces dropped at least two bombs near the
Yida refugee camp in the vicinity of an SPLA camp
along the border between Unity and Southern Kordofan
states, with unknown casualties. There are reports —
still unconfirmed — of an additional two bombs
dropped in the area. The Yida camp shelters
approximately 10,000 people displaced from the
fighting in Southern Kordofan. UNMISS has relocated
at least 12 non-governmental organization and United
Nations agency staff members from the area, and
additional relocations are ongoing. The Mission is, of
course, also working to verify the locations of the
reported bombings.
Today, the SPLA reported to the media a crossborder attack by the Sudanese Armed Forces in Kwek,
in the oil fields of Upper Nile state, causing up to
20 casualties. The Sudanese Armed Forces have since
denied any responsibility for that attack, and the
Mission is working to verify these reports and to
evaluate any additional humanitarian needs in the

11-58922

affected areas. As a matter of background, prior to
9 July, both the Yida and the Quffa areas were close to
SPLA Ninth and Tenth Division locations, which were
largely composed of combatants from the Nuba
Mountains and Blue Nile State.
As members of the Council are aware, yesterday
President Kiir delivered a press conference to the
diplomatic community in Juba. The conference was in
part a response to the Government of the Sudan’s letter
of 4 November to the Council, and also covered the
reported bombings along the border. President Kiir
again denied support to the SPLA-North and reiterated
his commitment to resolving issues with the Sudan
through dialogue. He stated that the bombings were a
violation of the territorial sovereignty of South Sudan
and that the attacks were on civilian refugees from the
fighting in Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan states. He
reiterated his claim that the Government of the Sudan
was supporting insurgent groups in South Sudan and
warned of imminent attacks by militia forces in Maban
county, Upper Nile state. While noting that his
Government would not tolerate these activities,
President Kiir stated that South Sudan would not be
drawn into fighting with the North.
I believe that the situation in the Sudan and South
Sudan is at a difficult juncture, with very low trust
between the countries, heightened rhetoric, and mutual
accusations of support to insurgencies in the territory
of the other. In this environment, neither country is
making sufficient progress towards building a strong
and mutually beneficial relationship. Tensions along
the border may also flare up into serious violence
during the migration period, particularly in the Abyei
area, from which neither side has fully withdrawn.
Bombings by the SAF in the border areas
between Sudan and South Sudan are a major concern,
not only for the relationship between the two countries,
but also for the tens of thousands of civilians in the
affected areas. While neither side appears ready to
return to war, there is a concerning pattern of
escalation and destabilization that could lead to largescale confrontation and put more civilian lives at risk.
It is absolutely imperative that both Governments take
the necessary steps to de-escalate the situation, ensure
that civilian lives are protected, and resume peaceful
dialogue.
During my visit to the Sudan, I also spent a day
in El-Fasher and Shangil Tobaya camp, and discussed

3

S/PV.6656

the situation in Darfur with a wide range of
interlocutors. While the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) continues to
do its best in particularly difficulties circumstances, I
was struck by the differing perceptions of the situation
on the ground on the part of key stakeholders. In
reality, there has been progress, but at the same time
real challenges continue to cause deep concern. It is
true that the security situation has improved since the
height of the conflict, and that the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur provides a framework and opportunity
for concrete progress. Indeed, some internally
displaced persons have been able to return to certain
areas.
At the same time, however, new displacements
have occurred in other areas, tens of thousands of
internally displaced persons continue to live in difficult
conditions in the camp, a number of armed movements
remain outside the peace process, widespread banditry
hampers civilian life, access remains limited in a
number of areas, and much more needs to be done to
address impunity. Moreover, with the end of the rainy
season, renewed hostilities remain a real threat.
On the security situation, as members of the
Council know, UNAMID was attacked twice in the past
month, losing four peacekeepers, including one this
past weekend. While the Government promised me its
full cooperation in the investigation of the first attack,
we remain deeply concerned about the need for further
cooperation in creating a secure environment and
bringing to justice those responsible for attacks on the
United Nations.
(spoke in French)
The preparation of the road map for peace in
Darfur, as requested by the Council, is an opportunity
to bring the international community together to speak
with one voice on Darfur. UNAMID and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations are working
closely with our partners, including the African Union
and the Special Envoys, in the preparation of the road
map. At the same time, we continue to work our United
Nations humanitarian partners and the African Union
on the review of UNAMID uniformed personnel,
which was also requested by the Council. In particular,
we must bear in mind the need to formulate a common
assessment of the situation on the ground and to
strengthen our coordination mechanisms. We trust that
these exercises will help us to establish a better

4

coordinated international approach in support of the
peace process, humanitarian assistance and early
recovery in Darfur.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ladous for his briefing.
(spoke in English)
I now give Mr. Ladsous the floor once again so
that he may read out the statement of Mr. Menkerios.
Mr. Ladsous: I shall now read out the statement
of Special Envoy Haile Menkerios.
“I have just returned from several weeks of
consultations with the Governments of the Sudan
and South Sudan and with the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel (AUHIP) in
support of the finalization of the postComprehensive
Peace
Agreement
(CPA)
negotiations between the Sudan and South Sudan
and of the implementation of the 20 June
agreement on Abyei, and I am happy to brief the
Council today on the state of these negotiations.
“To date, a number of CPA benchmarks and
critical
post-CPA
arrangements
remain,
unfortunately, unresolved and continue to be a
major source of tension between the Sudan and
South Sudan. These crucial matters include the
resolution of the final status of Abyei, the holding
of popular consultations in Southern Kordofan
and Blue Nile States, the demarcation of the
border and the establishment of border-security
mechanisms, as well as oil revenue-sharing and
related transitional financial arrangements.
“While engagement continues between the
two parties to resolve these pending issues
through dialogue, tensions have continued to be
exacerbated by, first, the eruption of fighting in
the areas bordering Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile States, as well as internal strife within some
areas bordering South Sudan, with each country
accusing the other of supporting its armed
opponents;
secondly,
delays
in
the
implementation of the 20 June agreement on an
interim administration and security arrangement
for Abyei; and, thirdly, similar implementation
delays in demilitarizing the common border zone
and starting joint monitoring of the zone, which
the two sides had agreed to do.

11-58922

S/PV.6656

“In Abyei, the overall dynamics on the
ground have not changed significantly since
20 June, despite the timely deployment of the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). UNISFA reports that the Sudanese
Armed Forces and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army forces have remained, respectively, in the
areas north and south of the Kiir River, although
the Government of South Sudan has declared its
readiness to withdraw completely should the
North do so unconditionally, consistent with the
stipulations of the agreement.
“The continued presence of troops from
both sides in the Abyei area constitutes a major
obstacle to the enforcement of the 20 June
interim agreement and the implementation of the
mandate of UNISFA. Furthermore, it is creating a
tense security environment, affecting the return of
internally displaced persons and the seasonal
migrations of the Misseriya southward, which
could escalate into conflict.
“The
African
Union
High-level
Implementation Panel recently submitted a
compromise proposal aimed at resolving the
remaining differences between the parties on the
establishment of the Abyei Area administration
institutions, which in turn could lead to troop
withdrawal. The Government of the Sudan
responded favourably to that proposal by
nominating as the Chair of the Legislative
Council a Misseriya from greater Abyei who is
well known to South Sudan as the former Deputy
Administrator of the Abyei Area. The mediation
is still waiting for the official response of the
Government of South Sudan and hopes to achieve
progress on this issue in the coming days.
“The border region continues to be an area
of heightened tensions between the two countries,
owing, among other factors, to the respective
military build-ups by both countries along the
border, accusations of support for the respective
insurgencies by both Governments across the
border, and remaining disputes over border
demarcation. The
intensification
of
the
Government of South Sudan’s fighting against the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North
(SPLM-North) in Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile, and its spillover across the border in
particular poses, as reports of recent bombings

11-58922

across the border attest, a dangerous threat that
could draw the two countries into direct clashes.
“The two countries must be strongly
advised to do everything possible to address their
differences and differences with their internal
opponents through political means, not through
military force. As long as wars continue, innocent
civilians will continue to suffer, as we have
witnessed in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile as
well as in the states in South Sudan where
military confrontation with rebel groups has
continued. Needless to say, the two countries
should be strongly urged to refrain from any
encouragement or assistance to each other’s
insurgent groups to wage war.
“The establishment of the joint border
monitoring mechanism agreed upon by the parties
on 29 June, including a 20-kilometre-wide
demilitarized border zone, could help to address
existing tensions and restore confidence.
However,
progress
on
the
operational
establishment of the border mechanism has been
delayed by remaining disagreements over the
delineation of the border line from which the
border zone can actually be determined.
“The African Union Panel mediation has
prepared and submitted to the parties an
operational map proposing a temporary
redeployment line to resolve this deadlock. Both
Governments are currently assessing that
proposal. The Panel intends to resume
discussions on border security in Addis Ababa on
19 November. Should those discussions result in
a mutually agreed zone and mutually agreed
locations to monitor the border, the conditions
would be right, I believe, for the Council to
consider the expansion of UNISFA’s mandate to
include support for the border-monitoring
mechanism as requested by the parties.
“As
I
mentioned
earlier,
military
confrontations are still ongoing between the
Sudan Armed Forces and the SPLM-North in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States. It is
increasingly clear that the Government of the
Sudan and the SPLM-North are no longer
committed to the 28 June framework agreement,
as both parties are pursuing military options.
Having previously rejected any international

5

S/PV.6656

mediation, the Government of the Sudan has
agreed to mediation with the SPLM-North under
the auspices of AUHIP, while it concurrently
pursues bilateral discussions with Juba.
“However, both the Government of the
Sudan and the SPLM-North have thus far relied
on military means to improve their bargaining
positions, and neither has to date shown a
concrete commitment to a political path, towards
mutual accommodation, that could have led to a
cessation of hostilities. If the conflict continues in
the two areas, and mutual accusations of support
for each other’s armed rebellion do not end, I
would like to reiterate that there is a high risk of
the fighting leading to localized confrontations
between the two countries, thereby starting a
dangerous pattern of escalation that could be
costly in terms of human lives. The mediation has
been engaged in discussions with Juba and
Khartoum to de-escalate those tensions.
“The Sudan is currently affected by the
negative economic impact resulting from the
separation of the South. An agreement on oil
revenue-sharing
and
transitional
financial
arrangements with South Sudan is thus the
priority for the Government of the Sudan. Both
parties have now submitted proposals to the
AUHIP on oil revenue-sharing and transitional
financial arrangements, which will be discussed
as an element of a negotiation on all issues that is
tentatively scheduled to start on 19 November.
“The Sudan and South Sudan are engaged
today in negotiations under the auspices of the
AUHIP to address pending issues between them,
which we are actively supporting. This needs to
be encouraged. However, at the same time, a
pattern of escalating mistrust and tension that is
of great concern for the future of peace and
security between and within the two countries is
also apparent, and the Council has to strongly
warn against it. I would like to urge both
countries to de-escalate this tense situation and
continue to build upon both the bilateral dialogue
they started at the highest level, at the summit
between President Al-Bashir and President Salva
Kiir last month in Khartoum, as well as the
ongoing negotiations under the facilitation of the
AUHIP. Both will lose from a confrontation,
which would represent a threat not only to their

6

respective populations but also to the entire
region.”
(spoke in French)
That concludes the statement prepared yesterday
by Special Envoy Haile Menkerios.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for reading
out the statement of Special Envoy Haile Menkerios,
who, unfortunately, could not be here today.
I now give the floor to Ms. Johnson.
Ms. Johnson: I wish to thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to provide this short briefing on the
incidents that took place this week in South Sudan to
supplement
Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous’s
briefing. We will provide the Council with more detail
on what we have learned up to now.
On 6 November, a mission of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) visited New Guffa,
in Maban county, on the border with Kurmuk county in
Blue Nile State, in response to bombings reported by
the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) on
2 September and 26 October. The situation was
assessed as calm. However, two days later, the SPLA in
Upper Nile State reported that Sudanese Armed Forces
(SAF) had conducted an aerial bombing of New Guffa
and Yalta, in Maban county, at around 4 p.m. UNMISS
followed up on that information, which was confirmed
by the Maban county commissioner. The SPLA and the
commissioner reported that the bombing was carried
out by an Antonov aircraft, which dropped nine bombs
that resulted in the death of one child and seven SPLA
soldiers. Furthermore, they reported that six SPLA
soldiers and seven civilians, including four women,
were injured. Two non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) present in the area have also confirmed the
8 November bombings. However, UNMISS has not
verified those reports. The county commissioner
requested assistance with the evacuation of about
29 casualties. UNMISS today evacuated 14 of the
priority-one casualties, from Bunj to Malakal.
This morning, UNMISS received a report from a
local authority that new bombs may have been dropped
in the area of Guffa today. That has not been confirmed
from other sources. We are now trying to verify the
information. Reports indicate that people are moving
away from Guffa towards Bunj, the county capital.
Reportedly, there are already large numbers of
internally displaced persons and refugees in Bunj

11-58922

S/PV.6656

already, with increasing numbers anticipated.
Humanitarian assessments and inter-agency teams are
being sent to Bunj now. A mission to Guffa is also on
its way to verify and assess situation on ground.
Yesterday, we received reports that between 2.30
and 3.00 p.m. Sudanese Armed Forces bombed the
Yeda refugee camp, on the border between South
Kordofan, the Sudan, and Unity State, South Sudan.
The refugee camp is located in an area near an SPLA
camp. According to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and other
humanitarian agencies, five bombs hit the Yeda area,
with two falling directly inside the perimeter of the
yeda shelter site. One bomb fell near a temporary
school. The number of casualties has yet to be
confirmed. A bomb that fell in the market remains
unexploded.
A rapid assessment by NGOs has so far found no
casualties, but many remain unaccounted for.
Reportedly, many fled when they heard the aircraft.
The UNMISS Mi-26 helicopter, which had been
delivering humanitarian supplies, left Yeda just
moments before the bombing started. An UNMISS
Mi-8 helicopter was on the ground at Yeda for a regular
flight scheduled to that location. There is no damage to
the helicopter, which was used to evacuate some
United Nations agency and international NGO staff.
UNMISS is currently organizing the relocation of
international NGO and United Nations agency staff
from the area. It is also working to verify the locations
of the reported bombings. In total, 26 people were
relocated yesterday by two UNMISS flights, including
5 from the United Nations, 15 from NGOs and 6 other
representatives of media and Government.
Fighting in Upper Nile State was reported by the
SPLA on 9 and 10 November, allegedly between SPLA
and rebel militias at South Kuek and Gabat. Both
locations are in Manyo county, on the western side of
the Nile river. UNMISS has not been able to verify
those incidents. However, the SPLA is seeking
assistance for the evacuation of SPLA casualties from
both locations, which are being organized as I speak.
Reportedly, the SPLA claims to have pushed the rebel
militia groups back into Kordofan. UNMISS has been
requested to assist the SPLA with the evacuation of
16 wounded from Renk. In doing so, we hope to
confirm which rebel militia groups they were fighting.

11-58922

SPLA spokesperson Philip Aguer today alleged
that there had been fighting in Kuek following an
attack on their base by Sudanese Armed Forces and
so-called mercenaries, which started at 9.00 a.m. and
lasted seven hours. They have also reported an alleged
18 deaths and 73 wounded, on both sides. Aguer also
said that the SPLA expected more attacks in the Upper
Nile area, motivated by Khartoum’s desire to “take the
oil fields”. That echoed the words of President Salva
Kiir, who made similar claims yesterday.
It is a significant concern that the rhetoric is
heightened on both sides, the Republic of the Sudan
and the Republic of South Sudan. The engagement of
the Security Council in contributing to de-escalating
the situation is very welcome, as Under-SecretaryGeneral Ladsous so strongly emphasized.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to begin by thanking Mr. Hervé Ladsous and Ms. Hilde
Johnson for their statements and the information they
have provided.
I shall comment in detail on those statements by
summarizing each piece of information that has been
provided. However, I would first like to recall a fact
that — with all due respect — all members of the
Secretariat seem to ignore. From the very beginning of
the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, the Sudan and its Government have
underscored their commitment to a political settlement
to the conflict between the north and the south. Today,
I would like to reiterate here in the Council that we are
committed to finding a peaceful solution to pending
issues that divide the north and South Sudan.
It is clear to everyone that the establishment of
the State in the south was an honest effort undertaken
by the Government and leadership of the north, as
represented by President Al-Bashir. The Council may
not be aware of this but, following independence, the
President visited the capital of South Sudan and
reiterated his desire to cooperate with its Government.
We had hoped those goodwill efforts would at least
have been praised, or even welcomed.
We have no doubt about our unchanging position
on finding a peaceful political settlement to all pending
issues. Nevertheless, there are always two sides to a
coin. Unfortunately, there has been little enthusiasm

7

S/PV.6656

among our brothers to the south since independence, as
there should have been in order to strengthen efforts to
build a modern and prosperous State in line with the
aspirations of South Sudan for many decades. No
member of the Council has called upon the Republic of
South Sudan to concentrate its efforts on those
endeavours, rather than embarking on stirring up
tension and new wars. An example is the well-known
meeting in Kauda that brought together the
Government of the South and rebels in Southern
Kordofan, Blue Nile and Darfur, which led to a
political statement calling for military action aimed at
undermining the Khartoum regime. Let us recognize
these truths, which I have simply highlighted.
Tuning now to the briefing by Mr. Ladsous,
before briefly commenting on it, allow me to reiterate
our commitment to cooperating with the United
Nations without conditions, first and foremost with the
Security Council and the Secretariat, but also with
peacekeeping missions. Not only did I personally
supervise Mr. Ladsous’s visit to South Sudan, but I also
facilitated a meeting between Mr. Ladsous and the
highest authority of the country, President Al-Bashir,
who gave Mr. Ladsous a very warm welcome and
recalled the information that I presented at the
beginning of my statement.
With regard to Mr. Ladsous’s statement about
Mr. Salva Kiir’s statement yesterday denying that the
Government of South Sudan was supporting rebels in
the north, Mr. Ladsous spoke in detail about the
subject. In fact, I would have preferred for the detailed
statement to have been made not by a representative of
the Secretariat but by a representative of South Sudan.
Allow me to share three pieces of information
with the Council about the Sudanese Government’s
implication in incidents in Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile. The fourth battalion of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army is fighting with all its equipment in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. That battalion has
deployed many tanks when the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan was in the area. That information can
be found in the Joint Military Commission’s
documents. That is clear proof of the support by the
Government of South Sudan for the rebels and of the
presence of its troops and military hardware in those
areas.
Turning now to Ms. Johnson’s statement, we
thank her for her efforts in the recent past when she

8

was part of a group that established the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. However, it seems that time changes
everything. I listened to her detailed and focused
statement, which made it seem as if she were
advocating for the actions of the Government of South
Sudan, as if air bombardments and military actions by
the Government of the Sudan were being carried out
against South Sudan. I would instead have preferred
her to speak in the way she has in the past, when she
behaved as a mediator who contributed to the
conclusion of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. I
would have preferred her to speak in a completely
impartial manner, providing information — as it is her
duty to do in the service of the United Nations — on
the movement of the forces of the south and the
military support of the south to rebel movements. She
gave no information on that topic. Where is the
credibility she has had in the past? I hope that time will
not erode it.
Let me turn now to Abyei. Mr. Ladsous briefed us
on the topic, providing true information about the
numerous leaders of the south who refuse to facilitate
the movement of the Misseriya tribe, who have lived in
the region for thousands of years. That is another
example of lack of cooperation on the part of the
Government of South Sudan in averting military
clashes.
With regard to mediation, let me note that we
have always demonstrated our commitment to
mediation under the leadership of Mr. Thabo Mbeki,
our brother from South Africa, and he can confirm that.
We participated in all meetings and workshops,
whereas the other party was not always present and,
when it was, did not always show moderation. We are
ready to continue efforts under the mechanism led by
one of our brothers on the continent to achieve
effective solutions.
I now turn to developments in Blue Nile and
Southern Kordofan. We have provided the Council
with many documents and letters that give a detailed
description of the root causes of the violence. The
violence consists entirely of incitements on the part of
the Government of South Sudan. In the Blue Nile
region, elected Governor Malik Aggar has initiated the
rebellion and taken up weapons, thereby destabilizing
the State, which after intervention by Sudanese forces,
is today returning to normal life, stability and security.

11-58922

S/PV.6656

In conclusion, we affirm that the situation in Blue
Nile state is entirely stable. We do not expect that the
Sudanese Armed Forces will have to take military
action, including aerial bombing, to deal with acts
perpetrated by rebel movements, which have been
contained in the past few days. In addition, as far as
bombings are concerned, there have been no bombings
on the refugee camps on the border between North and
South. We are dealing here with half-truths — indeed,
truths fabricated by the media across the board. We
hope that the Council will not base its decisions on
false information spread by the media, since it has
mandated a mission in the Sudan capable of verifying
such information.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Choat (South Sudan): I would like to thank
Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Mr. Haile Menkerios and
Ms. Hilde Johnson for their statements today.
The Republic of South Sudan is extremely
concerned about the deteriorating security situation in
the border areas of both the Republic of the Sudan and
the Republic of South Sudan. Yesterday, the Sudan
Armed Forces (SAF) bombed Yida refugee camp in
Unity state, South Sudan, and killed 12 people. In
addition, the Sudan Armed Forces attacked the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army position in Kwek, Upper
Nile state. There were approximately 20 casualties. The
SAF also bombed Gussa in Maban county, Upper Nile
state, and killed seven people.
We call on the Republic of the Sudan to desist
from further military activity north or south of the
border, and to avoid unnecessary escalation. As stated
by His Excellency Mr. Salva Kiir Mayardit, President

11-58922

of the Republic of South Sudan, during his recent visit
to Khartoum, the Republic of South Sudan is
committed to resolving all outstanding issues
peacefully and through dialogue — the opposite of
what President Al-Bashir has been saying recently in
threatening the South with a return to war. Blaming
others for its own problems has been a feature of the
Sudan’s attitude.
We reiterate that the Government of the Republic
of South Sudan’s policy is one of total non-interference
in the affairs of other States. All the accusations made
by the Sudan are untrue. Naturally, we are deeply
concerned about the situation in Southern Kordofan
and Blue Nile states, given their geographical
proximity to our country. In particular, we are gravely
concerned about the impact of the ongoing violence on
the civilian populations of those areas.
We remain committed to full implementation of
the provisions of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA) relating to the two areas, not least the holding of
popular consultations. We believe that it is the ongoing
failure to implement the CPA provisions with respect to
the two areas that is one of the main causes of the
current situation.
Lastly, we call on the Council to take up with
urgency the issue of humanitarian access to the two
areas. The Republic of South Sudan stands ready to
assist with the provision of humanitarian relief to all
civilians fleeing conflict areas.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

9
