VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Samoa and to work out concrete programmes of assistance and economic development for the Territory;
6. Requests the administering Power to consider
favourably inviting a United Nations mission to visit
American Samoa for the purpose of observing conditions in the Territory and learning first-hand of the
aspirations of the people concerning their political
status;
7. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the Government of American Samoa, to
safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the
Territory to the enjoyment of their natural resources
by taking effective measures which guarantee the rights
of the people to own and dispose of those natural
resources and to establish and maintain control of their
future development;
8. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national life
of American Samoa;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to American Samoa,
including the possible dispatch of a visiting mission in
consultation with the administering Power, and to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution.
85th plenary meeting
I December 1976
31/ 56.

Question of Brunei

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Brunei,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,54
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, as
well as other relevant resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations relating to the Territory, including in
particular the consensus on the question adopted by
the General Assembly on 13 December 197 4, 55
Recalling also its resolution 3424 (XXX) of 8
December 1975,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Brunei to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Brunei;
3. Notes that no progress has been achieved so far
in the implementation of General Assembly resolution
3424 (XXX);
54 Jbid., chap. XVIU.
55 Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/9631 ),
p. 117, item 23.

127

4. Calls upon all parties concerned to work towards
the early implementation of resolution 3424 (XXX);
5. Calls again upon the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, consistent with its responsibility as the administering
Power, to take all steps within its competence to facilitate expeditiously the holding of free and democratic
elections by the appropriate government authorities in
Brunei, in consultation with and under the supervision
of the United Nations, in accordance with the inalienab!,e right of the people of Brunei to self-determination
and independence, and further calls, prior to the elections, for the lifting of the ban on all political parties
and the return of all political exiles to Brunei so that
they can participate freely and fully in the elections;
6. Calls upon the administering Power, in conformity with the provisions of the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly, to extend full co-operation to
the Special Committee;
7. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
keep the situation in the Territory under review and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976

31/57.

Question of the United States Virgin
Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the United States
Virgin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,"6
RPcalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the United States Virgin Islands,
Conscious of the need to promote progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to the United States Virgin Islands,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as
a consequence of previous visiting missions to NonSelf-Governing Territories and reiterating its conviction
that the dispatch of such missions is essential for securing adequate and first-hand information in regard to the
conditions prevailing in those Territories and to the
views, wishes and aspirations of the peoples therein
with respect to their future status,
Mindful that the United States Virgin Islands requires
the continued attention and assistance of the United
~ations in t!1e a~hievement by its people of the objectives embodied m the Charter of the United Nations
and in the Declaration,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of the Territory, and stressing the necessity of diversifying its
56 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev.I), chaps. III and XXXI.

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

128

economy as a matter of priority, in order to reduce its
dependence on fluctuating economic activities,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the United States Virgin Islands;57
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the United States Virgin Islands to self-determination
and independence in accordance with the Declaration;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the Territory;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, in consultation with the freely elected representatives of the people,
to continue to take all the necessary steps to ensure the
full and speedy attainment of the goals set forth in the
Declaration with respect to the United States Virgin
Islands;
5. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
possible steps to diversify the economy of the Territory
and to work out concrete programmes of assistance and
economic development for the United States Virgin
Islands;
6. Requests the administering Power to consider
favourably inviting a United Nations mission to visit
the United States Virgin Islands for the purpose of
observing conditions in the Territory and learning firsthand of the aspirations of the people concerning their
political status;
7. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the Government of the Territory, to safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of its natural resources by
taking effective measures which guarantee the rights of
the people to own and dispose of those natural resources
and to establish and maintain control of their future
development;
8. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national
life of the United States Virgin Islands;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to the United States
Virgin Islands, including the possible dispatch of a
visiting mission in consultation with the administering
Power, and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-second session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
85th plenary meeting
I December 1976

to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 58
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to Guam, in particular General Assembly
resolutions 3429 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 and
3481 (XXX) of 11 December 1975,
Conscious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to Guam,
Deploring the policy of the administering Power in
continuing to maintain military installations on Guam,
in contravention of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as
a consequence of previous visiting missions to colonial
Territories and reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of such missions is essential for securing adequate
and first-hand information in regard to the conditions
prevailing in those Territories and to the views, wishes
and aspirations of the peoples therein with respect to
their future status,
Mindful that Guam requires the continued attention
and assistance of the United Nations in the achievement
by its people of the objectives embodied in the Charter
of the United Nations and in the Declaration,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of Guam, and
stressing the necessity of diversifying its economy as a
matter of priority in order to reduce its dependence on
fluctuating economic activities,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Guam; 59
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Guam to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the Declaration with respect to the Territory;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, in consultation
with_ the freely elected representatives of the people, to
contmue to take all the necessary steps to ensure the
full and speedy attainment of the goals set forth in the
Declaration with respect to Guam;
. 5. ~trongly deprecates the establishment of military
mstallations on Guam as being incompatible with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and of General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);

31/58.

Question of Guam

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Guam,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
57 Ibid.,

chap. XXXI.

6. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
possible steps to diversify the economy of the Territory
and to work out concrete programmes of assistance and
economic development for Guam;
7. Calls upon the administering Power to reconsider
its attitude towards receiving United Nations visiting
5 8 Jbid.,
59 Jbid.,

chap. III, chap. V, annex IV, and chap. XXIII.
chap. XXIII.
