S/PV.7936

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7936th meeting

Thursday, 11 May 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosselli. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Audouard
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison

Agenda
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-13320 (E)
*1713320*

S/PV.7936

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
Ambassador Abdellatif Aboulatta of Egypt will
first make a joint statement on behalf of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).
Following that, the Council will hear briefings by the
Chairs of those three Committees.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Aboulatta.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): On behalf of the Chairs of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism; the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities; and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), I have the honour to brief the Council
on cooperation among the three Committees and their
respective groups of experts.
The Committees have recognized the grave threats
posed by terrorism and the challenges presented by
terrorists and their organizations in resorting to new
means to finance, plan, prepare, facilitate, recruit and
commission terrorist acts, possibly involving the use
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). They have
also stressed the importance of raising awareness
among Member States of their obligations with regard
to effectively implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions. They also believe that building
Member States’ capacity to meet those challenges is
particularly important.
Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and
the risk of the proliferation of WMDs to non-State
actors, continues to pose a serious threat to international
peace and security. The Security Council, in dealing
with these grave threats, emphasized the importance
of cooperation and coordination between the three
Committees and their respective expert groups.
2/21

11/05/2017

The three Committees continue to collaborate, and
their three expert groups have continued the practice
of synchronizing their efforts, where appropriate and
feasible, in conducting country visits. Over the past
year, experts from the 1267 and 1540 Committees have
joined the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) on two
such visits — in May 2016 on the visit to Kazakhstan, and
in February 2017, on the visit to Tajikistan. Exchange of
information between the three Committees continues
through their respective expert groups,sz especially
with regard to visits, technical assistance needs, and in
reaching out to international and regional organizations
of common interest.
As part of their support to the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), the three
Committees have maintained close cooperation
within the framework of a number of CTITF working
groups. In particular, the three groups worked with
the CTITF Foreign Terrorist Fighter Working Group
to develop a capacity-building implementation plan to
assist Member States to comply with resolution 2178
(2014), on curbing the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
Their collaborative efforts also continue through their
participation in, inter alia, the CTITF Working Groups
on the Protection of Critical Infrastructure, Including
Internet, Vulnerable Targets and Tourism Security;
Preventing and Responding to Weapons of Mass
Destruction (WMD) Terrorist Attacks; Countering the
Financing of Terrorism; and Border Management and
Law Enforcement Relating to Counter-Terrorism.
The 1540 Group of Experts, in its role as a
CTITF collaborating entity, encourages the CTITF
WMD Working Group to focus on the prevention of
the proliferation of WMDs to non-State actors, now
that the Group’s work on responses to WMD attacks
is complete.
Pursuant to resolution 2253 (2015), the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and the 1267 Committee Monitoring Team continue
to work closely in drafting the Secretary-General’s
reports on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL)/Da’esh. Four reports have been
submitted, and drafting of the fifth and final report is
under way.
CTED and the 1267 Monitoring Team have also
been collaborating closely on the use of the Internet
and telecommunications technologies for terrorist
purposes. The Monitoring Team participated in the
17-13320

11/05/2017

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

consultations of CTED and the ICT4Peace Foundation
with the private sector in Zurich, Silicon Valley and
Kuala Lumpur in late 2016, and in drafting a report.
As a result, Microsoft has updated its terms of use and
is now using the 1267 sanctions list as a reference to
determine terrorism-related content.
The three Committees have also actively shared
information on terrorism financing and proliferation
financing. CTED and the 1540 Group of Experts
recently met to discuss the risk of illicit trafficking
through online public trading platforms, such as eBay
and Ali Baba. The three expert groups also coordinate
in the context of the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF). In December 2016, they met with the FATF
secretariat to discuss ongoing issues, developments
and challenges.
In April 2016, CTC, the 1267 Committee, Member
States, FATF and other organizations held an open
briefing on depriving terrorist groups of funding,
particularly Al-Qaida, ISIL and their affiliates. In
December 2016, they held a joint special meeting on
practices and lessons learned in preventing terrorist
groups from accessing, raising and moving funds. CTC
continues to invite the other two expert groups to attend
regional and thematic briefings by CTED staff, various
experts, and visiting officials from international and
regional organizations.
The three Committees also recognize the need to
further enhance and strengthen their coordination and
cooperation, where relevant and possible. They will
therefore work to identify further synergies, including
by identifying thematic areas in which joint interaction
may be beneficial within the framework of their
respective mandates. While efforts are considered and
undertaken in the United Nations system on enhancing
the United Nations capacity to meet the challenges of
global terrorism, the three Committees will continue
to implement the tasks and mandates of the Security
Council’s resolutions, with the full support of CTED,
the Monitoring Team and the 1540 Group of Experts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Aboulatta for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Kairat Umarov,
Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities.

S/PV.7936

Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): In today’s briefing, I
would like to focus my remarks on the principal areas
of work of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities since the joint Council briefing in May 2016
(see S/PV.7686). I shall focus mainly on the following
three elements: the evolving threat to international
peace and security posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL)/Da’esh, Al-Qaida and affiliates;
the response from the Committee; and the Committee’s
engagement with Member States.
My statement today will be made available on the
Committee’s website.
Since the joint Council briefing in May 2016, the
threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and affiliates
has further evolved. In its latest report, the Monitoring
Team finds that ISIL and Al-Qaida affiliates continue to
present a complex and diverse challenge to international
security. ISIL remains under sustained military
pressure, and in response it has conducted a range of
attacks outside conflict areas. Many of the ISIL-inspired
attacks were initially reported as lone-actor attacks, but
subsequent investigations revealed that in most cases,
individuals received support from other extremists and
criminal groups. ISIL’s finances have declined, and it
now operates on a crisis budget. Al-Qaida affiliates
also maintain a significant level of terrorist operations
in their respective regions. In some regions, Al-Qaida
affiliates remain stronger than the respective ISIL cells
and groups. Therefore, the emergence of ISIL has not
strategically weakened Al-Qaida.
The Monitoring Team further reported that the
overall flow of foreign terrorist fighters to Iraq and
the Syrian Arab Republic appeared to have slowed
as a result of increased control measures put in place
by Member States and military pressure. A growing
challenge involves returnees and relocating fighters. The
travel of these persons entails the risk of concentrating
individuals who potentially pose a considerable threat
in particular regions. South-East Asia and West and
East Africa are experiencing a rising level of risk
emanating from ISIL or Al-Qaida affiliates.
A growing challenge involves returnees and
fighters whose travel to conflict zones has been
frustrated by the efforts of national authorities. These
two groups represent a growing security risk. Of

17-133203/21

S/PV.7936

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

particular concern, too, are returnees and relocators
who hold multiple nationalities. Therefore, the
Monitoring Team highlighted the continued need for
enhanced information-sharing among Member States
in this regard. In addition to the reduced flow of foreign
terrorist fighters, sanctions measures levied against
asset streams of ISIL have begun to take effect. This
relates in particular to the trade in antiquities illegally
removed from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic.
Member States have begun to report seizures of such
items on their territories. Concerning Afghanistan, the
Monitoring Team notes that ISIL has lost significant
amounts of territory in Nangarhar province. Even
though there have been military successes against ISIL
in Nangarhar province, which have degraded their
numbers and fighting ability, the group has been able
to regenerate battlefield losses and launch at least one
high-profile attack in July 2016, causing large loss of
life against an ethnic Hazara demonstration in Kabul.
The Al-Qaida core, as well as Al-Qaida in the Indian
Subcontinent, continue to act as advisers and trainers
for the Taliban. A significant number of fighters related
to other Al-Qaida affiliated groups that previously
operated in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region
have joined the Taliban and led to an increase in Taliban
fighting capabilities.
The evolving threat is also reflected in the adoption
of a number of new resolutions by the Council that have
expanded the work of the Committee and the Monitoring
Team. In December 2016, the Council adopted resolution
2331 (2016) to curb the financing of terrorists from acts
of sexual and gender-based violence, and trafficking
in persons. The resolution noted that that those acts were
part of the strategic objectives and ideology of certain
terrorist groups, such as ISIL and Al-Qaida, and were
used as a tactic of terrorism and as an instrument to
increase their finances and power through recruitment
and the destruction of communities. In the context
of the resolution, in December 2016, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict sent a report to the Committee on
ISIL’s use of sexual violence as a tactic of terrorism.
In addition, the resolution tasks the Monitoring Team
with collaborating with Member States to see whether
further information could be obtained.
Resolution 2347 (2017), concerning the protection
of cultural heritage in armed conflicts, not only
builds on the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida regime, but
also mandates a range of concrete measures. Those
4/21

11/05/2017

measures are based on the recommendations made by
the Monitoring Team in various reports throughout
2016 and to which the Committee had agreed.
Resolution 2347 (2017) also asked the Monitoring Team
to cooperate with the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and UNESCO on a
report concerning the implementation the resolution, to
be delivered at the end of 2017.
For both resolutions, it is crucial that Member
States engage with, and provide updated information
to, the Committee and the Monitoring Team on the
evolving nature of the threat, listed individuals and
entities and the status of the implementation of then
sanctions measures.
To enhance the full and effective implementation of
the sanctions, the Committee also undertakes visits to
selected countries. In that context, the 1267 Committee
Chair visited Afghanistan from 11 to 13 November
2016. The Chair was accompanied by a representative
of Kazakhstan in our capacity as incoming Chair of
both Committees, delegates from the Committee and
representatives of the Monitoring Team. The visit was
facilitated by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, with the objective of obtaining firsthand accounts regarding the implementation and
effectiveness of sanctions measures and to promote
enhanced dialogue and engagement of Afghan
interlocutors with the Committees. I look forward to
conducting more of such visits as Chair.
As part of the Committee’s engagement on the
latest developments in Afghanistan, on 3 February, the
Committee decided to remove Gulbuddin Hekmatyar
from its sanctions list, with a view to facilitating ongoing
efforts in Kabul towards national reconciliation.
Resolution 2344 (2017) expressed serious concern
about the presence and potential growth of ISIL (Da’esh)
affiliates in Afghanistan posing serious threats to the
security of Afghanistan and the countries of the region,
including in Central Asia.
The Committee continuously strives to ensure that
its list is as updated and accurate as possible in order to
facilitate the implementation of the sanctions measures.
Since the last joint briefing, seven individuals were
listed. No entities were listed. Twelve individuals were
delisted. No entities were delisted. The Committee
approved amendments to the existing entries of 24
individuals and two entities on its sanctions list. As of
17-13320

11/05/2017

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

today, there are 254 individuals and 75 entities on the
Committee’s sanctions list.
Since the last joint briefing to the Security Council,
the Committee decided to delist six individuals and
retain two individuals, on the basis of reports submitted
by the Ombudsperson. In addition, one comprehensive
report of the Ombudsperson is under consideration
by the Committee, and the Ombudsperson has four
cases in the dialogue phase and two cases in the
information-gathering phase.
On 8 May, the Chair held an open briefing on the
work of the Committee for interested Member States. I
plan to continue to hold such open briefings regularly.
I encourage Member States to share any queries and
concerns with the Committee and its Monitoring Team.
I would like to take this opportunity to call upon
Member States to continue their engagement with the
work of the Committee and the Monitoring Team, as that
is essential for maintaining an up-to-date and dynamic
sanctions list, and fundamental to the effective operation
of the sanctions regime. In that regard, I would like to
note that the Committee is in the process of concluding
its current annual review, which considers if names on
the list, especially those not reviewed for three years,
remain pertinent, and to address cases where sufficient
identifiers do not exist, individuals are deceased or
entities are defunct. I thank the Member States that
provided information, as it has provend challenging to
obtain responses from all relevant Member States. We
urge all Member States to engage with the Committee
in a timely manner on the next annual review to support
this key due-process function.
In addition to the regular reviews, the Monitoring
Team updates list entries based on information provided
by Member States. We encourage Member States to keep
the Team informed. I also urge those Member States
that have not done so to submit their implementation
reports mandated under the relevant resolutions.
As Chair, I would like to thank all Member States for
their cooperation with the Committee, its Monitoring
Team and the Office of the Ombudsperson.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Umarov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Amr Abdellatif
Aboulatta, Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
concerning counter-terorism.

S/PV.7936

Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): I thank members for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
ongoing work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and its Executive Directorate (CTED).
CTED is mandated until 31 December 2017 to
assist Member States, on behalf of the CTC, to achieve
the full implementation of Security Council resolutions
on terrorism. Since the Committee’s previous briefing
to the Council (see S/PV.7686), the CTC and CTED
have continued to engage in a wide range of activities
within the framework of those resolutions, specifically,
to increase the number and pace of assessments and
to follow up promptly on facilitation of technical
assistance; to identify important issues, trends,
developments; and to work with partners on innovative
responses.
Assessment visits to Member States and follow-up
on the facilitation of technical assistance are at the heart
of CTED’s work on behalf of the Committee and the
Council and remain a critical part of the Committee’s
dialogue with Member States. Since March 2016,
the Committee has conducted 17 visits to Member
States — more than in any other equivalent period since
its establishment, in 2001. The visited States included
Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kazakhstan, the
Lake Chad basin States, Paraguay, Senegal, Sri Lanka
and Tajikistan.
In post-visit follow-up, CTED has worked
intensively with Member States and implementing
agencies to facilitate technical assistance based on
the Committee’s recommendations. Engagement with
Iraq, including further follow-up in Baghdad, is a
good example in that regard. Facilitation work sped
up markedly in the past 12 months. Argentina and Sri
Lanka agreed on commitments with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime on technical assistance
pursuant to the visits’ recommendations while the visits
were still ongoing.
Terrorism continues to pose a serious global
security threat, and the CTC and CTED have been
working to identify threats, emerging trends and
potential responses. Counter-terrorism financing was
a priority in the Committee’s work in the past year.
CTED has noted that terrorists continue to devise new
fundraising methods, and there is increasing concern
about the transnational organized crimes that fund
terrorism. CTED is working with the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF) and similar regional bodies. CTED

17-133205/21

S/PV.7936

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

helped finalize revisions of the international standards
and provided inputs for a typology report on terrorist
financing in West and Central Africa, adopted in
October 2016. In the framework of the FATF, CTED
initiated specific work on the misuse of social media
for terrorism-financing purposes, having organized a
side event on the topic in December.
An awareness of the increased use of the Internet
and other information and communication technologies
(ICT) in terrorism led the CTC to organize a special
meeting in December 2016 on terrorists’ use of ICT.
ICT industry leaders also briefed the CTC in February
about the joint CTED/ICT4 initiative — Tech Against
Terrorism — which promotes self-regulation of the
industry globally. Concern about the role of women in
terrorism, and in line with resolution 2242 (2017), led
CTED to incorporate a gender dimension in its work,
where relevant, including assessment visits, threat and
trend analysis and technical assistance.
With respect to the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2016/) of the Council on 11 May 2016 on the
challenges of countering terrorism narratives, the CTC,
in consultation with CTED, the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), other United
Nations bodies and interested Member States, prepared
a proposal for a comprehensive international framework
to address this threat. The proposal was submitted to
the Council last month for its consideration.
CTED continues to take advice from practitioners
with real-world experience of the challenges of tackling
terrorism. South Asian judges, prosecutors and police
officers convened regularly by CTED since 2009 to
promote regional cooperation, to provide advice and
guidance on trends and developments and to inform
the Committee’s formulation of strategic regional
and thematic approaches, most recently in Sri Lanka
in October.
The Committee and CTED have held formal and
informal briefings to keep Member States and other
partners aware of emerging threats and responses.
Most recently, on 5 April, the Committee held an
open briefing, on denying safe haven to terrorists, at
which the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and INTERPOL encouraged States to strengthen their
cooperation, including by adopting legislation and
sharing information through INTERPOL tools and
databases. CTED, INTERPOL and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees agreed
6/21

11/05/2017

to continue to assist States to ensure more systematic
screening of asylum seekers. This information will
inform CTED’s preparation, pursuant resolution 2322
(2016), of a report on international judicial and law
enforcement cooperation.
CTED also advised Member States on the need
to develop comprehensive and integrated counterterrorism strategies that engage multiple stakeholders
in Iraq, Mali and Tunisia.
The CTC and CTED continued to pay close attention
to relevant human rights and rule-of-law issues, in
accordance with the Committee’s policy guidance.
They take account of relevant human rights concerns
in their dialogue with States, in special meetings and
open briefings, in the context of country visits and in
the facilitation of technical assistance.
CTED is actively engaged with CTITF and its
working groups, being a member of eight of the groups,
five of which it chairs. CTED has worked closely with
CTITF on issues including the coordination of efforts,
pursuant to resolutions 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015),
to prevent the looting of antiquities in the territory
controlled by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
Mindful of the ongoing gravity of the global
terrorist threat and its evolving trends and challenges,
the Council has stressed and continues to stress, the
need to ensure that counter-terrorism remains a priority
on the international agenda and has underlined the
critical role of CTED in supporting the Committee in
its work. It is expected that the forthcoming review of
CTED’s mandate will provide an opportunity to further
enhance the impact of CTED’s efforts, together with its
partners, to fulfil the tasks conferred by the relevant
Council resolutions and decisions.
The President: I thank Ambassador Aboulatta for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Llorentty Solíz,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Mr. Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
Ambassador Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta, in his capacity
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), for leading the
preparation and delivery of our joint statement.
17-13320

11/05/2017

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

On behalf of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), I would
like to say that we fully endorse the views expressed in
the joint statement. From my Committee’s perspective,
our concern is with preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, their delivery means
and related materials to non-State actors, including
terrorists. While the mandates of the three Committees
differ, there are important areas of complementarity.
Cooperation between the three Committees and their
supporting experts is important to promoting the
effective implementation by States of their obligations
under our respective Security Council resolutions.
As far as the 1540 Committee is concerned, that is
recognized in our five-year comprehensive review of the
implementation of the resolution and in the subsequent
resolution 2325 (2016), of 15 December 2016. In that
resolution, the Council reiterated the need to enhance
cooperation among the three Committees, among other
means, while enhancing the sharing of information
and the coordination of visits to States and technical
assistance. We should continuously seek ways, as
appropriate to our respective mandates, to improve the
cooperation between the three Committees.
From the 1540 Committee’s perspective, we value
the joint visits to States with the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED), as referred to in the
joint statement. We hope that, within the limits of the
available resources, such visits will continue. In many
States an important number of stakeholders responsible
for national implementation of the resolutions
concerned are the same officials. Where appropriate,
engaging in visits collaboratively is very much in the
interests of both the Committees, and in particular of
the States concerned.
In resolution 2325 (2016) the Council decided that
the Committee should continue to intensify its efforts
to promote the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). Furthermore, it noted in particular the need to
pay more attention, inter alia, to enforcement measures
relating to nuclear, biological and chemical weapons
and the proliferation of financing measures, as well as to
accountability for, and the ensuring, related materials;
as well as national export and transhipment controls.
We welcome the kind of cooperation between our
experts referred to in the joint statement on the risks
of illicit trafficking and terrorism through the use of
online public trading platforms. This certainly helps

S/PV.7936

the 1540 Committee to respond to the Council’s request
for us to take note in its work, where it is relevant, of the
continually evolving nature of the risks of proliferation,
including the use by non-State actors of rapid advances
in science, technology and international commerce for
proliferation purposes. This kind of exchange puts the
Committee and its experts in a good position to support
States, as appropriate, in their efforts to take account of
such developments in discharging their responsibilities
for implementation under the resolutions concerned.
The requirements of resolution 2325 (2016) and
the 2017 programme of work of the 1540 Committee
place demands on our limited human and financial
resources and make it even more important to exploit
opportunities for collaboration while taking account
the respective mandates of the Committees.
As we continue with our outreach activities to help
those States that need it to implement their obligations,
I am glad to take this opportunity to thank those States
that have contributed to the Trust Fund for Global and
Regional Disarmament Activities, some of which are
represented at this table, with assistance specifically
in support of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). The Committee could not fulfil its programme
of work successfully without such support. The
Committee also welcomes the support of those States
that make contributions in kind — for example, by
hosting resolution 1540 (2004) events. An example is the
regional seminar on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) hosted by Pakistan in April this year.
The Committee looks forward to the hosting by other
Member States of other events scheduled for later this
year. These are important contributions to promoting
the effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
The leading edge of the cooperation between the
three Committees should be our respective experts. We
encourage them to continue with their interactions in
the common areas of interest within their respective
areas of responsibility. From the perspective of
resolution 1540 (2004), since we are in the business
of preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors, it is important to have
a good connection at the expert level between us and
the counter-terrorism community. At the same time,
we should take into account the differences in the
various Committees’ goals, as well as their means
of implementation.

17-133207/21

S/PV.7936

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Llorentty Solíz for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Ms. Sison (United States): The international
community has made notable progress in degrading
terrorist groups worldwide, with recent significant
gains in Syria and Iraq against the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). But the Security Council
must stay vigilant to counter the dynamic threat that
ISIS and other terrorist groups, including Al-Qaida,
Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and others, pose around the
globe. As ISIS loses territory and funding, thousands
of foreign terrorist fighters are returning from the
conflict zone. We also see ISIS and Al-Qaida affiliates
radicalizing and recruiting others, with ISIS continuing
to establish and support its affiliates around the world.
That demonstrates that terrorist groups and their
extensive networks are still very capable of expanding
their areas of attack and convincing others to carry
out their heinous mission. No country is immune from
the threat.
That is why the United Nations has an everimportant role to play in supporting the fight against
terrorism in all of its forms. Moreover, it is critical that
the three Committees that briefed us today, and indeed
all parts of the United Nations system, coordinate
their efforts closely and take a whole-of-United
Nations approach to support efforts to defeat terrorism
wherever it exists. One way that the Security Council
can support such an approach is by working closely
with the new United Nations counter-terrorism office,
which, when established, will coordinate counterterrorism efforts across 38 United Nations offices.
The office’s close engagement with the three CounterTerrorism Committees will help eliminate duplication
across the United Nations system and contribute to
the balanced implementation of the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Strategy across all four of its pillars.
Over the past year, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, with the help of the Committee’s experts
in the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorat,
examined issues that we consider critical. They include
identifying good practices on countering terrorist
narratives, leveraging real world experience from
judges, prosecutors and police officers on prosecuting
terrorists, and promoting respect for human rights
and rule-of-law issues when countering terrorism. We
8/21

11/05/2017

encourage the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate to work with
other parts of the United Nations system, including
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
INTERPOL and other actors, to encourage States to
cooperate better, adopt new needed counter-terrorism
legislation, share best practices and build the vital
capacity necessary to thwart terrorists’ ability to carry
out attacks. The upcoming review of the mandate of
the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate offers an
opportunity to further enhance the Directorate’s mission
to assess States’ implementation of existing United
Nations counter-terrorism obligations and identify
opportunities to strengthen capacity. We hope that the
new United Nations counter-terrorism office can take
advantage of the Directorate’s country assessments
to enhance the strategic planning of Member States’
capacity-building.
We continue to see the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities as vital to countering
the threats posed by such groups. We appreciate
Ambassador Umarov’s active stewardship of that
Committee and thank the Monitoring Group for its
great work in reporting on the changing terrorist threat
picture challenges to implementing resolution 2253
(2015) and on the new areas on which the Committee
and the Council should focus to better counterterrorism financing.
Although much focus has been on ISIS, we should
also remember that Al-Qaida remains a potent threat,
blending in with local populations and assuming the
guise of a more “moderate” organization. We hope
that the Committee and its Monitoring Team will focus
on financing and recruitment activities, including the
challenges posed when foreign terrorist fighters return
home or relocate from Iraq and Syria. We must keep
in mind that, for many States Members of the United
Nations, the 1267 sanctions list is the only guide used
at border posts and at seaports and airports to screen
against terrorists. It is therefore crucial that all Member
States help update that list so that it accurately reflects
current threats. We must also work together and with
the United Nations to build State capacity to implement
the sanctions. We hope to use the Council’s regular
review of the ISIS and Al-Qaida sanctions next month
17-13320

11/05/2017

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

to make sure that sanctions are best adapted to the
evolving terrorist threat.
Turning to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), I would
like to thank Ambassador Llorentty Solíz for Bolivia’s
leadership of the 1540 Committee. The United States
considers resolution 1540 (2004) to be the cornerstone
of international efforts to combat the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. Today’s briefing is timely
because the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and the risk if they fall into the hands of terrorists is by
no means a theoretical one. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea continues to develop nuclear
weapons and ballistic missiles. In Syria, we have seen
the devastating consequences of confirmed chemical
weapons use by both State and non-State actors. Yet,
despite such challenges, the obligations in resolution
1540 (2004) are still not fully met.
Last year, in a comprehensive review, the 1540
Committee found that notable implementation gaps
remained, particularly in the areas of chemical and
biological security, countering proliferation financing
and controlling means of delivery. But we think that,
together, we can improve that trend, using the many
tools at the 1540 Committee’s disposal. While today’s
briefing is important, it should by no means be the
only time the Committees interact. There needs to be
regular, continued engagement on the intentions and
capabilities of terrorists. The Committees should also
be sharing notes on how the United Nations can help
to build State capacity to counter such threats. We look
forward to working with other countries to bolster those
efforts and advance our common security.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Chairs of the Security
Council Committees for their detailed briefings on
counter-terrorism activities.
To a great extent, the performance of Security
Council subsidiary bodies determine the credibility
and effectiveness of the Security Council as the key
coordinating platform in international counter-terrorism
cooperation. In recent years, the terrorist threat has
indeed become global. The swell in the radicalization
of public opinion, and in spite of the efforts of the
international community, has not yet been curbed.
The envoys of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
Al-Qaida, Al-Nusra and other terrorist organizations
continue to recruit fighters in many regions of the

S/PV.7936

world, flooding the Internet and other channels of
mass communication with their propaganda. Youth and
socially bereft groups of society are in the line of fire.
Exactly one year ago, on 11 May 2016, the Council,
under the presidency of Egypt, held an important debate
(see S/PV.7690) on the matter of countering terrorist
propaganda. Building on the outcomes of that meeting,
and in accordance with a chairman’s statement adopted
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee a few days ago,
a comprehensive international framework has been
developed on the matter. We believe that it is a promising
basis for the further activity of the Committee and its
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate. We hope that
the document will be adopted swiftly as a Security
Council resolution, a draft of which was proposed by the
delegation of Egypt. However, in the current context,
we are convinced that it is high time to strengthen the
legal and sanctions toolkit in combating the narrative
of terrorism.
We advocate the same approach with respect to
countering financing for terrorism. The results of the
December special meeting of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee on the matter demonstrated that resolutions
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015) are not being implemented
fully or by all States. That type of situation must be
addressed immediately. The current regime of the
Council, in particular in combating the financing
and material support for terrorists, requires rigorous
compliance and strengthening. We are grateful to
the Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
Mr. Aboulatta, for his able steering of the Committee.
Over the past month, as before, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee has been drawing on expert support and
on the work of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate, which continues to play an important role
in addressing the multidimensional tasks of countering
terrorism facing the Committee and Security Council
as a whole.
We fully share the view that the main thrust of the
Committee’s activities and its Executive Directorate
should be assessing States’ implementation of resolutions
1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014). In this regard,
we have seen significant progress, particularly in the
growing number of monitoring visits. However, there
is a need for clear delineation of priorities, focusing on
States that are at highest risk for terrorism in line with
Committee-approved classifications.

17-133209/21

S/PV.7936

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

We note the usefulness of trips to Afghanistan in
that regard. Visits to Central Asian States are currently
the last stage of the cycle. Underestimating the threat
hanging over the region could lead to the most dangerous
consequences. We think that in the work in Central
Asian countries there should be integration of the broad
experience and ideas of such regional organizations
as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the
Commonwealth of Independent States, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, and the Eurasian Group
on Combating Money-Laundering and the Financing
of Terrorism.
The Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) on sanctions
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and Al-Qaida is the Security Council’s most important
counter-terrorism mechanism. We pay due tribute
to Ambassador Kairat Umarov’s able leadership of
the Committee. We think the sanctions list should
appropriately reflect the highly active and everevolving terrorist threat. In this context, we support
the proposal for Member States to list new individuals
and entities. The Committee should consider the
relevant requests swiftly and, most importantly,
without politicization. Also important is increasing
the effectiveness of sanctions mechanisms, which
hinges on States’ compliance with their international
obligations in this field. Unfortunately, today problems
remain on this score.
The powers of the Ombudsman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) have been set forth in resolution
2253 (2015). We think them most appropriate. However,
unfortunately, the practical activities of this institution
do not always address mandated tasks and are subject to
increasing criticism. Often, we see excessively focused
and short-sighted approaches, ignoring the views of
interested States. We support the work of the Monitoring
Team, whose reports are a major linchpin of the work of
the Committee. We call upon Member States to closely
cooperate with experts of the Team. Yet we do trust
that its reports will be as objective as possible and rely
solely on trusted sources of information.
With regard to the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we should first
and foremost like to extend our heartfelt thanks to
Ambassador Sacha Sergio Llorentty Solíz for his deft
steering of the Committee and for his contribution to
its activities. We also thank the Committee’s group of
10/21

11/05/2017

experts for the advisory support provided with respect
to components of weapons of mass destruction and
expert control.
We are essentially pleased with the work of the 1540
Committee, which is a solid buffer against components
of weapons of mass destruction falling into the hands of
non-State actors, including terrorists. The Committee
continues its effective work in assisting countries in
carrying out the provisions of the resolution. There
are very few States left that have yet to present their
national reports. We think it would be justified to hold
official meetings of the Committee more regularly.
This year, a far-reaching programme, stemming from
the conclusions of the 2016 comprehensive review and
the resulting resolution 2325 (2016), is planned.
In the light of the unabated terrorist activity in Syria
and Iraq from ISIL and other terrorist groups that have
acquired technology for the production of chemical
weapons and actively use them, resolution 1540 (2004)
is more relevant than ever. Our idea is that the 1540
Committee should continue its cooperation with the
other Security Council counter-terrorism committees
on this matter in the framework of its mandate.
Violations of resolution 1540 (2004) are inadmissible.
Information on non-State actors gaining access to
chemical weapons requires thorough investigation and
response from the Security Council. There is such an
urgent need to combat acts of terrorism that the toolkit
offered by resolution 1540 (2004), while carrying out
an important role, just like the toolkit offered by other
targeted resolutions, is simply not enough. What we
need today are global and comprehensive approaches.
We are ready to make this happen.
In conclusion, we would again like to underscore
our interest in strengthening the weapons of mass
destruction non-proliferation regime and our readiness
to spare no effort here, drawing upon close cooperation
with regional and international partners.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking the Chairs of the three Committees — the
Permanent Representatives of Egypt, Kazakhstan and
Bolivia — for sharing the activities of their Committees
with us, as well as for their excellent work as Chairs.
Today we are facing terrorist attacks all over the
world. Numerous foreign terrorist fighters in Iraq
and Syria are returning to their countries of origin or
relocating to other regions, including South-East Asia.
17-13320

11/05/2017

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

S/PV.7936

Their tactics are evolving, including through the use
of “broken travel” techniques with forged passports.
As the Chairs have indicated, we have countered these
developments by fully implementing all the recent
counter-terrorism resolutions, including on aviation
security, international judicial cooperation, and
protection of critical infrastructure (resolution 2341
(2017)). The adoption of those resolutions is important,
but their implementation is equally vital.

I would like to return to the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). North
Korea continues to conduct ballistic-missile launches
and nuclear tests in blatant violation of Security
Council resolutions. Chemical weapons have been used
in Syria, including by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. These striking examples demonstrate that the
threats posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction are very real.

I would like to note one concrete action item.
Resolution 2178 (2014) and the subsequent presidential
statement (S/PRST/2014/23) respectively encourage
Member States to utilize advance passenger
information (API) and Passenger Name Records (PNR)
systems. API contains passport and flight information,
while PNR contains passengers’ booking information,
including itineraries, names of travelling companions
and payment methods. This information helps the
authorities analyse and detect possible foreign terrorist
fighters before they arrive at airports. However, to my
knowledge, only 56 out of 193 Member States have
introduced the API system, and only 15 use the PNR
system. I urge all Member States to implement these
systems as soon as possible.

It is therefore the responsibility of every State
to protect itself and its people by strengthening
international and domestic non-proliferation measures.
Proliferation activities must be prevented whenever
and wherever they are undertaken or attempted.
Implementing measures related to paragraph 3 of
resolution 1540 (2004), including the development of
national control lists, is increasingly important. The
1540 Committee and its Group of Experts can assist
States wishing to strengthen their domestic measures.

The use of API and PNR is just one example of
implementation measures made pursuant to resolution
2178 (2014). Many others are also required to stem the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters with forged passports,
such as using biometric tools and INTERPOL’s Stolen
and Lost Travel Documents Database. We must enhance
our own capabilities and extend assistance to those in
need in order to effectively implement the resolutions.
With regard to resolution 2178 (2014), in March
2017, Japan provided $1.1 million to the Capacitybuilding Implementation Plan for Countering the
Flow of Foreign Terrorist Fighters set up pursuant to
the recommendation made in presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/11. However, this plan has so far acquired
only 23 per cent of the funding it needs. I encourage
Member States to contribute to this comprehensive plan
to stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, which
would focus not only on countering such fighters and
foreign terrorist fighter returnees but also on preventing
violent extremism as well. Japan will continue to
support and actively engage in the discussion on the
United Nations counter-terrorism architecture to
ensure that the new office of counter-terrorism can
most effectively coordinate relevant bodies on counterterrorism and on preventing violent extremism.

Japan therefore attaches high importance to direct
interaction between Member States and the Committee.
Joint visits to States by the Committee and the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate are particularly
valuable in that regard.
Japan disbursed $1 million to the Trust Fund this
year to support the work of the 1540 Committee. A
significant portion will be used to finance those types
of direct interaction. Japan urges interested States to
contact the Committee. As the coordinator of Working
Group I for monitoring and national implementation,
my delegation would also be happy to relay any message
to the Committee.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank the Chairs
of the Committees for their briefings this morning. As
they have set out clearly today, the Committees perform
a crucial role in our continuing fight against terrorism.
That work is intricate and vital, and I thank them for
their service to the Security Council.
The threat is one that so many countries around
this table know only too well. The United Kingdom
witnessed it less than two months ago in the horrific
attack in Westminster, which claimed the lives of
five people and injured more than 50 more. It speaks
volumes of the threat we now face that the senseless
actions of one man on one day could affect the lives of
innocent men and women from 12 countries, including
the United States, France, China and Italy, as well as

17-1332011/21

S/PV.7936

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

peoples from my own country. That is just one example
of many.
We share a common threat, one that demands a
shared response and is continually evolving. Just as
terrorists pursue every means possible to carry out
their hateful acts, so too must we pursue every available
avenue to stop them. The three Committees are an
important part of that effort, so let me take up each,
briefly, in turn.
First, I welcome the work that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate are doing to galvanize our efforts
to tackle terrorists on every front — whether combating
illicit trafficking, the financing of terrorism or the abuse
of the Internet and other forms of communication.
Secondly, thanks to the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, and its Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to
resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning
ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, we have a clear, up-to-date
understanding of the evolving threat posed by Da’esh
and Al-Qaida. I welcome the Committee’s work in
keeping the sanctions list up to date, ensuring that
individuals, groups and entities joining or affiliating
with those groups are listed.
Thirdly, thanks to the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we
are taking tangible steps to prevent weapons of mass
destruction from falling in to the hands of terrorists and
non-State actors. Sadly, as the Joint Implementation
Mechanism has confirmed, this is no longer a
hypothetical nightmare scenario. To adapt to this new
reality, it is important that the Committee take account
of new and emerging challenges from the terrorist
threat, and advances in science and technology. And
we must all do more, as others have said, to encourage
Member States to submit their reports on the national
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
To defeat terrorism, we all need to play our part.
The Committees cannot do it alone. That is why the
United Kingdom has been such a champion, in the
Council, for aviation security — including through
resolution 2309 (2016). Protecting civil aviation should
be high on everyone’s counter-terrorism agenda. We
12/21

11/05/2017

all need to follow the international standards and
recommended practices for aviation security developed
by the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO), which are designed to keep pace with the
evolving nature of the threat. Member States should
recognize, support and draw on the cooperation
between the United Nations and ICAO and take steps
to strengthen that work. The CTC’s upcoming meeting
on aviation security in July is an important opportunity
to focus on that issue, to share best practices and to
explore how the United Nations and ICAO can best
support Member States.
Finally, it is not enough to simply counter terrorism.
We must also ensure that we put the prevention of
violent extremism, in all of its forms, at the heart of
our collective efforts. We have made good progress
over the past year. The prevention of violent extremism
was recognized in the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and was presented in the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
in January 2016. As we go forward, it is essential that
we keep preventing violent extremism at the heart of all
of our work.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Let me, at the outset,
commend Ambassadors Aboulatta, Llorentty Solíz
and Umarov for their insightful briefings and their
leadership of the Committees they chair.
Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction continue to pose a serious threat
to international peace and security. The threat is
constantly evolving and recent alarming developments,
including the use of chemical weapons in Syria by State
and non-State actors, have demonstrated the tangible,
concrete challenge faced by the international community.
The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its Group of
Experts are linked to the United Nations broad CounterTerrorism Committee and its work. Paragraph 27 of
resolution 2325 (2016) underscores that linkage and
complementarity, and reiterates the need to enhance
ongoing cooperation among the 1540 Committee, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism — through
17-13320

11/05/2017

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

information sharing, coordination of visits to States,
technical assistance and other issues of relevance to all
three Committees.
Terrorist individuals and entities are benefiting
from rapid developments in science, technology and
international commerce for proliferation purposes. That
phenomenon demonstrates how the abuse of emerging
scientific innovation can facilitate the spread of illicit
proliferation activities, particularly through the illegal
transfer of sensitive technology. This shortfall enables
terrorist entities and transnational criminal networks to
obtain access to weapons of mass destruction and make
it harder for States to put in place effective controls to
prevent proliferation activities.
Since no country is immune to the terrorist threat
today, it remains imperative for Member States to
take the necessary steps to effectively implement the
most relevant resolutions and to put in place long-term
prevention efforts, in compliance with their obligation
under international law, including human rights law. In
that regard, Italy recognizes the ongoing work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and, in particular, their efforts to assist Member States to
achieve the full implementation of Council resolutions
on terrorism and to identify important issues, trends
and developments.
Acknowledging the ability demonstrated by terrorist
individuals and entities to easily adapt to changing
circumstances, including the capability to misuse the
internet and social media to spread their hateful message,
recruit sympathizers, raise and move funds, CTED and
the Swiss non-governmental organization ICT4Peace
Foundation launched a joint project on private sector
engagement in order to respond to terrorists’ use of
information and communications technology.
We encourage CTED to further pursue work on
private sector engagement, in response to terrorist
use of information and communications technology.
Furthermore, we welcome the CTC’s recent adoption
of the proposal for a comprehensive international
framework aimed at countering the ways terrorists use
their narrative to encourage, motivate and recruit others
to commit terrorist attacks — submitted last month to
the Security Council for its consideration.
The 1267 Committee and its sanctions regime
remain crucial tools in the international community’s
effort to detect and disrupt the activity put in place

S/PV.7936

by terrorist individuals, groups and undertakings. We
strongly support the work of the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions
1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh),
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities, particularly its regular report, focused
on the evolutionary threat posed by ISIL, Da’esh and
Al-Qaida and their affiliates, as well as its trip reports
aimed at curbing the current threat posed by those
entities in specific countries.
In that regard, we look forward to cooperating
with the Monitoring Team during its visit to Italy in
the second half of the year. In acknowledgment of the
importance of the delisting mechanism, we also want
to pay tribute to the relevant role played by the Office
of the Ombudsperson and its effort to guarantee due
process and transparency in undertaking its function.
Resolution 1540 (2004) and the second comprehensive
review on the status of its implementation remain
central pillars of the international non-proliferation
architecture and have become even more important
in the current context, which is characterized by
acute and diffuse threats in which the distinction
between international and internal security is blurred.
The full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is
still a goal to be achieved and a long-term task that
requires continuous effort at the national, regional and
international levels, sustained and intensive support
from the Security Council and direct interaction with
States and the relevant organizations.
In this regard, and this is my final point, we
welcome all of the outreach activities conducted by the
1540 Committee and its strong engagement in providing
capacity-building assistance and encouragement to
those States that need to implement their obligations.
Considering the tools currently available in countering
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, we
believe that particular attention should be paid to
the field of biological weapons. Similarly, enhancing
protection of the critical infrastructure relevant to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction from
the increasing risk of cyberattack is a necessity today.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Close collaboration
between the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities; the Security Council

17-1332013/21

S/PV.7936

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism; and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) is essential to achieving the goal of effective
international cooperation in the field of countering
terrorism and the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMD), including through ensuring
the comprehensive implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.
We would therefore like to thank our three
colleagues for having provided extensive information
on the activities of the respective Committees and
highly commend the efforts of the Chairs and the
respective expert groups.
In particular, we take positive note of the increase
in the number of their country visits and other outreach
activities aimed at facilitating the improvement of
national counter-terrorism mechanisms, assisting in
the identification of terrorist threats on the ground
and assessing countries’ needs in the area of technical
assistance. Recent examples include the visits carried
out to terrorist-vulnerable regions such as Afghanistan
and the Lake Chad basin by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and the 1267
Committee Monitoring Team. The close cooperation
between these expert groups also contributes greatly to
the Secretary-General’s periodic reports on the threat
posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and its affiliates worldwide.
Let me briefly touch upon an issue of
particular importance to the functioning of the
respective Committees.
The recently adopted resolutions of the Security
Council, specifically 2309 (2016), on aviation security;
2322 (2016), on international judicial cooperation;
2341 (2017), on protecting critical infrastructure; and
2347 (2017), on protecting cultural property, have
significantly expanded the mandate of the CounterTerrorism Committee and CTED.
We are pleased that these topics are duly reflected
in the Committees’ programmes of work and that
CTED is doing its utmost to deliver expert support for
the activities of the United Nations and Member States
in these areas. Yet we have to admit that the effective
implementation of the mandated tasks requires adequate
capacity and resources.
14/21

11/05/2017

It is very encouraging that CTED has managed
to share this increased workload with its research
network, which started off by producing, on the heels of
resolution 2341 (2017), a comprehensive trends report
on the protection of critical infrastructure against
terrorist attacks. We therefore support the strengthening
of CTED’s capabilities and look forward to the review
of the Directorate’s mandate this December.
Ensuring the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) underpins my country’s position in the
field of non-proliferation. Given the objective need for
continuous improvement in the process of the practical
implementation of the provisions of the resolution,
Ukraine maintains active discussions at the national
level and in inter-agency meetings, with the participation
of representatives from all relevant State bodies as well
as the respective non-governmental organizations and
community experts on the issue, so as to strengthen
the coordination of all national institutions involved in
the process.
Our national implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) will be enhanced by the development of a road
map that addresses in particular the following areas.
The first is the development of a national action
plan for the implementation of the resolution. In this
connection, we recall that according to paragraph 8 of
resolution 1977 (2011), States Members of the United
Nations are invited to develop national action plans
that define their priorities in this direction. Other
undertakings include the establishment of a national
contact centre in Ukraine and of an inter-agency working
group on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
as well as interaction between Government agencies
and non-governmental organizations.
Given the growing threats and challenges in the field
of non-proliferation, the development of cooperation
between the public and private sectors, including
industrial and specialized research institutions, is of
particular relevance.
The year 2016 marked a significant stage in the
fostering of the WMD non-proliferation regime. A
possible use of weapons of mass destruction is a clear
and ever-present danger to humankind. The risk of the
world’s most dangerous materials falling into the wrong
hands, either intentionally or as a result of neglect or
oversight, remains high.
17-13320

11/05/2017

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Thus, strengthening cooperation in preventing the
proliferation of WMDs and their components, as well
as building synergies among all stakeholders, including
the relevant international, regional, subregional and
non-governmental organizations, is an urgent task. In
this light, the 1540 Committee should also continue
to promote outreach activities, in conformity with the
recommendations of the comprehensive review and the
provisions of resolution 2325 (2016).
We therefore join others in reconfirming
our support for the comprehensive review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which
culminated in the unanimous adoption of resolution
2325 (2016) in December last year. The conclusions and
recommendations of the 2016 comprehensive review,
once properly implemented, will significantly reinforce
or even re-energize resolution 1540 (2004). The
review report clearly demonstrates the differentiated
implementation progress regarding both WMD types
and the various obligations contained in the resolution.
The document also contributes to defining specific
areas for each concerned party as to where national,
regional or international efforts should be intensified.
However, despite all the measures taken by Member
States to reduce proliferation risks, the world is
witnessing growing and ever more sophisticated threats
in this area. These risks arise not only from gaps in
national legislation, but also from the rapid development
of science and technology, as well as e-commerce and a
lack of threat awareness among academia, industry and
civil society.
Over the past decade, chemical and biological
materials have been quite often referred to as potential
weapons for terrorists, non-State actors and rogue States.
This assumption appears to be correct, as confirmed by
recent events. Ukraine’s position in this regard is very
clear: any use of weapons of mass destruction, under
any circumstances, has to be met with a strong response
from the international community. The perpetrators of
such abhorrent acts must be held accountable, and the
Council cannot afford to remain silent or indifferent on
this subject.
Mrs. Audouard (France) (spoke in French): May
I first thank Ambassadors Aboulatta, Umarov and
Llorenty Solíz for their briefings and for their leadership
at the helm of the three Committees.
Terrorism today is one of the greatest threats to
international peace and security, as evidenced by the

S/PV.7936

all-too-frequent attacks we hear about in the news. The
risk of terrorists acquiring and using weapons of mass
destruction is a disturbing reality that we have already
had to face.
As underlined by the Chair of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities,
Da’esh continues to pose an increasingly complex
and multifaceted threat despite the military pressure
to which it is subject on the ground. In addition to
the attacks ordered directly by the group, the ones
carried out in Nice, Berlin and Stockholm make clear
that Da’esh’s barbarous ideology continues to push
radicalized individuals to take action.
In this context, our collective response must be
robust and well thought out.
The 1267 Committee fulfils two essential missions
to which France attaches great importance. The first
is analysing the terrorist threat via the reports of the
Monitoring Team, which are very detailed and valuable
to Member States. The second is implementing andd
rigorously monitoring the sanctions list. In that regard,
we encourage all Member States to continue to submit
requests for listing. For that system to remain credible,
the procedures should also respect the fundamental
freedoms of those on the list. The establishment
of the Office of the Ombudsperson in 2009 was an
unprecedented action taken by the Council to improve
procedural safeguards. France welcomes that step, as
well as the considerable work carried out by Ms. MarchiUhel in that post, and encourages all States to continue
to cooperate with the Office of the Ombudsperson.
The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism also fulfils two functions in a complementary
manner. The first is to make States aware of the new
trends that characterize the ever-changing threat of
terrorism. The special meetings of the Committee,
such as the one we will have on 21 June on international
legal and police cooperation, are an excellent means
of informing States and discussing together certain
specific issues.
The second function of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee is to examine how States implement
major Council resolutions: resolution 1373 (2001),
on combating terrorism in general and its financing;

17-1332015/21

S/PV.7936

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

resolution 1624 (2005), on combating incitement to
commit terrorist acts; and resolution 2178 (2014), on
foreign terrorist fighters, to name a few. It is therefore
essential that States accept visits from the Executive
Directorate so that it can assess their counter-terrorism
system and formulate the best recommendations. It is
also essential that the relevant United Nations entities,
including the Task Force, be able to implement technical
assistance programmes based on those evaluations
and recommendations.
In general, France encourages the continuation of
the joint meetings of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the 1267 Committee in order to compare the
analysis of the terrorist threat and the assessment of the
implementation of the Security Council resolutions.
Finally, I would like to say a few words about
the important work being carried out by the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), chaired by Bolivia.
The risk of biological, chemical and nuclear
materials falling into the hands of terrorists is a real
danger. It is now known that Da’esh has chemical
capabilities in Syria and Iraq. The Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism has established
that Da’esh used mustard gas on at least one occasion in
Syria in 2015. Added to this are the remaining doubts
as to the Syrian declaration on its chemical programme
to the OPCW. Moreover, the potential existence of
residual capacity on Syrian territory only increases that
risk, which we take very seriously.
It is therefore more important than ever to adapt
our effort as the threat evolves. The review carried
out in 2016 confirmed that the progress achieved in
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
subsequent resolutions was tangible, both nationally
and regionally. The great majority of Member States
have now adopted measures that transpose the
provisions of the resolution into national law. Whether
it concerns the securing of sensitive materials and
goods, the strengthening of border controls or even,
where appropriate, the establishment of export control
mechanisms, the international community is on standby
to ensure that such sensitive materials and goods cannot
fall into the hands of terrorists.
The adoption of resolution 2325 (2016) has made
it possible to adapt and strengthen our tools to combat
this threat. By bolstering the cooperation, assistance
16/21

11/05/2017

and interaction that must guide our efforts, we will be
able to better prevent the risk of acquisition of weapons
of mass destruction by non-State actors. France will
remain fully involved in that regard.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Ambassadors Umarov, Aboulatta
and Llorentty Solíz for their briefings. The Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), under the leadership of the three ambassadors,
have actively carried out their work. That is something
that China appreciates.
Terrorism is a common enemy of the whole of
humankind. Da’esh, Al-Qaida and other terrorist forces
pose a serious threat to international peace and security.
Counter-terrorism capacity-building in all countries
and international counter-terrorism cooperation
need to be strengthened urgently. The prevention
of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery is a shared task of the
international community. Under such circumstances,
the international community should strengthen
cooperation by implementing comprehensive policies
and effectively dealing with these issues.
First, the 1267 Committee is an important Council
counter-terrorism mechanism. It evaluates the threats
of terrorism organizations, strengthens sanctions
measures and ensures that the relevant Council
resolutions are implemented effectively. Indeed, it
plays an important role. Recently, the 1267 Committee,
pursuant to the mandate of the Council’s resolution,
carried out a review of the sanctions list, strengthened
its work on listing and delisting and conducted other
review work. It has strengthened cooperation with
the Monitoring Team and the Ombudsman and has
consistently improved its working methodologies,
efficiency and effectiveness. Its work is full of
positive results. China hopes the 1267 Committee will
strengthen its communication with the Member States
concerned, strengthen its cooperation with regional and
subregional counter-terrorism mechanisms and support
the capacity-building and counter-terrorism efforts
of relevant countries and regional organizations. The
1267 Monitoring Team and the Ombudsman should
follow the Security Council resolutions and the rules
17-13320

11/05/2017

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

of procedure of the Committee by further improving
their work and jointly maintaining the mechanism’s
effectiveness and authority.
Secondly, the 1373 Committee, supported by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
has promoted the full implementation of the Council’s
resolution, monitored new terrorist threats and evolving
trends and provided technical assistance in the area of
counter-terrorism, thereby playing an important role in
that regard. China supports the continuing attention
given by the 1373 Committee to the fight against the use
of the Internet by terrorist organizations for terrorist
activities and financing. China welcomes the 1373
Committee’s submission of proposals to the Council for
a comprehensive international framework on counternarratives. China hopes the 1373 Committee will
continue to strengthen its dialogue with Member States
and have better coordination and cooperation with
other United Nations agencies. Furthermore, it hopes
the Committee will help Member States to strengthen
their counter-terrorism capacities so as to cooperatively
deal with the new challenges of terrorist organizations
using the Internet for their terrorist activities.
Thirdly, the prevention of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery is a common challenge for the international
community. It is also an important component of the
global governance. In 2016 the 1540 Committee carried
out a comprehensive review of the implementation of
the resolution by Member States and the work of the
1540 Committee. It also produced a comprehensive
review report.
The Council also adopted resolution 2325 (2016)
unanimously. In the next stage of work, the 1540
Committee, guided by the Council’s resolutions and
the programme of work of the Committee, should
insist on Member States playing a leading role in
non-proliferation efforts, and avoid the establishment
of new mechanisms. It should give priority to meeting
the needs of developing countries so as to strengthen
their capacity to implement the resolutions. China
is against all forms of terrorism and is actively
implementing relevant United Nations resolutions in
earnest. China is taking part actively in international
counter-terrorism cooperation. China is willing to work
with the international community to promote actively
international cooperation on counter-terrorism, to
improve the non-proliferation system and to jointly
maintain international peace and stability.

S/PV.7936

Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank the
Permanent Representatives of Egypt, Kazakhstan and
Bolivia for their briefings and their leadership as Chairs
of their respective Committees.
Acts of terrorism continue to pose a threat
to international peace and security and affect all
regions of the world. We view such acts as attacks
on democracy and on our open and tolerant societies.
Terrorism in all its forms must be opposed, and those
responsible, obviously, held accountable. At the same
time, all counter-terrorism measures must be carried
out in accordance with international law, including
international human rights law, humanitarian law and
refugee law — a fundamental principle reiterated in
numerous Security Council resolutions.
We welcome and encourage the continued good
cooperation and sharing of information between the
three Committees, notably through close cooperation
between their respective groups of experts. It is
important to continue to find synergies while respecting
their distinctive mandates and tasks. I would like to
make three points in response to today’s briefings.
First, with regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, as Da’esh’s power and
attractiveness wane, its attacks have become even more
bloody and indiscriminate. It is turning to increasingly
desperate and malicious means to secure funds,
including kidnapping for ransom. Da’esh is a threat to
us all. The perpetrator of the attack in Stockholm last
month is suspected of being a sympathiser or member
of Da’esh. It is important that the Committee, with
the assistance of the its Monitoring Team, continue to
monitor and adapt its measures accordingly.
The growing security challenges involving
returning and relocating foreign terrorist fighters
calls for enhanced information sharing. The advice of
the Monitoring Team, as well as that of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, in
understanding those flows is extremely useful for
Member States, including Sweden, to better combat
the phenomenon. Every case must be assessed on its
own merits and may require the involvement of many
stakeholders at the local and national levels. Sweden has
introduced new penal code provisions related to travel
and financing so as to fully meet the requirements set

17-1332017/21

S/PV.7936

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

out in resolution 2178 (2014). It is also important that we
make use of existing international information systems,
for example within INTERPOL.
The Council has recognized sexual violence
as a tactic of terror, and we welcome the adoption
of resolution 2331 (2016) and the report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2017/249), submitted to the 1267 Committee by his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We look forward to reporting by the Monitoring Team
on those issues, and, with regard to the protection of
cultural heritage, we look forward to the SecretaryGeneral’s report at end of the year.
We welcome the Chair’s call for cooperation by
Member States in the annual review of the 1267 list.
For the sanctions regime to be credible and effective,
the listings must be factual and correct. We recognize
the important work carried out by the Ombudsperson
in that regard, as well as the impartial and professional
way in which she is carrying out her mandate. The
sharing of information with the Ombudsperson by
Member States helps to safeguard the credibility of the
listings, thereby strengthening the sanctions regime.
Secondly, with regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism, Sweden welcomes the many opportunities
for dialogue in the Committee on the current challenges
in countering terrorism. The goal of all counterterrorism activities must be to prevent terrorist attacks
from being carried out in the first place. At the same
time, fundamental principles, such as the freedom of
information and of expression, online as well as offline, and the freedom of association and assembly
must be upheld. Those freedoms represent the basis
of an open society that promotes critical thinking and,
consequently, resilience against terrorist propaganda.
Women play multiple roles in relation to terrorism,
including those of perpetrators, supporters, facilitators,
victims and preventers. We encourage the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate to apply
an integrated gender perspective in all its reports, as
mandated in resolution 2242 (2015).
Thirdly, and finally, regarding weapons of
mass destruction, resolution 1540 (2004) remains a
central pillar of the multilateral disarmament and
non-proliferation regimes. The goal of resolution 1540
(2004) — to stop non-State actors from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
18/21

11/05/2017

delivery — is closely linked to global anti-terrorism
efforts. The threat from non-State actors is real, and
its urgency has become even more evident with the
increased confirmed use of chemical weapons.
We welcome the role of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in facilitating
technical assistance, in particular by engaging actively
in matching offers and requests of assistance, including
through a regional approach. Sweden is engaged in such
cooperation with Ukraine in the area of export controls.
We welcome the decision to hold a special meeting of
the 1540 Committee devoted to intangible transfers of
technology, since more attention should be placed on
knowledge and information as central factors in the
acquisition of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Sir, for convening this meeting, which
we find very relevant and useful in the light of the
common goal that the three Committees share as
important subsidiary organs of the Security Council in
countering terrorism.
We express appreciation to all three Chairs — Amr
Abdellatif Aboulatta, Kairat Umarov and Sacha Sergio
Llorentty Solíz — and their respective teams for their
dedicated efforts.
With regard the report of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism (CTC), we recognize the indispensable
role that it plays in monitoring the implementation
of resolution 1373 and the other relevant resolutions
on counter-terrorism. Ethiopia also appreciates the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) in implementing the CTC’s
decisions. The expert assessments, which provide
assistance to Member States in the implementation of
Security Council resolutions on terrorism, have also
been very useful and relevant. We note in particular the
increase in the number of assessments and their followup on facilitating technical assistance, as reported by
the Chair, and appreciate the CTC as well as CTED for
their efforts in that regard.
We believe that the promotion of regional
cooperation should be strengthened and should also
focus on the most affected countries and regions. It
is right that the assessment visits to Member States
should be followed-up with the facilitation of capacitybuilding and technical assistance where there is a need
17-13320

11/05/2017

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

to fill in the existing gaps. In that regard, we would
like to commend the role of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and other bilateral partners
in their continued engagement with the CTC and the
CTED. We also note that identifying new threats,
emerging trends and potential responses; countering
terrorist financing, transnational organized crimes and
their linkage to the funding of terrorism, the misuse of
social media for the purposes of financing terrorism, as
well as establishing awareness of the increased use of
the Internet and other communication technologies for
terrorist purposes, have also been given due attention
by the Committee.
In all those areas, the engagement and cooperation
of all relevant stakeholders, both public and private,
remain very critical. We appreciate the timely submission
by the Council of the comprehensive international
framework to counter terrorist narratives as requested
by the presidential statement adopted on 11 May 2016
(S/PRST/2016/6). We believe that developing counternarratives should benefit from existing good practices
and also take into account respective national contexts
so as to be effective.
The work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities is very critical in
overseeing the sanctions measures imposed by the
Security Council on ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and
associated groups, individuals, undertakings and
entities, in accordance with the relevant resolutions. We
appreciate the report and updates that we have received
on the activities of that Committee. We recognize the
important work of the analytical support and sanctions
Monitoring Team in assisting the Committee’s work
and commend their expertise and professionalism. The
report rightly points out that Al-Qaida and its affiliates
continue to present a complex and difficult challenge to
international security. Moreover, the emergence of ISIL
has not strategically weakened Al-Qaida. Although
the decline in the number of volunteer fighters going
to Iraq and Syria is good news, we note the growing
challenge with regard to returnees and the relocation of
fighters. We note what South-East Asia and West and
East Africa are experiencing in terms of a rising level
of risk emanating from ISIL and Al-Qaida affiliates.
Therefore, enhanced information sharing among

S/PV.7936

Member States, as highlighted by the Monitoring Team,
remains vital.
We note with great concern the threat posed by
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, their
means of delivery and related materials, and of the
possibility of such weapons falling into the hands of
non-State actors, particularly terrorists. We believe
that the issue of the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction under the agenda of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) should
be seen from the broader point of view of a total ban
and elimination of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery. The objectives of resolution 1540 (2004)
can be best achieved through the gradual control and
reduction of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons,
leading towards their total elimination and prohibition.
In that regard, we welcome the ongoing discussions in
the context of the General Assembly to negotiate and
adopt a comprehensive and universal legally binding
framework on the prohibition of nuclear weapons with
a view to their total elimination. We believe that is
vitally important.
We concur with Ambassador Llorentty Solíz
that cooperation between the three Committees at
the experts’ level should continue. As a follow-up to
today’s joint briefing, the Chairs of the Committees
could consider convening a joint meeting between the
Committees at the experts’ level to identify concrete
measures or mechanisms that could help to further
enhance the existing cooperation with a view to
preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruction
into the hands of terrorists. In addition, the possibility
of the joint participation of the 1540 Committee’s Group
of Experts and the Monitoring Team of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities in national workshops
and regional meetings in the context of 1540-related
issues could be further explored, where appropriate.
Coordination between the 1540 Committee Group
of Experts and the Monitoring Team could also be
envisaged in relation to the capacity-building and
technical assistance provided to Member States or other
organizations. Such joint participation and coordination
would enable the 1540 Committee Group of Experts
and the Monitoring Team to coordinate their responses
to the risks posed by terrorists.

17-1332019/21

S/PV.7936

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

11/05/2017

Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today’s meeting for joint briefings on the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities and the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004). That is a result of improvements
in our methods of work and in coordination between
United Nations institutions, which is so essential to
having an impact. That is why it is a pleasure to be able
to thank Ambassadors Aboulatta, Llorentty Solíz and
Umarov, the Chairs of those three Committees, whose
statements very much reflect the level and quality
of the cooperation they receive. In a global context
marked by increasingly violent and sophisticated
attacks by terrorist and extremist groups such as
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State and their affiliates,
it is encouraging to see these three vital Security
Council entities combining their efforts to implement
their mandates. Given these terrorist groups’ ability
to adapt, especially to technological change, and their
increasingly clear willingness to create as many victims
as possible — civilian victims in particular — in their
attempts to achieve their aims, a well-coordinated
mobilization of international efforts is essential to
prevent them getting their hands on weapons of mass
destruction in particular.

Based on that, and with a view to helping Member
States improve their implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the delegation of Senegal
would like to highlight the following points. First,
beyond their collaboration with one another, it is
important that the three Committees under discussion
work to establish and strengthen partnerships at the
national, regional and international level with all the
parties involved, both public and private, in the areas of
the sharing of information, experience and intelligence,
and in coordinating operations so as to disrupt terrorists’
supply chains and improve border controls — all of this
in order to better understand Member States’ priorities
and needs and improve the coordination of assistance
to them.

In this global mobilization of efforts to combat the
threat of terrorism and violent extremism, it is crucial
to ensure that Africa does not become a weak link or
fertile ground for the spread of terrorist groups and
transnational criminal organizations, since besides
groups such as Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram and Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb, there are indications that the
Islamic State is trying to move into other parts of the
world, including the Sahelo-Saharan zone of Africa,
using foreign terrorist fighters, among others, to
spearhead those efforts. In 2011 the United Nations
assessment mission on the impact of the Libyan
crisis on the Sahel region reported that all sorts of
sophisticated weapons were being circulated and
smuggled, threatening the stability and security of the
countries of the region. We can add to that situation the
problems of transnational organized crime and every
kind of trafficking, including trafficking in drugs and
in persons.

In conclusion, my delegation encourages this
tripartite collaboration and hopes that it can be
expanded, as far as possible, to other United Nations
entities whose remits cross the mandates of the three
Committees. All of this will have limited effect on
the fallacious propaganda of terrorist organizations
and violent extremists if the international community
in general, and the United Nations and the Security
Council in particular, cannot come up with doctrinal
responses and solutions to problems of inequality
and development.

20/21

Secondly, while the Committees’ mandates differ,
we encourage their continued collaboration in
complementary areas, such as joint participation in
country visits, in the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force and in drafting the Secretary-General’s
reports on the threat posed by the Islamic State.
Thirdly, the political commitment of the African
Union is to be commended not only for its cooperation
with the 1540 Committee at conferences for countries
requesting assistance, but also for taking action in
subregions, through, for example, the Multinational
Joint Task Force in the Lake Chad basin and the
standby force being generated by the Group of Five for
the Sahel.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as representative of
Uruguay.
I would like to thank the ambassadors of Egypt,
Kazakhstan and Bolivia, the Chairs of the three
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
17-13320

11/05/2017

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities, and to resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004), and their detailed briefings on the Committees’
work combating terrorism. I would also like to thank
the Executive Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee,
the Group of Experts of the 1540 Committee and as the
Office of the Ombudsperson for the work they do in
accordance with their mandates. Uruguay encourages
cooperation and coordination between the Committees
and we hope that it will continue in the areas discussed
and that other possible areas of cooperation can be
found, particularly with regard to the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force.
In our view, the Committees’ reports provide
us with very useful information that allows us to
understand the dimension of the terrorist phenomenon
and how it is developing.
With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
we particularly appreciate the country visits by the
Committee’s Executive Directorate, which make
it possible to identify strengths and weaknesses in
normative matters, as well as in institutional, technical
and operational capacity. This, in addition to the
identification and exchange of good practices and to the
role that the Committee meets in providing technical
assistance, are an example of what international
cooperation can offer to those countries that need it.
In that connection, we appreciate in particular
the recent visit to Uruguay by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, as well as its
recommendations and assessments, and we express our
desire to continue to work together with it in a spirit of
frank cooperation. This is important to us, not only to
prepare us from a national perspective, but also as part
of our commitment to the United Nations system and
as an expression of our responsibility to and solidarity
with members of the international community. We also
consider very useful the thematic reports and meetings
organized by the Committee to address different
aspects of the terrorist phenomenon.

S/PV.7936

With regard to the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253
(2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL)/Da’esh, Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, we believe to be
of vital importance the Committee’s monitoring of
ISIL, Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities and its important work to
neutralize the capacity for action of all who are included
on the Committee’s sanctions list through the freezing
of assets, travel bans and arms embargoes. However,
we note that a large part of the effectiveness of the
sanctions regime depends on the cooperation and the
commitment of States to keep the list up to date. The
creation of the Office of the Ombudsperson, pursuant
to resolution 1904 (2009), represents an important step
forward in favour of procedural guarantees that help to
provide the regime with impartiality and transparency.
With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), we are concerned by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the
growing risk that these could fall into the hands of
non-State actors, including terrorist groups. That is why
consider important the preventive role played by the
1540 Committee and the work of the Committee in its
areas of work: implementation, assistance, cooperation,
transparency and dissemination.
While the mandates of the three Committees differ,
there are important areas of complementarity and
cooperation among the Committees and the experts
is important to promote the effective implementation
by States of their obligations pursuant to Security
Council resolutions.
In conclusion, for Uruguay, it is crucial that we
continue all antiterrorist activities in the framework
of the rule of law and that we respect and protect
fundamental freedoms.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

17-1332021/21
