S/PV.7271

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7271st meeting

Friday, 19 September 2014, 2 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kerry/Ms. Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland  . . . .

Mr. Zuain
Ms. Bishop
Mr. Mahamat
Mr. Riveros
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Fabius
Mr. Judeh
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Asselborn
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Ms. Mushikiwabo
Mr. Ellwood

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq

14-54191 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1454191*

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 2.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
The President: It is my pleasure to warmly
welcome the extraordinary turnout of Ministers and
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. The participation here today and the number
of people who have travelled from afar — some of
whom, like Laurent Fabius, are going to turn around, go
right back and then come back again — and the extent of
the dedication of so many in being here, given the press
of business for everyone in the Chamber, is a statement
in and of itself about the importance of the matter under
discussion. We are therefore deeply grateful, not just
for the response to our invitation but to all the countries
that have understood the responsibility and seriousness
of this moment. We thank everyone heartily.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Bahrain, Belgium, Canada,
Denmark, Egypt, Finland, Germany, Georgia, Iraq, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Lebanon, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Poland,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Spain, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Turkey and the United Arab Emirates to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: It is indeed an honour to brief the
Security Council today on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral.
This is the fourth time I have addressed the Council
on the devastation inflicted on the people of Iraq by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). On behalf
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), I would like to thank the Security Council
for its continued interest and unity in expressing
support for the people and the Government of Iraq, as
2/43

19/09/2014

well as for making it possible for our Mission to fulfil
its mandate. The Council’s consistent calls for inclusive
political engagement, timely elections and a process
for forming a Government have not gone unheeded. Its
condemnation of the violence and human rights abuses
has been welcomed by Iraqis. Finally, its consistent
pronouncements, most recently through the adoption
of resolution 2170 (2014), continue to encourage the
people of Iraq by letting them know they are not alone.
Iraq’s transition has been painful and scarred by
much violence. Its people, however, have shown an
unmatched ability to persevere, despite the difficulties.
Most recently, amid a rapidly deteriorating security
environment, they came out to vote in a competitive
election that was followed, finally, by a peaceful
transfer of power. As Iraq’s new Government of
national unity is moving to restore security to large
parts of the country, it is also seeking to strengthen
the relationship between the ethnic and religious
communities and to develop inclusive policies that
contribute to social peace and cohesiveness. It is also
looking to the international community for support.
Today, as Iraq faces life-threatening danger from
the advances of ISIL, its people look to the countries
represented here — the members of the Security
Council, their neighbours, allies and friends. They look
to the international community and the United Nations
for collective measures aimed at removing this threat to
peace in Iraq and the rest of the region.
Since the beginning of the year, ISIL and its
affiliated armed groups have captured large parts of
northern and western Iraq. They have gained access
to substantial amounts of weapons and financial and
natural resources. Their networks, spanning the globe,
reach out in order to recruit foreign fighters in their
battle to dismantle the Iraqi State. Months before
Mosul fell into ISIL’s hands, the provinces of Anbar
and Ninewa had become fertile ground for this terrorist
organization. Throughout this period the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq observed and underscored
the organization’s evolving strategy of terror, which
continues to systematically undermine the legitimate
authorities through kidnappings, assassinations and
violence. It seeks to use the discontent among some
communities to turn it into bitterness and violence. It
is using its consolidated control over extended territory
in both Iraq and Syria, combined with an ideology of
hatred, fear and nihilism, to present a clear danger to
the very existence of a unified Iraqi State. It is a threat
to the region and to international security.
14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

In recent weeks, the combined efforts of targeted
airstrikes, Iraqi security forces and Kurdish Peshmerga
operations have enabled some areas to be brought back
under the control of the legitimate authorities. They have
been instrumental in saving thousands of lives from
imminent death on Mount Sinjar, in the town of Amirli
and elsewhere. They have protected the city of Erbil;
they have safeguarded key infrastructure, including the
Mosul and Haditha Dams, and they have halted ISIL’s
advance towards the capital, Baghdad. Despite those
successes, however, ISIL forces have most recently
been able to take control of key towns in Salahadine
province. But I am encouraged to report that in the face
of this growing threat, cooperation and coordination on
security between the Federal Government of Iraq and
the Kurdistan Regional Government has substantially
increased.
Iraq is facing an escalating emergency, with as
many as 1.8 million people displaced since January.
About 850,000 of them have sought refuge in the
Kurdistan region alone. Just in the past fortnight, an
additional 10,000 families from Diyala province have
been displaced from their homes. The humanitarian
crisis is not just in the north of the country; tens of
thousands of people have fled to the south, where
many are being hosted by families and religious
institutions. The pressure on local communities across
the country is growing, since the continuing influx
has created a massive shelter crisis. With winter fast
approaching, immediate and critical measures must
be taken. Furthermore, since more than 2,000 schools
are currently providing shelter to internally displaced
persons (IDPs) throughout the country, the start of the
school year has already been delayed by a month.
In response, the United Nations has mounted a
massive humanitarian effort across Iraq to provide
food, shelter, water, sanitation and health assistance.
We continue to face immense challenges in reaching the
estimated 650,000 people who are still in the areas of
active conflict. I would like to take this opportunity to
call on the Government of Iraq to formulate a national
strategy to address the displaced people’s situation, as
well as to immediately restore the payment of salaries
and essential social services throughout the country.
The Government’s efforts must be encouraged and its
financial commitments to remedy this humanitarian
catastrophe must be recognized. The United Nations
stands ready to provide additional help in improving
the coordination and delivery of services.

S/PV.7271

On behalf of the entire United Nations family, I
would like to thank those Member States that to date
have responded to our call for assistance and followed
through with generous support to the United Nations
humanitarian effort. I would also like to recognize the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which has contributed some
$500 million of the total $712 million given so far for the
United Nations effort in Iraq. Over 60 per cent of that
substantial donation has already been spent on tents,
food and other items for the hundreds of thousands of
internally displaced persons. Having said that, I have
to note with growing concern that available funding for
humanitarian operations will be exhausted before the
winter and additional support will be needed.
The current crisis has had a devastating effect on
the respect and protection of human rights in Iraq. The
United Nations estimates that, since January, there have
been some 25,000 civilian casualties, including at least
8,500 killed and more than 16,000 wounded. On behalf
of the Secretary-General and the entire United Nations
team in Iraq, I extend my deepest condolences to the
families of all civilian casualties across Iraq and to the
victims of terrorism. Minority communities, including
Christians, Yazidis, Shabaks, Turkmen, and others,
have been particularly targeted by ISIL, which has
systematically and deliberately sought to cleanse them
from territories under its control, perpetrating acts that
may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity
and possibly genocide.
The United Nations Mission in Iraq continues
to investigate reports of violations and abuses of
international humanitarian and human rights law. Our
teams have conducted over 500 interviews with victims
of and witnesses to those violations. As a result of
those investigations, the United Nations has verified
systematic and widespread human rights violations
committed by ISIL and associated armed groups, along
with violations and abuses committed by armed groups
supportive of the Government and some committed by
the Iraqi security forces. A public report was published
in July, while a second one is currently in preparation.
Due to the gravity of the crimes committed by ISIL,
I welcome the decision of the United Nations Human
Rights Council to dispatch a mission to Iraq to investigate
alleged violations and abuses of international human
rights law and humanitarian law.
The fall of Mosul forced people to understand that
it was not just the survival of their country that was at
stake, but the very existence of their communities. All

14-541913/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

Iraqis, no matter what ethnic or religious community
they belong to, stand to lose if they fail to cooperate
against the growing threat of terrorism, radicalism and
extremism. Today there is a growing understanding
that if any security plan is to succeed, it needs to be
broadly accepted by all. There is agreement among
key decision-makers that security cannot be provided
without full respect for the Constitution, the rule of
law, international humanitarian law and human rights
standards.
The conditions that breed discontent and violence
in Iraq need to be addressed as a matter of priority
so that disaffected communities, particularly those
currently located in conflict areas, can be brought back
into the democratic process. The Iraqi Constitution
remains the guiding framework for legitimately
resolving all grievances. Reforms that allow for better
service delivery, policies that contribute to social
peace and development, the devolution of authority,
fair revenue-sharing among provinces, efficient public
services, measures to combat pervasive corruption and,
perhaps most importantly, the strengthening of the rule
of law and democratic accountability will all allow the
country to move forward.
Transitional justice and reconciliation are impossible
without addressing the human rights violations of the
past and the present. Left unresolved, past grievances
or abuses of human rights will undermine any attempt
to resolve outstanding constitutional, legal or policy
issues. I am pleased to report that, since its appointment,
the Government has taken important steps and made a
strong beginning for its collective work. I very much
welcome Prime Minister Al-Abadi’s recent orders
to suspend Iraqi air force strikes in civilian areas,
including in ISIL-controlled areas, and his public
commitment to the protection of civilians. I urge the
Government of Iraq to fully uphold that commitment.
As Commander-in-Chief, Prime Minister Al-Abadi has
also taken the initiative to restructure the leadership of
the Iraqi armed forces. Those decisions are encouraging
steps towards meeting the demands for reform.
I further welcome the Council of Ministers’ decision
to establish a reconstruction fund to rebuild the areas
damaged by military operations. The United Nations
stands ready to assist in that respect. The United Nations
stands ready to assist in this respect. I am also pleased
to report that the Council of Ministers has initiated the
process of drafting a law for the creation of a national
guard. This will allow for the devolution of authority

4/43

19/09/2014

and will strengthen local engagement in the provision
and management of security.
In his most recent address to Parliament, the
Prime Minister committed to resolving the outstanding
budgetary disputes between the federal Government and
the Kurdistan region. I encourage the Iraqi Government
to swiftly move forward on restoring subsidies, starting
in September, to the provinces of Dohuk, Erbil and
Sulaymaniyah. The federal Government and the
Kurdistan Regional Government should move quickly
to reach agreement on the outstanding payments. And
finally, it is time for the pervasive issues of revenue
and budget sharing to be resolved in line with the
Constitution. As always, the United Nations in Iraq
stands ready to continue to facilitate that process.
All members of the international community should
continue to work closely with the Government of Iraq
and the Kurdistan Regional Government and extend
to Iraq the security, humanitarian and development
assistance it needs.
The stakes are very high for both the people of
Iraq and the region. Iraq and all its regional neighbours
have an unprecedented opportunity to restart positive
bilateral relations based on mutual interests and
partnership. That cooperation should be open and
inclusive of all neighbours who can contribute to
addressing the challenge of ISIL. The recent adoption
of resolution 2170 (2014), the Arab League Resolution
7804, the Jeddah Communiqué, the Paris Conference
on Peace and Security in Iraq and the recent NATO
discussions all strengthen international support for
Iraq in its time of need. The United Nations stands
ready to support Iraq and the region by coordinating
the political, social, humanitarian and financial efforts
needed to address the current crisis.
To conclude, let me be very clear. ISIL is a scourge
that has brought untold sorrow to the people of Iraq and
Syria. It has shown contempt for equality, fundamental
human rights and the dignity and worth of the human
person. It not only ignores but also shows disdain for
international law, and its perverse ideas of justice
are evidence of its deep reaction against the progress
humankind has made over centuries. That threat, grave
as it is, can be addressed if Iraq, the region and the
world work together on the basis of the framework
of the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for his
briefing. We all thank the Secretary-General and
14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

Special Representative Mladenov, whom we thank in
particular for all the work he is doing as the head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq. We are very
grateful.
The Council has before it the text of a statement
by the President on behalf of the Council. I thank
Council members for their valuable contributions to
this statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members, I shall take it that the members of
the Security Council agree to the statement, which will
be issued as a document of the Security Council under
the symbol S/PRST/2014/20.
It is so decided.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim
Al-Jaafari, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Iraq.
Mr. Al-Jaafari (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to express my appreciation to you, Sir, for
convening today’s meeting in the light of the serious
threat we face not only in Iraq but throughout the whole
world. I also value the presence of my colleagues, the
Foreign Ministers of friendly countries, whose presence
here today proves the gravity of the threat we face. We
also wish to thank the United States for convening this
meeting with a view to mobilizing international support
to face up to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) and its affiliated organizations. I would also like
to welcome the briefing by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq.
Iraq reaffirms its determination to face up to
terrorism as an international scourge that must be
eliminated. It is extremely important that there be
coordination and cooperation among all parties. The
influx of terrorist fighters from all over the world to
establish a state under ISIS is a grave danger not only
to Iraq and Syria but to the entire region. Fighting those
terrorists in Iraq and sparing the Iraqi people their evil
is in the interest of the entire world. This war is being
launched against the people of Iraq, who are fighting on
behalf of all other peoples. They have violated our land
and the dignity of humankind. All the Iraqi people —
Christians, Yazidis, Turkmen, Shiites, Sunnis and
Kurds — are united in spirit against that evil.
We would like to restore peace and stability so that
we can restore public services to the people, especially
in the affected areas. The action of ISIS has led to the

S/PV.7271

displacement of more than 1.8 million Iraqis towards
Kurdistan and other areas in the south. However,
in spite of the political and security challenges, the
newly elected Government has cooperated with United
Nations agencies in Iraq to alleviate the suffering of
the people and to enable security forces to restore their
control over the entire territory of Iraq and to assist
displaced persons to return to their homes.
In spite of those challenges and the continued
threats, the Iraqi people have been able to hold their
national elections, followed by the formation of a unity
Government that pays interest to the concerns of the
entire people of Iraq in all its factions and that has
committed itself to implement the main principles in
the document of political agreement among Iraqi blocs,
signed on 8 September, to enhance national unity and
social cohesion and to take the necessary measures to
face up to terrorism. We have as a nation agreed on the
formation of a national Government that includes all
sectors of society. Mobilizing all efforts internationally
and regionally to face up to terrorism is an effective
way to deal with other challenges that face the region.
We believe that the main responsibility for fighting
ISIS and the other terrorist organizations on our
territory belongs to us and the Iraqi armed forces, the
Peshmerga forces and the national guard. However,
assistance from friendly nations is required for aerial
support.
We have taken every step to enhance national unity
and to take unified action. We had previously warned
that the situation in Syria would eventually affect Iraq
and that this major threat should be removed, not only
from Iraq but from any other country. On 25 June, Iraq
called on the Security Council for assistance from the
international community. I should therefore like to
state the following.
Military, economic and financial assistance to
Iraq should continue to support its counter-offensive
against ISIS. Removing the threat of Daesh requires the
removal of all its fighters, including in neighbouring
countries. Any military actions against ISIS should be
done in coordination with the Iraqi armed forces.
Humanitarian assistance should be provided
urgently to alleviate the suffering of more than
1.8 million people, including women and children.
We call upon States Members of the United Nations to
remain committed to the implementation of the Human
Rights Council resolutions and Security Council

14-541915/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

resolutions in that regard, with a view to drying up the
sources of financing and military support to ISIS and
to preventing ISIS from dealing in natural resources in
the areas that it controls.
The United Nations strategy against terrorism has
stressed those points, and we would like to emphasize
that this threat will not be removed unless we fight the
extremist ideas that support it. The advocates of such
extremist ideas should be prevented from public speech
and should be countered at all levels. The people and
the Government of Iraq appreciate the roles played by
the United Nations, European nations and other nations,
including Arab brotherly countries that have assisted in
providing for the needs of the displaced and in assisting
people in affected areas where fighting has been severe.
We all face a grave danger that has no respect for
human rights or humanitarian aspects. We should all
work for the opposite culture of love, prosperity and
cooperation.
Finally, we would like to express our appreciation
for the assistance provided by the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, particularly the
humanitarian assistance to displaced persons, and to
reaffirm our appreciation and thanks to Mr. Mladenov
and his team for their dedication in assisting Iraq in
this crisis.
The President: I thank His Excellency
Mr. Al-Jaafari for his very important statement. We
very much appreciate your leadership in the new Iraqi
Government’s efforts.
It is now my privilege to make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
At the outset, let me express my thanks to everyone
for participating in this meeting. I have seen in the past
weeks when travelling around how extraordinarily busy
everyone is and how committed to the effort everyone
has been through their actions as well as through their
incredibly busy schedules. I am convinced that the fact
that so many countries are represented in the Council
today from so many parts of the world really underscores
the clear need for all of us to come together, to welcome
and to support the new inclusive Government in Iraq,
and to put an end to the unfettered barbarity of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
I want to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and to welcome our new Iraqi counterpart, Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Al-Jaafari. I do not need to remind
the Council that the last two times the eyes of the world
6/43

19/09/2014

were focused on Iraq was when its Government was in
confrontation with the international community, with
great consequences. Today, however, we come together
in support of the new Iraqi Government, which has
already made great strides in a short length of time. We
must not miss this moment.
In the past week, I made my second trip to Baghdad
in just over two months in order to meet with the new
Iraqi Government. I was very encouraged to hear them
reaffirm their commitment to govern in the interests
of all Iraqis and to finally address the deep divisions
of which we are all aware, including those over energy
resources, regional autonomy and the composition
of the security forces. All of those have plagued Iraq
throughout its modern history. They are also committed
to empowering local communities to mobilize, to
maintain security control in their areas and to work
with the international community to defeat ISIL.
Indeed, Iraq has responded to the ISIL threat with
a spirit of unity that the country has not experienced
in decades, if ever. In the past month, an Iraqi-Arab
pilot, Major General Majid Ahmed Saadi, flew an Iraqi
Air Force helicopter with a Kurdish crew and a Yazidi
member of Parliament with the single goal of rescuing
Yazidis on Mount Sinjar. Tragically, the helicopter
crashed. Major General Saadi was the only one killed,
but before he died, he told a New York Times reporter
that the mission to rescue the Yazidis was the most
important thing he had ever done in his entire life and
career as an Iraqi pilot. That historic level of cooperation
between Iraqi and Kurdish forces has resonated deeply
in both communities.
As President Obama explained earlier this month,
ISIL is a terrorist organization, pure and simple. It has
no vision other than the slaughter of all who stand in
its way. In a region that has known so much bloodshed,
these terrorists are actually unique in their brutality.
They execute captured prisoners, kneeling them down,
tying their hands behind their backs, a bullet through
their heads. They kill children. They enslave, rape and
force women into marriage. They threatened a religious
minority with genocide. In acts of barbarism, they took
the lives of two American journalists, Jim Foley and
Steven Sotloff, and British aid worker, David Haines.
Simply, ISIL poses a threat to the people of Iraq and
Syria and the broader Middle East. If left unchecked,
those terrorists certainly would pose a growing threat
beyond the region — because they have already
promised to do so.

14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

Ultimately, history will judge how the world
responds to this moment, to this challenge. In the face
of this sort of evil, we have only one option to confront
it with a holistic, global campaign that is committed and
capable of degrading and destroying this terrorist threat
and ensuring that ISIL cannot find a safe haven in Iraq,
Syria or elsewhere. As President Obama has clearly
explained, and as I think everyone in this Chamber
is well aware of at this point, the coalition required to
eliminate ISIL is not only, or even primarily, military
in nature. It must be comprehensive and include close
collaboration across multiples lines of effort. It is
about taking out an entire network — decimating and
discrediting a militant cult masquerading as a religious
movement.
The fact is there is a role for nearly every country
in the world to play, including Iran, whose Foreign
Minister is here today. ISIL poses a threat to all of us,
and we are committed to working in close partnership
with the new Iraqi Government and countries around
the world to defeat it. That is why I have spent the
past week consulting with my Iraqi counterparts and
travelling in the Middle East and in Europe, building
partnerships, and that is why we were so focused on
hosting the meeing here today.
I also thank Foreign Minister Saud Al-Faisal for
Saudi Arabia’s leadership in hosting its conference in
Jeddah, and President Hollande and Foreign Minister
Laurent Fabius in France for their leadership in hosting
the conference in Paris. From each of these has come
a greater and greater commitment to doin what we
need to do. I have to say that in many of the meetings
that I have had so far, leaders are not talking about if
they should support our campaign against ISIL; they
are asking how. Already, across each of the lines of
effort that we are focused on, we have seen more than
50 countries come forward with critical commitments.
Regarding military support, countries in the region
and around the world are already providing assistance,
both in terms of kinetic action and also in the form
of training, advising, equipping, providing logistical
support and so on. In the region, countries such as
Egypt have committed to significantly enhancing the
coordination between its forces and Iraqi and Kurdish
forces. But even further away from Iraq, countries
such as Australia are committing to deploying fighter
jets, support aircraft and personnel. Germany, in
recognition of the grave threat posed by ISIL, reversed
its long-standing policy against offering lethal aid. Last

S/PV.7271

night, France conducted its first air strikes against ISIL
targets in Iraq. These forms of assistance, provided at
the request of Iraq and in full respect for its sovereignty,
are essential to combating ISIL, but they are only one
part of the comprehensive approach that is required.
We are also seeing overwhelming support when it
comes to humanitarian assistance. Dozens of countries
from throughout the international community have so
far committed almost $1 billion to the United Nations-led
humanitarian response in Iraq. That includes donations
from countries within the region — Saudi Arabia, Qatar
and elsewhere — as well as funds from countries on
the other side of the world: Japan, New Zealand, South
Korea and more. We are seeing encouraging progress
in the effort to dry up ISIL’s illicit funding as well, and
Bahrain has offered to host an international conference
in the near future to further develop a global action
plan to counter terrorist financing.
As we will discuss next week at the meeting that
President Obama will preside over, we must also stop
the flow of foreign fighters to ISIL — men and women
who carry passports from countries around the world,
including nearly every country represented in this
Chamber. This is yet another area where countries
have already begun to take important steps, including
legislation criminalizing the recruitment, preparation
and participation of their citizens in combat activities
of terrorism abroad.
Finally, there is an urgent need to counter the
poisonous propaganda and gross distortion of Islam
that ISIL is spreading far and wide. It is time to put
an end to a group that is so extreme in its rejection
of modernity that it bans math and social studies
for children. It is time to put an end to the sermons
of extremists that brainwash young men to join these
terrorist groups and commit mass atrocities in the name
of God. This is something that leaders of the region are
very focused on. Saudi Arabia’s top clerics this week
came out publicly and declared terrorism a heinous
crime under Sharia law and called ISIL in particular
“the order of Satan”.
All of this is vital, because we know that in
preventing an individual from joining ISIL or from
getting to the battlefield in the first place, that is
the most effective measure one can take. But if this
campaign international to have any chance of success,
Iraq itself — and its security forces on the front
lines — must be leading the way. That is one of the
reasons why it is imperative that we all go the extra

14-541917/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

mile to help Iraq fully reintegrate into the region and
into the global community of nations. That is starting
to happen. Last week, the Iraqis, long estranged from
their neighbours and isolated from the world, were not
just invited, but were warmly welcomed at international
meetings in Jeddah and Paris, and now here in New
York, before the Security Council and the entire world.
What is different about today’s meeting — and
this is one reason why we are so grateful to so many
ministers for travelling here — is that at previous such
meetings the world did not share in the deliberations or
the discussions formally as they went on; they heard
afterwards. Today, the world can listen to each of the
ministers, and it will understand the breadth and scope
of the support for this effort. We are well on our way,
but that does not mean that we are where we need to be.
I hope that today the progress that I have described will
continue, and that over the course of this week more
partners will come forward and more commitments to
these efforts will be announced.
Make no mistake — our work to build and enhance
this coalition will continue well after this week is over.
I commit that to those here, and President Obama
firmly commits it to. One of our most respected
military experts sitting right here behind me, General
John Allen — who served in Afghanistan in command
of our forces there for two years and also in Iraq, and
who knows many of the people in Iraq from his service
in Anbar — has agreed to come to the State Department
with a presidential appointment and oversee the United
States effort to match up each country’s capabilities
with the coalition’s total needs so that the line of effort
is coordinated.
I look forward to hearing from all of those here in
the course of this afternoon. Again, I would close by
thanking everybody for joining this discussion, and I
am absolutely confident that through a global campaign
that is comprehensive and committed, we can support
the promise of the new Government in Iraq, and we can
defeat the ISIL threat wherever it exists.

19/09/2014

that country, the region, and indeed the world. Your
leadership today, Mr. President, and the presence of
a number of ministers in this debate are an indication
of the will of the international community to honour
its obligation to support and protect the Iraqi people
against the threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL). It is unfortunate that every time the
Security Council defaults on its inherent responsibility,
that of the maintenance of international peace and
security, the human cost is just unbearable.
We all know that the conflict in Syria has been
a breeding ground for ISIL. That terrorist group has
committed mass and gross atrocities that may amount
to crimes against humanity. Its ongoing persecution of
Christians, Yazidis and other religious minorities for
simply who they are may even amount to genocide.
The unprecedented brutality of this group should and
must reinforce our resolve to protect the many innocent
civilians caught up in the cruelty they have had nothing
to do with.
We take this opportunity to express our condolences
to all of the bereaved families.
Baghdad is far from Kigali in more aspects than
only geography. But the plight of many Iraqi people
today is no different from that of many Rwandans
20 years ago. Faced with unprecedented cruelty, they
looked to the world for help. I am the Foreign Minister
of Rwanda and, as such, I carry Rwanda’s experience of
abandonment in 1994.
We believe that the international community
must act fact and act collectively to deny this terrorist
group any hold to territory, any access to financing
and any channel to recruitment, which has allowed
it to kill children and adults, behead journalists and
humanitarian workers, enslave women and girls and
persecute religious minorities.

I now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Louise
Mushikiwabo, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Rwanda.

There are opportunities upon which we can build
our support for the people of Iraq and to eradicate the
ISIL threat. First, there is the ability, demonstrated
by the Iraqis, to come together and form an inclusive
Government led by Prime Minister Haider Al-Abadi.
Indeed, unity among Iraq’s communities is critical
to ensuring any sustainable success against ISIL: the
effort against that organization should be nationally led
and owned, with the support of all.

Ms. Mushikiwabo (Rwanda): I thank the United
States for organizing this important debate on the
situation in Iraq at this very challenging time for

Secondly, we should take advantage of the existing
building blocks. We acknowledge the active role played
by the United States in building a coalition to fight the

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

8/43

14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

terrorist group. The upcoming Security Council meeting
on foreign terrorist fighters that President Obama will
preside over next week will be another opportunity
to garner global support for the effort. We are also
encouraged by the outcome of the Jeddah ministerial
conference held on 11 September, which brought
together States members of the Gulf Cooperation
Council, as well as Egypt, Iraq, Turkey, Jordan and
Lebanon. We commend their resolve for a coordinated
military campaign against ISIL. In the same spirit, we
welcome the outcome of the international conference
on peace and security in Iraq held on 15 September in
Paris.
Thirdly, there is a critical need to ensure
implementation of resolution 2170 (2014), of 15 August,
and other relevant resolutions concerning the fight
against terrorism. There is a lot that the international
community can do, particularly this body, to stop the
influx of funding, starting by the implementation of
targeted sanctions. In that respect, countries of the
region and beyond should also play an important role in
preventing hatred and extremism and take the necessary
measures to prevent religious radicalization.
Before concluding, I should note that the rapid
advance of ISIL in Iraq and Syria has led to the massive
displacement of more than 2 million people, requiring
increased humanitarian assistance. We therefore call
on the international community to provide enhanced
support to the affected populations and countries.
Finally, Sir, we commend your delegation for
introducing the presidential statement that was just
adopted (S/PRST/2014/20). We also thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the entire team in the country for
their dedication to the people of Iraq in such a difficult
time and environment.
The President: Thank you, Your Excellency, for
the important reminder of the impact of inaction from
1994.
I now give the floor to Ms. Julie Bishop, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Australia.
Ms. Bishop (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for initiating this meeting today, for we must send a
clear signal of the international community’s strong
support for Iraq.
Australia endorses the terms of presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/20, which is an affirmation of

S/PV.7271

Iraqi and international efforts to combat the terrorist
threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and to provide humanitarian relief to prevent
further suffering.
The attacks by ISIL have brutalized the Iraqi
population and shocked us all. Atrocities against women
and girls and against vulnerable minorities and security
force opponents, as well as the barbaric use and then
beheading of captured journalists, an aid worker and
others, to advance their depraved agenda, are utterly
despicable. Who can forget the grotesque image shown
around the globe of an Australian child, not more than
nine years old, standing with his father, an ISIL leader,
holding up the severed head of a soldier? That showed,
beyond any ambiguity, the kind of hideous acts of which
the group is capable.
Australia condemns absolutely ISIL and its ilk and
their barbarism and their ideology. The international
community cannot, with any conscience, turn away. We
cannot leave the people and the Government of Iraq to
face that cruelty alone.
ISIL’s actions leave in no doubt the severity of
the threat to the region and the wider world. It poses
a threat to Australia, our friends in South-East Asia
and beyond. We have seen it before — extremists and
foreign fighters, returning home — responsible for
terrorist attacks in our region.
Australia’s security and law enforcement agencies
have taken steps in recent days against a group in our
country inspired by ISIL that was seeking to emulate its
brutality in Australia. ISIL is a threat to the fundamental
values of the international community and an affront to
our shared sense of humanity.
Australia has announced its preparedness to
do more to help Iraq and its partners in the fight. In
cooperation with Iraq, we are deploying a military
force to the region for possible involvement in a United
States-led effort to support Iraq against ISIL. We are
willing to provide strike, early warning and air-toair refueling aircraft, and a special forces task group
to advise and assist the Iraqi security forces. That is a
prudent and proportionate response to the threat posed
by that murderous terrorist organization.
Efforts to effectively end ISIL’s ravages and
territorial ambitions will necessarily involve measures
to cut off ISIL’s support network, including the flow
of fighters, arms and funding. There is more we can
all do. Australia is introducing legislative reforms to

14-541919/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

address the threat from home-grown terrorism and is
intensifying its counter-terrorism engagement with
others. We urge other Member States to do the same.
Political measures are also needed. The formation
of a new Iraqi Government is a positive step towards
addressing issues that contributed to ISIL’s advance.
Australia supports Prime Minister Al-Abadi as he seeks
to form an inclusive Government capable of rebuilding
a stable and cohesive Iraq that can counter the forces of
violent extremism.
The security situation in Iraq remains grave. The
humanitarian needs, including of innocent women
and girls in conflict zones, are multiplying. Nearly
2 million people are believed to be internally displaced.
Those people are vulnerable. Their protection needs are
urgent. ISIL has explicitly targeted minorities, and also
women and children for sexual violence. There must be
consequences for the perpetrators.
Australia will help to specifically address the needs
of displaced women and girls and victims of genderbased violence and will provide a further $2 million to
help the United Nations Population Fund to scale up the
delivery of reproductive and other health care. Australia
has provided $5 million in emergency humanitarian
funding to Iraq, and we have undertaken air drops
of emergency supplies to besieged communities on
Mount Sinjar and in Amerli. We have also provided
approximtely $130 million in humanitarian aid for
those in dire need in Syria and have assisted Lebanon
and Jordan in facing the outpouring of refugees across
their borders.
The humanitarian crisis must end. The international
community cannot stand by and do nothing in the face
of ISIL’s threat to humanity. That is why Australia
is joining international partners to assist the Iraqi
Government in its fight against ISIL.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Nasser Judeh, Minister for Foreign and
Expatriates Affairs of Jordan.
Mr. Judeh (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to express our appreciation and gratitude to
the Government of the United States, represented by
Secretary of State John Kerry. We would like to thank
the United States for its initiative to convene and preside
over this very important Security Council meeting on
maintaining international peace and security.
This meeting is taking place on the basis of recent
conferences and meetings, in particular the Jeddah
10/43

19/09/2014

meeting, organized by Saudi Arabia and presided over
by Prince Saud Al-Faisal, as well as the Paris meeting,
presided over by the President of the French Republic,
in which Mr. Laurent Fabius also participated. Those
meetings sought to mobilize the necessary resources to
deal with the terrorist threat and to adopt a different
approach in support of the sister nation of Iraq in its
clashes with the terrorists who have taken control
of vast areas of Syria and Iraq. The Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant has gone beyond political and
geographical borders and is now a threat not only to the
political stability of the region but also to international
peace and security.
Today, the world faces an imminent threat that is
unprecedented in its savagery and in its capacity to
take root in society and to take advantage of political
and security vacuums and national unity issues within
States for its own purposes for political reasons or
owing to marginalization and division on religious or
other grounds. That threat seeks to establish its own
military and economic position and has given rise to
the situation facing us today.
The situation could further deteriorate if the
international community does not immediately act
robustly and decisively. Resolution 2170 (2014) lays
the groundwork for a comprehensive fight against all
aspects of the threat, in particular foreign fighters
and funding by international groups. In that context,
we support the idea of a Security Council meeting
on foreign fighters, to be presided over by President
Obama. We also endorse the initiative of Bahrain
to organize a conference to address the issue of the
financing of terrorism. We also welcome the Council’s
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2014/20. I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for his efforts in
that regard.
Jordan and King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein have
long warned about the possible spread of the Syrian
crisis beyond its territory, in particular to Iraq. The
failure of the inclusive political process in Syria and
in Iraq have therefore given rise to a climate conducive
to that terrorist organization, which moved from
Syria to Iraq, and vice versa. That situation allowed
the establishment of a network of alliances and took
advantage of the vacuums and political consequences
that I have mentioned. That led to its ability to control
large areas of territory in Syria and Iraq. Combating the
organization therefore requires an inclusive political

14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV.7271

process in order to restore national unity among the
various stakeholders in Iraqi society in line with an
inclusive Iraqi ownership.

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Jean Asselborn, Minister of Foreign
and European Affairs of Luxembourg.

In that context, the establishment of a new Iraqi
Government under the leadership of the new President
is an important step. We hope that it will move forward.
We support the efforts of the new Government in Iraq
to fight terrorism. I would like to thank Mr. Al-Jaafari
for his statement and for his briefing on the situation.
Jordan stands by Iraq in its efforts to promote stability
and security and to maintain its territorial integrity.
We call on all Iraqi political forces to participate in an
inclusive political process and in taking decisions, to
preserve the unity of the Iraqi people and to promote
national understanding.

Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
am grateful for your initiative, Mr. President, to convene
this ministerial debate at a time when the support of the
international community to the Iraqi authorities and
to the Iraqi people is more crucial than ever. I thank
Nickolay Mladenov, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing and for his service
at the helm of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Iraq (UNAMI).

In Jordan, as His Majesty the King has affirmed,
we are working to help combat extremism, terrorists
and their supporters and, in particular, to cut off their
financial sources. We are devoting our expertise and
efforts to deal with such extremism, including through
our efforts in the Security Council to overcome terrorism
and extremism, to promote dialogue among the various
faiths and ethnic and religious groups and to encourage
a better understanding of the noble religion of Islam. I
would like to recall the Amman Letter, issued a decade
ago, which, together with the many meetings in that
context, moved us forward in that direction.
We are all concerned about the fight against
extremism and in its various manifestations and
affiliated groups. We participate actively in regional
and international efforts to combat terrorism and
to deal with extremism. Our action on the basis of
Jordan’s national interests and its clear and sincere
position against the terrorism that targets us and has
led to crimes on our territory and against our people.
Restoring peace, security and stability in the sisterly
nation of Iraq directly concerns our own security.
That group has committed heinous crimes against
entities and parts of the very social fabric of the region.
That is an important part of our society. It is dear to
our hearts and has contributed to our heritage and the
nation-building. Islam is innocent of such heinous
crimes committed in its name. Our duty today as a
region and as the international community is to take
immediate measures to put an end to that cancer and
to its poisonous and destuctive thinking before it can
spread further and before it is too late.

I welcome the presence of Iraqi Minister for Foreign
Affairs Ibrahim Al-Jaafari, whom I had the pleasure of
meeting at the international reconstruction conference
for Iraq in Brussels in 2005 when he was Prime Minister
of Iraq. I would like to thank him for his compelling
and encouraging statement and to assure him of our full
support.
What has happened these past weeks is truly
horrifying. We all have before us the unbearable
images of victims in agony, the bodies of children
lined up, thousands of people trapped, without water
or food, in the desert mountains near Sinjar, and the
unspeakable, barbarous beheading of the two American
journalists, James Foley and Steven Sotloff, and of
British humanitarian worker David Haines.
We have all witnessed the massacres and atrocities
committed against civilian populations by the terrorists
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) during
the fighting in Fallujah and Ramadi, the assault on
Mosul, the conquests of Zumar, Sinjar and Tal Afar and
the seizure of Qaraqosh, Iraq’s largest Christian city,
which forced hundreds of thousands of Iraqis to flee
their homes.
The violence has reached an inconceivable level,
magnitude and intensity. Children as young as 15, 14
or even 13 years old are compelled by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant to bear arms, arrest civilians
and commit suicide attacks. The jihadists commit war
crimes and crimes against humanity on a daily basis,
including enforced disappearances, torture, sexual
violence and deliberate attacks against schools and
hospitals. An ethnic and religious cleansing campaign is
targeting the minorities in the north of Iraq, especially
the Yezidis, the Christians and the Turkmen.

14-5419111/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

In the face of those crimes, the extremism of this
terrorist group, which is neither a State nor Islamic and
which seeks to destabilize Iraq and the entire region,
the international community must act. It must take the
necessary measures to help the Iraqi authorities to fight
the scourge of ISIL and to end the suffering it inflicts
on men, women and children in Iraq. We know what
those measures are, because we have debated them
right here, in the United Nations. On 15 August, we
adopted resolution 2170 (2014) to impose sanctions on
ISIL and to cut off its sources of financing. Next week,
in the framework of a global anti-terrorist strategy, we
will adopt a new resolution to counter the threat posed
by foreign terrorist fighters.
It goes without saying that we must also take
security measures to counter and defeat the terrorist
threat. We support the commitment of the coalition
launched by the United States at the request of the Iraqi
authorities and with the active support of the countries
of the region. We must also step up our efforts in terms
of humanitarian assistance and for the protection of
civilians. We must enhance the work of the United
Nations to halt the suffering of the Iraqi people. For
its part, Luxembourg is providing financial support
to the World Food Programme and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
help displaced persons.
We believe that the improvement of the security
situation will first and foremost depend on the progress
achieved in the political sphere. The roots of the conflict
will not be eradicated by force. In that regard, we
welcome the inauguration of the new Iraqi Government
of national unity, under the authority of Prime Minister
Al-Abadi. It is now a matter of urgency to restart
the national dialogue and the national reconciliation
process, which are essential conditions for a return to
peace and social order. Only balanced development
that benefits all the ethnic and religious communities
in the country will be able eliminate the root causes of
injustice, violence and terrorism.
Arab culture and civilization is being violated.
Islam is being perverted from its philosophy of peace by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. It is essential
that religious leaders continue to weigh in and promote
the values and humanism of Islam.
Allow me to also highlight the mention made
in passing, which is nevertheless important, of the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iran.

12/43

19/09/2014

Indeed, Iran can and must play a positive role in the
fight against extremism, whether in Iraq or Syria.
To conclude, I would like to pay tribute to
the exemplary work done by the United Nations
humanitarian agencies and the International Committee
of the Red Cross and their personnel on the ground. I
commend also the crucial activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq in terms of mediation and
the promotion of respect for human rights, especially
for people in detention and the protection of children’s
rights. I can assure the Council that Luxembourg,
both bilaterally and through the European Union, will
continue to support the consolidation of the rule of law
in Iraq in order to contribute to full respect for human
rights.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of France, Mr. Laurent Fabius.
Mr. Fabius (France) (spoke in French): The terrorist
group Daesh has seized control of part of Iraq and Syria.
They wish to be known as the Islamic State. In reality,
they are butchers. Daesh does not have the legitimacy
of a State nor does it represent Islam. The Grand Imam
of the Al-Azhar Mosque in Egypt did not mince his
words, and rightly so, when he recently said: “they are
criminals who tarnish the image of Islam and Muslims”.
They rape, crucify, slit throats and behead. They employ
the most archaic forms of cruelty and the most modern
communications technology as a grotesque means of
propaganda. They seek to massacre, and they do so to
not only minorities, Christians, Yazidi, Turkmen, and
many others, but to all those who do not submit to them.
They are flouting the rule of law and civil society. They
represent a clear challenge to the international order
and the founding principles that underpin the United
Nations. Thus far, they have attacked Iraq after having
thrived in Syria with the regime’s support, but their
true aim is to extend to the entire region and beyond.
Let us be clear. If they could, they would want to hold
us all, or almost all, at knifepoint and gunpoint. Before
such a threat, there is no choice but to take action.
France, in line with its principles and tradition,
has decided to shoulder its responsibilities. We did so
recently to face terrorism in Mali and, in a different
context, in the Central African Republic. We did so in
Syria, where we were among the first to support the
moderate opposition, against both Bashar Al-Assad and
the terrorists. In Iraq, we have decided to once again
shoulder our responsibilities by providing humanitarian

14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

aid and military equipment and, today, answering the
call by the Iraqi Government to provide air support, in
compliance with international law. This morning, on
the instructions the President of the Republic, French
Rafale aeroplanes intervened against a warehouse
occupied by the Daesh terrorists near Mosul, in northeastern Iraq. The warehouse was completely destroyed.
In the coming days, and without engaging troops on the
ground, we will continue our efforts, in coordination
with all those who want to commit, and in particular
alongside the Iraqi armed forces and the peshmerga.
The action against Iraq in 2003 divided the
Council. In 2014, in a very different context, action in
favour of Iraq and against the Daesh terrorists is the
common duty of us all. This fight, which has already
claimed many innocent victims often under atrocious
circumstances — and our heart goes out to them — will
be won, first and foremost, by the Iraqis themselves.
Military support is essential, but, as we have all said, it
is not enough.
Iraq needs international political solidarity and
internal unity. Terrorists have exploited the divisions
among Iraqis and the serious frustrations of part of
the population. The election of the new President Fuad
Masum and the creation of the new Government by
Prime Minister Haider Al-Abadi, now clears the path
for common action, and we must stay the course. We
support the essential process of bringing about unity
in Iraq. We all believe that the success of that process
will require the building of an inclusive, stable and
peaceful Iraqi State. For the just cause of international
solidarity, we must bring together a maximum number
of countries of all orientations, faiths and sizes.
With regard to security, we know the priorities:
military support to Iraq; blocking the channels of
foreign combatants; and draining the financial resources
of the terrorists, which are primarily derived from oil.
That draining should be completely unambiguous to
everyone. We will not win with force alone. We also
need political support for the Iraqi authorities. As I
have said before, rebuilding the State and restoring
confidence among all Iraqi communities are priorities.
With regard to international humanitarian
assistance, with almost 2 million displaced persons, it
should be greatly increased, together with rebuilding
efforts. A bridge of international solidarity towards
Iraq is truly what is needed. And yet the evidence also
points to the fact that the rear bases of Daesh in Syria
need to be weakened specifically through powerful

S/PV.7271

support to the moderate Syrian opposition. We must
act on all those fronts and quickly, because we know
from experience that the cost of action dramatically
increases the longer it takes us to take a decision and
move to action.
The Paris conference on peace and security in Iraq
held last Monday was a milestone, as was the conference
in Jeddah a few days before. Today’s meeting at the
United Nations, whereby Secretary of State Kerry has
taken the initiative in a very timely manner, is another
important step. The message of France in this struggle
is clear. For peace and against terrorism, we must
assume our responsibilities. The Daesh murderers must
be fought and beaten; only then will Iraq and the entire
region find peace and security.
The President: I thank Laurent Fabius for an
eloquent and forceful statement and, on behalf of
everybody, we also thank him for the leadership of
France last week. We appreciated it enormously and
thank him for his literally heroic effort to be here today.
We are very grateful.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
African Integration of Chad.
Mr. Mahamat (Chad) (spoke in French): As this is
the first time that I have taken the floor in this Chamber,
allow me to welcome my colleagues and ministers. I
would like to thank the ambassadors representing our
States and the Secretary-General and those working
with him on the excellent work that they do on a daily
basis to maintain peace and security.
Peace and security remain dangerously threatened,
in particular by terrorism. In that regard, I refer to the
type of international terrorism represented by Al-Qaida,
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Al-Shabaab, Boko
Haram and Daesh, to mention but a few.
I would also like to thank Secretary of State John
Kerry for holding this open debate, which comes at the
right time, given the grave situation in which Iraq finds
itself. I also take the opportunity to welcome the United
States presidency of the Security Council during the
month of September and I assure it of our full support.
I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, and
our colleague Ibrahim Al-Jaafari, Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Iraq, for their briefings.

14-5419113/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

The political situation in Iraq is critical and has
been for several months now. The political upheavals in
the region, the disintegration of the States and foreign
interference have exacerbated internal conflicts.
For that reason, Al-Qaida and other assimilated and
affiliated terrorist groups, in particular Daesh, have
found fertile ground in which to spread their form of
transnational jihadism, thereby threatening peace and
stability in Iraq and beyond. Chad remains profoundly
concerned by the prevailing climate today in Iraq
following the large-scale offensives launched by Daesh,
which still control localities in the country. Daesh is
spreading terror and committing unparalleled atrocities
in Iraq and Syria. It is a real threat, not only to those
two countries, but also to the international community
as a whole.
That is why Chad, which treats the fight against
terrorism as a top priority, is playing its part, in
particular in Mali, where it has paid and continues
to pay a heavy price in the fight against terrorism.
Hundreds of Chadian soldiers have fallen — five just
yesterday — and dozens have been injured. We are
providing our unflagging support to the United States,
the States of the region, France and other partners,
which are doing all they can to prevent the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, or Daesh, from being able to
cause harm.
We believe that the fight against the terrorist groups
cannot be waged only through wide-scale military
action. There is also and above all a need to focus on
the deep-seated root causes of the Iraqi crisis. As we
know, Daesh has benefitted from fertile ground, which
has promoted its apparent expansion and has exploited
the feelings of frustration, injustice and despair
within a significant group of Iraqi society, which feels
discriminated and excluded from the management of
the country. Reconquering the Daesh-controlled areas
in Iraq will be possible only if the Sunni issues are taken
into account. Therefore, we believe it is necessary to
combat Daesh politically, militarily and ideologically
by integrating the local and regional complexities into
the strategies of an international coalition.
With that in mind, the international community
needs to support the Government of the new Prime
Minister Haider Al-Abadi in order to enable him to
establish an inclusive policy, breaking with the past,
bringing together all Iraqis around a social project,
free from the ethnicity- and sectarian-based conflict.
We call on all religious and civilian sectors in Iraq
to demonstrate their cohesion in order to turn a new
14/43

19/09/2014

page in their history. Furthermore, we believe that the
involvement of militias within the Government’s armed
forces might exacerbate intercommunity tensions and
perpetuate the political polarization.
Once again, we stress the need to address the
root causes of violence in Iraq and to accelerate the
political process by an inclusive national dialogue in
order to establish democratic governance, the rule of
law, social justice and equal opportunity. The people
of Iraq deserve to live in stable, prosperous and secure
State where all groups, including religious and ethnic
minorities, can participate in the political process and
have the opportunity to develop a sense of belonging.
I would like to most firmly condemn the attacks
perpetrated recently by Daesh against religious and
ethnic minorities in Iraq, as well as the beheading of
journalists and humanitarian workers. The authors of
those hateful crimes must be found so that they can
answer for their acts in court.
In conclusion, I think that in order for us to have
the greatest chances of overcoming what I have called
“the international terrorist”, we must act. We must act
in solidarity and in a coordinated manner at all times
and in all places.
The President: We obviously appreciate the holistic
approach that Chad endorses. We all acknowledge and
know that Chad understands the challenge very well.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Eduardo
Zuain, Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Argentina.
Mr. Zuain (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I would
first of all like to thank the Foreign Minister of Iraq,
Mr. Ibrahim Al-Jaafari, who is with us here today,
for his statement, and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing.
I also wish to extend my appreciation to the presidency
for organizing this debate, which is certainly important
and timely.
We are concerned about the serious security
and humanitarian situation in Iraq, which has in
recent months drastically deteriorated as the terrorist
organization Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
has gained ground. The transnational nature of that
terrorist organization is not only a threat to Iraq, but
it is also a threat to the stability of the region and the
international community as a whole.
This is a welcome opportunity to express our
solidarity with the Government and the people of Iraq,
14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

with people who have been victims of attacks and
their families, and with the huge number of people
who have been driven from their homes and who have
had to flee and seek refuge from the territorial gains
and terrorist persecution. We must take advantage
of today’s meeting to reflect on the problems in Iraq
and fundamentally discuss what should be the scope
but also the limits of the effective contribution of the
international community so that the Iraqis themselves
can successfully overcome the difficult circumstances
in which they find themselves. We are convinced that a
perspective that seeks to understand the origins of the
current crisis will allow us to make out the elements of
a collective response that is coherent in its formulation
and effective in its implementation.
From that point of view, without double standards
and based on the principles governing the foreign
policy of my country, I would like to make the
following comments. First, ISIL is a terrorist and
criminal organization. It uses military force, extreme
violence and intimidation to impose terror, attacking
and persecuting individuals and ethnic and religious
minorities. It is also true that it is exploiting sectarian
tensions and frustration which already existed in large
sectors of the Iraqi population and which were never
included in the political system after the fall of the
Baathist regime over a decade ago.
We therefore welcome the recent formation of an
inclusive Government within the terms set forth in the
Constitution. That was a key step, and it offers a new
opportunity for conditions to be created that would
allow Iraq to successfully meet the challenges that lie
ahead. We congratulate Prime Minister Al-Abadi and
offer our full support as he is striving to address the
difficult but essential task of satisfying demands that
have been postponed and rebuilding trust among all
Iraqi communities.
Secondly, there is no doubt that ISIL is a threat to
the security of the region and to international security,
which requires a firm response from the Security
Council. Any coalition that is formed to fight ISIS must
frame its actions in accordance of international law
and uphold the highest standards for the protection of
civilians. ISIL, which finds its origins in the turbulent
years that followed the invasion suffered by the country
in 2003, must not be the pretext for unilateral actions,
which have shown that they generate more problems
than they solved.

S/PV.7271

Resolution 2170 (2014), adopted by the Council last
month, provides clear criteria and parameters for action
by the international community in its fight against
terrorism. It reaffirms the obligation of all States
to take steps to cut off funding sources, prevent the
movement of fighters and stop the supply of weapons
used by terrorist organizations. That strong expression
of the will of the Council must be applied quickly and
without exceptions.
Thirdly, and due to its deep interconnection, the
crisis that has endangered the territorial integrity of
Iraq is a new and powerful call for attention to the need
to find a solution to the tragedy that is destroying Syria.
Just as in Iraq, where the formation of a new inclusive
Government has been a vital part of the strategy to
stop the spread of extremism, so it is in Syria, where
finding a political solution to the conflict should be at
the core of the international community’s priorities.
Also with respect to Syria, we must find a peaceful
solution and renew our efforts, particularly in support
of new Special Envoy De Mistura. We must show
determination to find a way out of this situation and
work with the parties, with the aim of making them to
sit down at the negotiating table.
Fourthly, we recognize the role of the United
Nations in coordinating the vigorous response of the
international community to assist the Government
of Iraq to meet the humanitarian needs of millions
of Iraqis who have been displaced and affected by
violence, especially the most vulnerable sectors. We
are convinced that lasting peace and security in and
the stability of Iraq are inseparable from sustainable
social and economic development. The United Nations,
through the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq,
should continue to play a central role to promote and
channel cooperation of the international community in
order to address the root causes of sectarian divisions,
exclusion and poverty.
Finally, the scale and nature of the crimes
committed by ISIL and associated armed groups that
abuse human rights of innocent citizens cannot go
unpunished. Therefore, the Council must take all
necessary measures and make every possible effort
within the framework of international law to protect
members of ethnic and religious communities that
are particularly vulnerable, including the Christian
minority. It is essential to ensure that the perpetrators
of these heinous crimes accountable for their actions

14-5419115/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

before the national and international criminal justice,
for without justice there will be no lasting peace.
Iraq is a great nation, immensely rich in history
and in human and natural resources. Learning from the
lessons of past experience, it is up to the international
community to provide all possible assistance so that
the Iraqis themselves can make decisions on the path to
follow, overcome this difficult period and develop their
full potential. Argentina is ready to continue to support
the Iraqi Government while it is building a better future
for all its inhabitants.
The President: I thank the Secretary of Foreign
Affairs for a strong measure of support and for a
forceful statement. We appreciate it.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Tobias
Ellwood, Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office of the United
Kingdom.
Mr. Ellwood (United Kingdom): I warmly
welcome your initiative, Mr. President, in convening
today’s important meeting on Iraq. I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mladenov
and Foreign Minister Al-Jaafari for their informative
briefings.
I would like to congratulate Prime Minister Haider
Al-Abadi on the formation of Iraq’s new Government
and welcome his commitment to creating an inclusive
Government that can work together to unite and
secure Iraq in the fight against terrorism and in the
pursuit of peace and prosperity. That is a critical
first step to addressing the serious security, political
and humanitarian challenges facing the country. The
United Kingdom also welcomes the new Government’s
comprehensive programme, especially its commitments
on decentralization, reform of Iraq’s armed forces,
dissolution of militia groupings and better delivery of
services and infrastructure to the Iraqi people.
The international community must help the
Government to deliver on these promises, and the
Government of Iraq must also demonstrate its own
unwavering commitment to delivering these reforms.
It is now vital that all political blocs work together to
overcome these challenges, including the threat posed
by ISIL. It is essential that Iraq’s neighbours, which are
all threatened by ISIL’s emergence, put their differences
aside and work together to deal with the threat.
The creation of an extremist so-called caliphate
represents a direct threat to the security and stability
16/43

19/09/2014

of the region and to the national security of other States
Members of the United Nations, including the United
Kingdom. In seeking to establish its extremist State,
ISIL is already aiming to use the territory it controls to
launch attacks against the West, including the United
Kingdom, and is clearly contributing to insecurity in
the region.
We condemn ISIL’s barbaric acts, including targeted
killings, forced conversions, abductions, trafficking,
sexual violence and sexual slavery. The callous and
brutal murder a few days ago of a British aid worker,
David Haines, following on from the equally appalling
murders of two American journalists, underlines ISIL’s
ruthlessness and use of fear to retain power.
The Council has been united in its condemnation
of ISIL and all it stands for. So the United Kingdom
is ready to take whatever steps are necessary to
deal with this threat and keep our country safe. We
will be working closely with our allies and the Iraqi
Government on building international support during
next week’s meetings.
The adoption of resolution 2170 (2014) sent a
clear political message to ISIL, Al-Nusra and other
Al-Qaida-inspired terrorists and has taken important
practical steps to combat the threat that they pose.
We strongly support the approach set out by President
Obama last week, which builds on a strong international
coalition working with Governments in the region and
others in order to defeat the threat from ISIL. We must
work together to drive back, dismantle and, ultimately,
destroy ISIL for what it stands for.
We
must
use
all
the
tools
at
our
disposal — humanitarian, diplomatic, political and
military — to squeeze ISIL. We must tackle its presence
in both Iraq and Syria, and we will continue to support
those moderate forces fighting against ISIL.
At the request of the Iraqi Government, we have
provided heavy machine guns and ammunition and
transported other vital equipment to help the Kurdish
peshmerga defend the front line, protect civilians and
push back ISIL’s advances. We also continue to give
priority to alleviating the humanitarian suffering of
those Iraqis targeted by ISIL terrorists.
The United Kingdom has already donated
$37 million in immediate assistance to provide clean
water, sanitation, essential medicine and funding for
non-governmental organizations and charities. During
the course of the conflict in Syria, we have also provided
14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

$1 billion in humanitarian aid, which is reaching all of
Syria’s communities, including those most at risk from
ISIL.
There needs to be a comprehensive, coordinated
approach with our regional allies at the forefront to
tackle ISIL. As part of this, the United Kingdom will
continue to be a steadfast supporter of Iraq and an
active contributor to international and regional efforts
to degrade and defeat ISIL and rid the world of this
repugnant terrorist organization.
As others have noted today, the sustainable
solution to this crisis lies in an inclusive, sovereign
and democratic governance. Only a united Iraq, with
a Government that has support from all of Iraq’s
communities, can rid Iraqi territory of ISIL and its
violent ideology.
The President: We thank Mr. Ellwood enormously
for the significant initiatives and contributions of the
United Kingdom. I also congratulate him on the fact
that the United Kingdom is still the United Kingdom,
and we are delighted that Scotland decided to hang in
there with you.
Mr. Ellwood (United Kingdom): Sir, it shows that
the democratic process is never complete but is always
ever-evolving.
The President: At least it evolved in the right way,
correct?
Mr. Riveros (Chile): We, too, wish to express our
gratitude for the initiative of convening this meeting,
given the relevance of the issue that we are addressing
here today.
On behalf of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Chile, Heraldo Muñoz, and of our Government, I am
here to cast a clear vote of solidarity with Iraq and to
send a message of encouragement to the Administration
of Prime Minister Al-Abadi, who has shouldered the
crucial task of defending the integrity of his State. He
is called upon to preserve not only its freedoms but also
the ethnic, religious and cultural diversity that has for
millennia been one of its characteristics.
Chile has expressed its strongest condemnation
of the barbaric methods used by the self-styled
Islamic State to impose its violent, Manichean vision
of the religion of peace and tolerance that is Islam.
Its disregard for life, for freedom of religion and, in
general, for the fundamental norms of civilization such
as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the

S/PV.7271

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
calls for a forceful but legitimate response from the
international community. Such response should come
from this body, whose task it is to maintain international
peace and security, in accordance with the Charter of
our Organization and international law.
Iraq has always been a central power in the Middle
East. Its territorial integrity and democratic viability
are prerequisites for regional stability and international
peace and security. That requires scrupulous respect
for the constitutional and civil rights of the ethnic and
religious communities that make up its social fabric.
Democratic governance in Iraq requires a
Government of national unity that implements
genuinely inclusive policies and presents a united front
against terrorism and intolerance. That is the main task
to be undertaken by the new Government, and it has our
full support in that respect.
The United Nations has a duty to assist Iraq in this
endeavour by putting behind its people the full weight
of the collective security actions legitimized by the
Charter and adopted by its membership, represented for
this purpose by the Security Council, in keeping with
Article 25 of the Charter.
Resolution 2170 (2014), which we unanimously
adopted in August under Chapter VII and which Chile
co-sponsored, is another step towards the consolidation
of the counter-terrorism architecture of the multilateral
system, as it provides a clear impetus for international
efforts in the fight against terrorism, in particular in
the Middle East, by putting into place new measures to
deal with terrorist groups that are seriously affecting
the security of the region.
Another part of that counter-terrorism architecture
will be the draft resolution on foreign terrorist fighters
to be discussed and adopted by this body on Wednesday,
24 September, at a special meeting at the level of Heads
of State and Government.
The solidarity of the international community must
include an effective humanitarian dimension in order
to assist peoples affected by terrorism and violence.
It is also vital to continue implementing the sanctions
regime established by resolution 1267 (1999) against
Al-Qaida and the Taliban strictly and diligently.
Chile reiterates that it is essential that any collective
action against the Islamic State be sanctioned through
the legitimacy conferred by conformity to the Charter

14-5419117/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

of the United Nations. We must act together, and
hopefully with the Council’s unanimous backing, so
that the counter-terrorism efforts can rely on the firm
support of world opinion. Such legitimacy will allow
Iraq to integrate more smoothly into a regional and
global community that needs it as a privileged partner,
in order to restore peace and security in a region
that has too long been battered by war, barbarity and
oppression.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate. I
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Mladenov, for his briefing.
The formation on Monday 8 September of a
new, inclusive Government in Iraq was a landmark
achievement in the country’s political transition. At
the least, it sets the stage for achieving lasting peace,
stability and progress. We are encouraged by the
resolve of Iraq’s political leaders to overcome their
differences in the higher national interest. The decision
of the former Prime Minister, Mr. Nuri Al-Maliki,
not to remain in office has contributed significantly
to easing political tension in the country. That is a
remarkable accomplishment. The decision of Kurdish
leaders to set aside their demands on budget payments
and oil sales in order to facilitate approval of the new
Iraqi Government is also commendable. Prime Minister
Haider Al-Abadi has expressed his commitment to
resolving all outstanding issues with the Kurdish
Regional Government. In our view, this development
is an important element in giving the Kurds a sense of
belonging in the new Iraq.
While some Cabinet posts have been filled by
Mr. Al-Abadi, we note that the crucial positions of the
Ministers of Defence and the Interior remain vacant.
We hope they will be filled in due course. That is
particularly important in the light of Iraq’s security
situation, inflamed as it is by the pestilence of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). The activities
of ISIS and other terrorist groups pose a grave threat to
the peace, stability and territorial integrity of Iraq. In
conjunction with terrorist groups all around the world,
it is a potent threat to global peace and security. ISIS
is committing grave violations of human rights, war
crimes and untold other atrocities. Its brutal activities
are inflicting hardship and terror on the people of Iraq
embroiled in the conflict. According to the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, a total of 1,421
Iraqis were killed and another 1,370 injured in acts of

18/43

19/09/2014

terrorism and violence in the month of August alone.
The activities of ISIS represent a grave threat not just to
Iraq but to international peace and security in general.
We have said over and over again that terrorism
is a global problem that requires a global solution.
The situation in Iraq must not be left for Iraq to deal
with alone. The world must stand together to tackle it,
and that is palpable today. What is urgently needed is
immediate, decisive and sustained action on the part
of the international community in support of Iraq.
Another significant aspect of the fight against ISIS is
the importance of countering its dangerous message,
which appears to be radicalizing young people all over
the world and fuelling the conflict in the whole region
as well as in Iraq.
In that regard, we take positive note of the leading
role the Arab States are playing in repudiating the
dangerous distortion of religion that ISIS propaganda
attempts to spread throughout the region and the world.
We welcome the declaration on fighting ISIS signed by
the United States and the Arab Gulf States with Iraq,
Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon. As efforts to confront and
eliminate ISIS gather momentum, the international
community must work in concert in order to maintain
close cooperation and effective coordination in seeking
our collective, common objective of ensuring a peaceful,
prosperous, strong and united Iraq, once and for all free
of the menace of a senseless ideology of destruction.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for
his briefing, and we listened with special attention
to the statement made by Mr. Ibrahim Al-Jaafari, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq.
Russia has consistently supported the advancement
of the political process in Iraq, whose legitimate
participants should include all political, ethnic and
religious groups. What matters to us is a uniform
and stable Iraq, actively involved in international and
regional affairs. As for the parameters of the internal
process, they must be must agreed on by the Iraqis
themselves, since it is they who are responsible for the
future of their country. Imposing ready-made solutions
is a futile task.
We believe that the unprecedented rise of extremist
sentiment in its bloodiest form is the main threat to the
region. Eradicating it through collective efforts should
be a priority for the international community. However,

14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV.7271

we should not cling to ideological approaches and
double standards, dividing terrorists into bad ones who
should be destroyed, and not-very-bad ones with whom
we can supposedly work together for the sake of selfish
national interests and regime change. We will end up
in a vicious circle if we bomb fighters in one place and
protect them and prepare them for growing change in
another.

practical consequences, including for the humanitarian
situation in Syria. It is extremely dangerous to
contemplate the possibility that the fight against ISIL in
Syria could involve the so-called moderate opposition,
which is well armed. We should remember that ISIL has
achieved much of its military success thanks to seized
United States weapons that had been provided to that
country.

We must have the courage to learn from the
mistakes of the past and have the decency to admit to
them. After all, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) was not instantly able to bring to bear the full
potential that enabled it to bring almost almost a third
of the territory of Iraq under its control. The radical
Islamists’ ambitions grew along with their progress
in neighbouring Syria, something that was looked on
with satisfaction in some capitals. But in Iraq itself a
system of social and political relationships that had
evolved over centuries was undermined by the stress
of foreign interventions that ultimately also helped
prepare fertile ground for the radicals’ offensive on a
grand scale. Modern terrorism knows no boundaries
and spreads like a metastatic cancer. The extremist
network that is snaking through the planet today is
not limited to loathsome organizations such as ISIL
or Jabhat Al-Nusra that are on the Security Council’s
sanctions lists. We are dealing with a unified yet manyheaded opponent, and fighting it demands the strategic
thinking and action of a genuinely united front.

In order to effectively combat such a serious global
challenge and to find long-term solutions, we need to
address the underlying causes. We propose to hold in
the Security Council a brainstorming meeting to discuss
terrorism and extremism throughout the Middle East
and North Africa and to develop an appropriate format
for such an endeavour. In the meantime, all members
of the international community must ensure that they
completely eliminate all forms of foreign support to
terrorist groups, which will not survive for long on the
funds they rob from banks, or with the arms they steal
from the population. We can cut off such channels,
including the illegal oil trade, if we approach the
situation responsibly. At the same time, we need to take
steps to counter the radicalization of public opinion
and the ideology of violent extremism and terror. We
also need to step up the fight against terrorism at the
national level and establish an inter-State exchange of
relevant information.

In order to establish a truly broad international
coalition, any action aimed at combating the threat of
ISIL and groups like it must be carried out in accordance
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the standards of international law, based on existing
anti-terrorism instruments of the United Nations, and
in close cooperation with the Governments of the
region. An international anti-terrorist operation should
be conducted either with the consent of the sovereign
Governments or sanctioned by the Security Council. We
consider other options to be unlawful and detrimental
to international and regional stability.
It is vital that we act with extreme caution and
evaluate the possible consequences for the countries
of the region and the civilian population. The publicly
expressed intentions to strike ISIL’s positions on Syrian
territory without the cooperation of the Government in
Damascus are extremely disturbing. That would not
only be a gross violation of the fundamental norms
of international law, but could also have destructive

The Security Council recently adopted a number
of useful measures, including sanctions. There is
additional capacity in the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities. All
those instruments must work as a single coherent
mechanism. The Russian Federation is actively engaged
in helping the Iraqi Government in its fight against the
terrorist threat and stands ready to be constructively
engaged in developing further measures to combat that
shared scourge.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to thank the United States for its
initiative to convene today’s meeting of the Security
Council, which I hope will help forge international
consensus in order to assist Iraq in confronting the
grave challenges before us.
China has listened attentively to the briefing
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mladenov. We also welcome the presence of Foreign
Minister Al-Jaafari of Iraq and his statement earlier in
the meeting.

14-5419119/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

The situation in Iraq poses a serious threat to
international peace and security, which is of great
concern to China. We care deeply about the security
and welfare of the people of Iraq and we firmly
support the efforts to safeguard the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Iraq. We also
support Iraq’s efforts to restore its security an stability
and to achieve development and prosperity. The
international community should step up its solidarity
and coordination in order to move the Iraqi situation
in a favourable direction. We would like to emphasize
several points.
First, the international community should support
Iraq in continuing to further its process of political
reconciliation. We are heartened by the successful
formation of a new Iraqi Government, an important
milestone in that country’s political process that
creates the necessary conditions for the Iraqi people
to focus their energy on responding to the security
challenges they face and on promoting economic and
social development. We hope that the Iraqi factions
will continue to accord priority to the State as a whole
and to the Iraqi people and their stability. We also
hope that they will continue to push ahead with their
political dialogue and reconciliation process, beef up
their military and security capabilities and continue to
advance reform and reconstruction. The international
community should shoulder its responsibility and
provide constructive help to the new Government
in Iraq. In particular, there should be increased
humanitarian assistance, along with greater efforts
to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people and help
Iraq break the vicious cycle of poverty, extremism and
violence.
Secondly, the international community should unite
to help Iraq combat terrorism. We are deeply saddened
by the great suffering that terrorism has inflicted on
the Iraqi people. There is no good or bad terrorism.
Wherever and whenever it occurs, and whoever commits
it, terrorism should invariably be firmly opposed. In its
pursuit of international counter-terrorism cooperation,
the international community should respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the countries concerned. It should abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the basic norms that govern international
relations, while fully observing the leading roles of
the United Nations and the Security Council. At the
same time, it should adhere to consistent standards
with regard to both the symptoms and their remedies.
20/43

19/09/2014

The international community should closely track the
new features of terrorism against the backdrop of new
means of modern information. It should come up with
new means of thinking and new measures designed
to sever the three channels — namely, the spread of
terror via the Internet, the cross-border movement
of terrorists and the covert financing of terrorism in
order to minimize the breathing space for terrorism.
Meanwhile, terrorism should not be linked to specific
nations or religions.
Thirdly, the international community should
recognize the important interplay between the Iraqi
question and other hotspot issues in West Asia and North
Africa, through strengthened, integrated management.
For some time, hotspot issues in those regions have been
popping up in interwoven upheavals, and the conflicts
among nations, ethnic groups, religious groups and
religious sects have been acute. The international
community should take into full account the unique
historical and cultural traditions of those regions and
should proceed based on the fundamental interests
of the peoples and countries of those areas through
the peaceful resolution of disputes. The international
community should also support the independent search
by the countries of the region for the paths and models
best suited to their national conditions and their people’s
aspirations for orderly transformation and development
in order to create the fundamental conditions for lasting
peace and security in those regions. China supports Iraq
and other countries of the region in strengthening their
unity and cooperation and in promoting their common
unity with a view to their common development.
China is a sincere friend of the Iraqi people,
and we have been actively engaged in the peaceful
reconstruction of the country. China will continue its
cooperation with Iraq in various fields in order to bring
more real benefits to the Iraqi people. We will continue
to provide Iraq with additional humanitarian assistance
as needed and to support Iraq in its counter-terrorism
efforts. We stand ready to join the international
community in making unremitting efforts for the early
achievement of peace and security in Iraq and for the
early return of the Iraqi people to a peaceful and better
life.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this critical meeting. Let me also thank
Iraq’s Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Al-Jaafari,
for his statement, and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Nikolay Mladenov for his insightful
briefing and dedicated work.
14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

A united and democratic Iraq within the
internationally recognized borders, with a viable,
inclusive and representative Government, where
the interests of all the groups and components of the
society are taken into account, is the only antidote to
the murderous ideology of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), which is threatening the very
existence of Iraq as we know it today.
Muslims, Kurds, Turkmen: no one is safe where
ISIL sets foot. Yezidis, Shabaks and Christians, who
have been part and parcel of Iraq’s unique heritage, are
persecuted, forced to convert and brutally executed.
Mass rapes, sexual violence and horrific abuses
of women and children are routine. Destruction,
displacement and death: such is the daily reality for
millions of Iraqis as ISIL seeks to expand its hideous
hold.
It is against that horrific background of ISIL’s
devastating onslaught that the new Government of Iraq
must tackle the multiple challenges facing the country
today. The solidarity and support of the international
community — for the Iraqi people have shown
exemplary resilience even in the worst of times — could
not be more important.
We warmly welcome the formation of an inclusive
Government under the leadership of Mr. Haider
Al-Abadi. As it juggles the multiple challenges and
tasks, it is essential that it should avoid the mistakes
of the past that have placed Iraq’s people , as well as
the country’s unity and territorial integrity, at grave
risk. The sectarianism and divisiveness of the past
must be overcome and give way to a genuine and
credible process of reconciliation. Real inclusiveness
and representation of various social, political, religious
and ethnic groups must be guaranteed. Women, youth
and civil society, all vital assets for the development
and future prosperity of the country, must have an
equal say in the decision-making. Strengthening good
governance, accountability and the rule of law and
resolving existing problems of revenue- and wealthsharing must be tackled head on, in a fair and inclusive
manner. The strengthening of the armed and security
forces, including the Kurdish Peshmerga, remains a key
priority.
The humanitarian crisis must also be urgently
addressed. Sustained humanitarian assistance by the
international community is vital for saving lives and
addressing the urgent needs of a stricken population.
Lithuania has contributed to humanitarian efforts

S/PV.7271

through relevant European Union multilateral aid
mechanisms. Today, my country’s council decided on a
national contribution to be executed through UNICEF,
which will be transferred shortly.
The international community must stand firmly
with Iraq by providing the necessary economic,
financial and military support. The recent international
conference in Paris and the meeting in Jeddah of Gulf
Cooperation Council members and regional States
should act as a catalyst for long-term assistance to, and
a renewed focus on, Iraq.
The United Nations and the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq have stood with the people
of Iraq through good and bad. Their engagement
with the newly elected Government on a whole range
of needs and concerns remains critical. The United
Nations counter-terrorism bodies have an important
role to play by assisting Iraq through demand-based
capacity-building, the improvement of counterterrorism legislation and the sharing of best practices
on counter-terrorism and deradicalization.
Those latter measures are particularly important
in order to counter the terrorism onslaught. At
the same time, brainwashed fanatics and deadly
adventure-seekers from far beyond Iraq’s borders,
duped by the extreme apocalyptic ideology of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), are joining
its ranks, fighting against the nation they know little
about in the name of a faith they do not know. The issue
of foreign terrorist fighters demands our most resolute
action. In that respect, we consider very timely the
holding next week of a Heads of State meeting by the
Security Council on this important matter.
In conclusion, to assist Iraq in the face of an
existential threat, the international community must
act as one to counter the spread of terrorism and the
likes of ISIL, and we appreciate their dedicated efforts
in that respect. At the same time, let us remember that
winning against terrorist threats cannot be done without
winning the hearts and minds of the Iraqi people.
The new Government of Iraq must restore the trust
of all Iraqis in their rich regional, ethnic and religious
diversity — men and women, young and old people
alike. They must be able to stand firm and fight for
their security, dignity and rights on the basis of the rule
of law, genuine equality, inclusiveness and justice. I am
pleased to hear, as Special Representative Mladenov
mentioned earlier today, about the important steps

14-5419121/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

taken already by the Prime Minister in that respect,
which we warmly welcome.
Finally, we welcome the adoption of today’s
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/20), and we affirm
our readiness to work closely with our partners in the
international coalition for the future of Iraq.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic
of Korea appreciates the United States delegation’s
initiative in convening this important debate, as well as
the fact that you, Sir, are personally presiding over this
meeting. We would like to welcome Foreign Minister
Al-Jaafari of Iraq and to thank him for his remarks. We
also wish to thank Special Representative Mladenov for
his briefing.
The Republic of Korea is gravely concerned about
the situation in Iraq and strongly condemns the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist
organizations for their criminal acts of terrorism. ISIL’s
outrageous chain of violence in the form of killing,
kidnapping, raping and torturing innocent civilians
must be stopped.
Having lost our own citizens to such cowardly
acts in the past, we believe that those responsible for
such heinous crimes should be brought to justice by
any means and as soon as possible. We are also deeply
concerned by the worsening humanitarian situation in
Iraq. Millions of Iraqi people, including women and
children, are suffering from the scourge of the conflict,
and tens of thousands are displaced.
In that regard, we pay tribute to the devoted work
of humanitarian organizations, including the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World
Food Programme, the International Organization for
Migration and the International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies. Nonetheless, even in
such dire circumstances, we believe in the imperishable
spirit of the Iraqi people and in the collective strength
of the international community. The people of Iraq
have made their choice. Their choice is the path towards
peace, democracy and the reconstruction of Iraq.
The Republic of Korea welcomes and strongly
supports the new Iraqi Government. We are encouraged
to know that the new Government in Iraq is committed
to strengthening Iraq’s nascent democratic institutions,
addressing deep-rooted issues through dialogue and
standing firm against the spread of terrorism. With a
view to assisting the people and the Government of

22/43

19/09/2014

Iraq, the Republic of Korea has given $1.2 million in
humanitarian assistance so far and plans to make a
larger contribution in the near future.
In Syria, we have recently pledged $5 million more
in humanitarian aid, bringing the total to $11 million.
While we continue to hope for a better future through
such international support, we are also conscious that
no help from outside can replace ownership by the Iraqi
people of their future. The inclusive leadership of the
Iraqi Government is a sign of concern for the unity
of all Iraqi people. The future of Iraq — the future of
any society, for that matter — cannot and should not
be shaped by ideological extremism. It should be the
common yearning of the people for safety, stability and
prosperity that moves society forward. The people of
Iraq have made the right choice in their stance against
ISIL. The Security Council should strengthen its
support for their fight. We believe that the voices heard
today will bear fruit in the form of a robust international
commitment to assist Iraq.
Last but not least, we fully support Special
Representative Mladenov and all the staff of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and commend their
dedication to fulfilment of their mission.
The President: Before we hear from other invited
speakers, I want to quickly offer a word.
It is well known that an essential requirement
of being engaged in diplomacy is patience. I want to
particularly thank all the Ministers who have come
here in response to the invitation today. They have
displayed extraordinary patience in sitting through the
meeting thus far, and there are many more speakers
to come. I think the importance of that fact makes its
own statement: that so many feel compelled to take
part and to express publicly their feelings about what
is happening in Iraq and Syria and the region and how
compelling it is that we all must act. I want to again
say thank you to all of my fellow Ministers who have
sat patiently thus far and who are participating through
this afternoon.
It is now my pleasure to give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Frank-Walter Steinmeier, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Germany.
Mr. Steinmeier (Germany): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for
inviting non-members of the Security Council to
participate.

14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV.7271

In Syria and Iraq, we are witnessing the return of
barbarism. We are faced with an enemy that is not only
a threat for Iraq or Syria or the Middle East, but a threat
to all of us. We need to act. Fortunately, the international
community has heard the call in Newport, Jeddah and
Paris. Nations have met to confront the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) together. The Security
Council consolidated the international alliance against
this brutal enemy that is violating the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and violating humankind
itself.

Germany will continue to strengthen moderate voices
and structures — they are, from my point of view, the
only alternative to dictatorship and terrorism. We are
grateful for the ongoing efforts of the United Nations
to explore the basis for a political solution. We must
coordinate our engagement very closely with United
Nations institutions. We hope that the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, will
bring new ideas, and hopefully a new approach, because
we cannot allow ourselves to fail again, perhaps in the
third round of the Geneva process.

Next week, under our chairmanship, we will discuss
joint action against ISIL among the Foreign Ministers
of the Group of Seven (G-7), as well as at the G-7
Deauville Partnership meeting of Foreign Ministers.
This is what I think we need to do.

Today we are justified in focusing on Iraq and Syria,
but we should not forget that some of the neighbouring
States are bearing a huge burden. To ease the hardship
of Syrian refugees and the strain on Syria’s neighbours,
I will host a conference, together with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
in Berlin on 28 October. The goal of the conference is
to increase support for the countries most affected by
refugee flows from Syria, namely, Lebanon and Jordan,
but also Iraq and Turkey.

First of all, we continue to need humanitarian
aid. We need to alleviate the suffering of hundreds of
thousands of refugees and internally displaced persons.
I would like to thank the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other
United Nations agencies for their hard work. Germany
has so far provided $65 million for humanitarian aid
and shelter. I visited Erbil a few weeks ago and I was
shocked by the dire situation of refugees. Now, with
winter approaching, we must work even harder to
provide shelter for those who have fled ISIL attacks.
Humanitarian aid is necessary, but it is not
sufficient to stop the violence. That is why the German
Government decided to provide the Kurdish security
forces with weapons, ammunition and equipment, as
well as training, which we are of course undertaking
in close coordination with the Government in Baghdad.
However, even humanitarian and military assistance
will be futile if we lack a broader strategy against
ISIL — a strategy that incorporates the necessary
military means and tools into a political strategy. What
are the aspects of such a strategy?
First, we have supported the formation of a new
Government in Iraq, which includes all ethnic, religious
and political groups. I wish Prime Minister Haider
Al-Abadi, who has our full support, every success. I
also welcome presidential statement S/PRST/2014/20,
which was adopted today, as proof of the great support
from all around the world, far beyond the Middle East
region.
Secondly, the battle ground is Syria is different
from the one in Iraq, and is even more complex.

Thirdly, we need to stop the flow of foreign fighters
and financing to ISIL. The Security Council will take
further action in that regard. We welcome the planned
draft resolution on foreign terrorist fighters. Yesterday,
I met my new colleague from Turkey, and we agreed to
cooperate very closely, especially in the security sector.
Today we are worried about the latest news after
the ISIS attack on the Syrian city of Ayn Al-Arab and
surrounding villages. Again people had to escape.
History has shown that challenges as large as this
can only be solved together. Germany is willing to do
its share and to work together. I hope that all sides,
especially in the region, will lend their active support
as well. If we come together on this, we will reach a
new level of cooperation, and we will succeed.
The President: Thank you very much, FrankWalter. I appreciate your leadership and efforts. We look
forward to that conference and its resulting benefits.
I now have the pleasaure of giving the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Turkey.
Mr. Çavuşoğlu (Turkey): Let me begin by
expressing our appreciation to the United States and
to you personally, Secretary Kerry, for organizing this
important meeting on Iraq. I hope that our meeting
today will add value to our previous discussions in
Newport, Jeddah and Paris.

14-5419123/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

Obviously, Iraq is facing the most severe crisis
in its recent history. The ongoing conflict in Syria,
together with misguided policies and practices of the
former Government in Baghdad, has created a perfect
environment for extremist and terrorist groups to carry
out their despicable objectives. Therefore, our priorities
should be to devise policies and plans of action to change
this environment. We need engagement within Iraq, as
well as international cooperation, to achieve that aim.
That is why we have been convening so frequently.
However, if these meetings fail to make a difference in
the daily lives of the Iraqi nation, we may risk losing
our credibility.
I can see that there is broad agreement on the
need to devise and implement a comprehensive and
integrated strategy that embraces political, security
and humanitarian elements. In the political field, we
have to ensure that every component of the nation is
properly represented and has a meaningful role in the
decision-making process. Iraq has made a promising
start to that end wit the formation of the new Government
under Prime Minister Al-Abadi, but they have a long
and thorny road ahead. The challenges are real and
complex. The new Iraqi Government needs to reverse
the deteriorating security situation, overcome the longlasting ethnic and sectarian divisions and embrace all
segments of the Iraqi society. Our engagement and
support to that process should therefore be a long-term
one.
Sustained international support to Iraq in the
security field should be another component of the
strategy. That requires an organized and coordinated
flow of military equipment and an effort to help build
the defence infrastructure of Iraq. We shall guide and
support Iraq towards a future where it will be able
to defend itself. Restructuring the army and other
security organizations on a national basis should be an
indispensable part of those efforts. Neither the army
nor other Sate structures should be an instrument of
ethnic or sectarian groups. Unfortunately, that is
something that extremists and terrorist groups have
greatly exploited.
The third point I should like to highlight is the
need to redouble our humanitarian efforts. We have
been doing our best since the beginning of the crisis,
and we appreciate the help provided by many countries
present here. Turkey’s ongoing humanitarian support
has alleviated the suffering of thousands of Iraqis from
various ethnic and religious backgrounds. We are also

24/43

19/09/2014

setting up three camps in northern Iraq, with a total
capacity of 35,000 people. Furthermore, as of today,
we are hosting 38,000 Yazidis who sought refuge in
Turkey. Yesterday alone, we provided sanctuary to
more than 10,000 — I emphasize that number — Syrian
Kurds who had to run away from the ISIS advance in
Kobane, Syria.
Certainly, more has to be done. We call upon the
relevant United Nations agencies, as well as experienced
non-governmental organizations, to coordinate all
those efforts.
Let me also underline a very important factor in
all those efforts. It is imperative to treat Syria and
Iraq as a single theatre of action for the success of our
strategy. Ignoring Syria in this struggle would not help
bring about a lasting solution to the challenges we face
today. The Syrian regime is the patron of extremism.
Its policies based on sectarianism and ethnic divisions
trigger further instability and threaten the wider region.
As long as the regime remains in Damascus, stability
can neither be achieved in Syria nor in the region. The
only way of achieving stability and security is through
a political solution based on the Geneva declaration. A
genuine political transition in Syria is therefore a must.
Before concluding, I would like to emphasize once
again Turkey’s full support for Iraq in efforts to build a
better political environment that is free of extremism,
and thus to fight more effectively against terrorism.
We act in close coordination with our allies and friends
to that end. All of those efforts to create a stable Iraq
can be more effective with increased international
collaboration. We are ready to further deepen our
engagement with our partners with the aim of bringing
peace and stability to the region and in the fight against
extremism and terrorism.
The President: We appreciate Turkey’s efforts and
also, obviously, the comments about Syria as a frontline border State. As Mr. Frank-Walter Steinmeier said,
Turkey’s efforts will be critical. We look forward to
working with your country.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. José
Manuel García Margallo, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Spain.
Mr. García Margallo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, allow me to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate and for the invitation to
participate to address the grave threats currently faced
by Iraq — and not only Iraq.
14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

Jihadist terrorism poses a threat to the entire
international community. Spain knows that well
through its own experience. It is the duty of the Security
Council to provide a resolute and effective response to
a threat that concerns all of us. We therefore commend
the members of the Council on today’s adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/20, which Spain
fully endorses.
At this historic moment, we cannot remain
impassive before the systematic elimination of entire
communities and religious minorities and the ruthless
murders of hostages such as James Foley, Steven
Sotloff and David Haines, the abject cruelty of which
is shocking. The perpetrators of those crimes must be
brought to justice.
Experience teaches us that an efficient fight against
jihadist terrorism must be based on three essential
elements. First, all international interventions should
be carried out in accordance with the principles that
inspire the Charter of the United Nations and respect
for international law. The Security Council has already
taken a very important step in adopting resolution 2170
(2014), which makes unequivocally clear the will to act
against the terrorist groups Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and the Nusra Front. The resolution
provides legitimacy beyond any question. It introduces
important elements such as the prosecution of foreign
terrorist fighters and the need for the close cooperation
of States to prevent recruitment. Spain trusts that
the Council will take another significant step in that
direction in the upcoming debate next week on foreign
terrorist fighters. Spain is currently working to reform
its penal code to categorize as a crime of terrorism the
participation of radicals in foreign conflicts.
Secondly, the international community must
respond to the request of the legitimate Government
of Iraq. Prime Minister Al-Abadi has managed to
form an inclusive Government. We must support him
in strengthening Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity based on solid, participatory institutions. That
condition is a sine qua non in the efforts to join forces
and goodwill in the fight against the terrorist group that
calls itself the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.
Finally, we must adopt a strategy based on a broad
consensus among all regional and international actors.
A very important first step towards such a coalition
was taken at the Paris conference held on 15 September,
in which I was honoured to participate.

S/PV.7271

The Kingdom of Spain, which maintains close
friendship ties with the Iraqi people, assumes its
responsibility in this joint endeavour. We intend
to assist the Iraqis on their path — which is now
threatened — towards democracy, stability, prosperity
and peace.
We must strengthen efforts in preventive
diplomacy, political dialogue and building institutional
capacity. Initiatives such as the Alliance of Civilians
and Mediation in the Mediterranean — which Spain
leads — are examples of that approach. With regard to
dialogue, my country has convened meetings with the
moderate Syrian opposition and will convene others in
future.
As an example of strengthening institutions, we
highlight our programme called “Masar” — Arabic
for “path” — to support transition in the Arab world.
With the same goal and to confront the jihadist threat
in northern Africa, on 17 September Spain hosted a
conference on stability and development in Libya.
To date, the Spanish Government has contributed
significant sums towards helping meet the needs of the
Iraqi people. We will continue such efforts in future.
Furthermore, we wish to address the following issues
with regard to that joint undertaking.
First, we will support operations by providing the
use of Spanish bases; support and participate in strategic
transportation efforts; contribute capacity, including
air support, leadership, security and intelligence;
participate in advising and standing up military units,
in keeping with the priorities of the Iraqi military;
and facilitate the supply of military equipment to the
legitimate Government of Iraq.
The sophistication and the growing strength of
jihadist terrorism places us before a very demanding,
long-term challenge. There is no place for shortcuts or
discouragement. We must fight with intelligence and
perseverance. Above all, we must remain united and act
together. The people and the Government of Iraq and
the international community can count on Spain’s full
willingness and experience on behalf of this just cause.
The President: I thank Mr. García Margallo very
much, in particular for the important commitments he
articulated. They are very welcome and important.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Børge
Brende, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway.

14-5419125/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

Mr. Brende (Norway): I thank you, President,
for your leadership and for convening this important
meeting.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
has shocked the world with its rapid advance, public
executions and other barbaric acts. ISIL is now not
only a threat to Iraq and Syria, it is also a threat to
the wider region and to the rest of the world. There is
an urgent need to confront that threat. It is time for
us to collectively stand up against ISIL. Together we
can — and must — stop ISIL.
This debate is a promising sign that the Security
Council will live up to its mandate to maintain
international peace and security. I am encouraged by
the common purpose that I see evolving here today,
that we saw in Paris on Monday and also during the
meeting in Jeddah. The unity and urgency expressed
in presidential statement S/PRST/2014/20 sends a clear
message. Iraq’s neighbours and the rest of the world
stand together with the people of Iraq, and we are
acting now.
I am encouraged by the formation of Prime
Minister Al-Abadi’s cabinet. I am pleased that the
Foreign Minister is here with us. During my recent visit
to Baghdad, I stressed the fundamental importance of
sharing power. People living in the conflict-ridden
areas must feel that there has been a political shift and
that they finally have a Government that offers hope
and opportunities.
Equally, the country needs the broad and inclusive
support of the region and the rest of the international
community. Iraq and the countries in the region
must have a leading role in driving ISIL back. Peace
and respect for humanitarian rights are absolute
preconditions for prosperity, development and security.
Let us dismantle the arguments of those extremists who
have fuelled ethnic and religious antipathies or have
even created them. Let us work patiently to increase
understanding and tolerance among groups. Extremism
and terrorism must be fought on the ground, in the
courts, in classrooms, in Parliaments, on the Internet
and on the humanitarian front.
Norway will therefore continue to be one of the
main humanitarian contributors in Iraq and in Syria.
So far this year, we have provided $75 million to the
Syrian crisis and $30 million to Iraq. Today, I announce
an additional $10 million to alleviate the suffering
of the people of all communities who have fled the

26/43

19/09/2014

violence caused by ISIL and other groups in Iraq and
Syria. Furthermore, Norway is ready to send military
planning officers to assist the international fight against
ISIL in Iraq. We will also consider further contributions
to build military capacity. Progress in Iraq will depend
heavily on a move towards a political solution in Syria.
In order to succeed, we need a Security Council
that is committed and united. Without agreement in the
Chamber, the Syrian people cannot be protected and
the destruction of Syrian society cannot be stopped.
There is an urgent need to stop the advance of ISIL
and to start the long-term work needed to eradicate the
roots that allow such groups to exist. That work has
begun in Iraq and in the region. It has begun in the
Security Council, whose mission is to be the guardian
of the peace and security of all nations. We all stand by
the people of Iraq.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. John Baird, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Canada.
Mr. Baird (Canada): I am grateful for the leadership
of the United States and for the tremendous amount of
hard work that you, Mr. President, have put into that
challenge.
I do not need to explain to participants the
impact that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) is having in Iraq and Syria. I do not need to
persuade them that ISIL is evil. The question that we
must answer today is how do we, as an international
community of civilized nations, face this dangerous
and nihilistic force? I believe not only that is terrorism
the greatest challenge of our generation but also that we
need to face up to a new generation of terrorism. ISIL
is more of a terrorist army than the traditional image
of an isolated cell of extremists. It is the toxic mix of
medieval ideology with modern weaponry.
With that unusually high capability comes great
arrogance and a sense of invincibility. They do not
need to hide their vile acts. In fact, they bask in them
and exploit the Internet to try and give themselves a
disproportionate impact. They think that the more
brutal that they are, the more cowed we will be. They
are wrong. They wanted attention, and now they have
it. It is time to show them that they are more vulnerable
than they realize. We must also reject their world view
wherever we find it.
Sadly, their extremist ideology and bloodthirsty
methods are shared by a growing number of other
14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

groups and individuals around the world. I visited Iraq
for myself just a few weeks ago. I talked to a Christian
family who had five minutes’ notice to flee their
traditional home after neighbours told ISIL fighters
about their religion. Such rejection of religious freedom
and the severing of long-standing bonds and shared
history are not humanity. They represent the law of the
jungle. No nation-State condones ISIL. However, as
I stated in Paris earlier this week, it is not somebody
else’s problem. We must work together to each of our
strengths and abilities.
For Canada’s part, we are supporting Iraqi forces
in the front line against ISIL with the deployment of
advisers and the delivery of equipment. We are also
funding regional efforts to stem the flow of foreign
fighters. We welcome the leadership of Shaikh Khalid
Al-Khalifa of Bahrain to work to cut off the finances of
ISIL. That has our full and active support. We are, of
course, assisting with urgent humanitarian efforts. As
Valerie Amos has reminded us, much more help will
be required from us all. That includes, in particular,
efforts to combat sexual violence in conflict.
There is no question that ISIL and like-minded
groups are a real danger to global stability and security.
Such terrorists have talked openly about wanting to
establish a caliphate from India to southern Spain. They
stretch their delusional fantasies across generations and
across borders. To confront them, we must rely on the
forces that have shaped human history. We must defend
the firm and unyielding principles of human liberty
and dignity that have withstood the tests of fascism and
communism, and now terrorism. That is the test facing
us today. We cannot afford to fail.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Federica Mogherini, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Italy.
Ms. Mogherini (Italy): I thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this meeting and the
United States Government for the initiative. I would
also like to thank Nickolay Mladenov for the work that
he is leading in Iraq for the United Nations. I would
especially like to thank Minsiter Al-Jaafari for the
work that the Government in Baghdad is doing and also
for reminding us earlier in the meeting that the war
declared by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) is against all Iraqi people. I think that that is why
the Iraqi decision to form a national unity Government
and to work in an inclusive way to respond to the
threat in order to restore the country’s unity needs and

S/PV.7271

deserves our full support in coordination with the Iraqi
authorities and the Government in Baghdad.
Let me also say that we particularly appreciate
today’s initiative and the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/20. That helps and contributes
to the provision of a global United Nations framework
that is necessary for such a partnership to be
internationally recognized as one that is not primarily
military but mainly seeks to respond comprehensively
to a threat that faces us all.
Italy has been present from the very first days of
the outbreak of the crisis. We participated in the middle
of August in Baghdad and in Erbil with the visit of
Prime Minister Renzi. We have promoted a European
Union common framework for a response to the crisis,
requesting the convening of a meeting of the Council
of the European Union, which was held on 15 August.
On 20 August, we decided through a parliamentary
vote on our own contribution, first of all, to
humanitarian aid. We sent six flights of such aid. We
have contributed through multilateral channels, the
World Health Organization, the World Food Programme
and UNICEF. We also decided on military support.
Two other flights are arriving tomorrow, bringing arms
and ammunition. In total for this month, we will send
18 flights of arms and ammunition to Erbil through
Baghdad. But we are ready and willing to do more,
in particular in terms of training, advice, logistics
support and air refuelling if necessary. We have done
that working closely with the Iraqi Government and the
regional authorities of Kurdistan, because we know very
well that our most precious and valuable contribution is
and will be the political support that we can give to the
Iraqi Government in its work for inclusiveness and to
the unity of the country.
We also believe that all our efforts should be and
should stay focused on full, positive and coordinated
involvement of all actors in the region. I welcome the
presence here today of the ministers of many countries,
including His Excellency Mr. Zarif, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran. We
believe and have believed from the very beginning that
Iran can and — we are confident — will play a positive
role against ISIL.
We need an integrated approach, first of all to
defined a common strategy to face the crisis in Syria.
Here, I would recall the words that Frank-Walter
Steinmeier used: that we should take advantage of the

14-5419127/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

work that the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Staffan de Mistura, has started to do these days. I think
we need to coordinate and have a common approach.
We need a common strategy to prevent and stop foreign
fighters, and that is going to be at the centre of our
work next week. We need a common effort to stop the
financial flows supporting ISIL activities, and here I
value in particular the initiative from Bahrain. We
need to work with and in support of countries that are
hosting immense flows of refugees, primarily Lebanon
and Jordan, and ensure that the social pressure does not
become an internal factor that will destabilize those
countries and thus the region.
We need to unite forces. A global threat requires a
global response. We need to make it very clear: this is not
a coalition of the West against Islam. On the contrary,
it is a global partnership in support of Iraq and all Iraqi
people, whether Muslim, Sunni, Shia, Christian, Yazidi
or others, against a terrorist organization.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Franciscus Timmermans, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands.
Mr. Timmermans (Netherlands): Today, the
subject of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) is brought before the Council once again. I want
to thank the United States for taking this timely and
important initiative.
It is a hopeful sight to see this many nations
represented in this Chamber. Today, we gather with a
rare unity of purpose. The brutality of ISIL shocks and
disturbs us all. The violence it inflicts on the people
of Iraq and Syria and the wider region deeply offends
our shared values and our common humanity. Acts
too gruesome to fathom, with no place in any religion,
continue to profoundly vex us. Minorities are executed
for the crime of being different. Women and children
are raped and enslaved and remain the most vulnerable
victims in this conflict. Those agents of death and
destruction thrive on local fear, national sectarianism
and international apathy.
Too long have we stood on the sidelines of
unacceptable violence in the region. We witnessed
inaction in the Security Council that made us bystanders
to the horrors committed in Syria over the past three
and a half years, a fact the most recent report by the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
Syria reminds us of once more. We should not ignore
the killing of over 190,000 people in Syria; inaction

28/43

19/09/2014

leads parties to operate with impunity and nourishes
the violence that has consumed both Syria and Iraq.
Now, when we are faced by a global enemy, which is
active across borders, a great responsibility lies upon
this global Organization, the United Nations.
Too long, moreover, has Iraq been devoid of unity.
Herein lies a pivotal role for the new Iraqi Government.
The first steps we have seen are in the right direction,
and I thank the Iraqi Government for that. I strongly
encourage them to maintain a credible, inclusive course
all the way. The justified grievances of Sunni Arab
populations should be addressed if we want to achieve
a durable solution. Too long have people in Iraq and
Syria lived in fear, while only the absence of such fear
can bring them the peace they so deserve.
If we want to defeat the obscurantist, nihilistic
ideology embodied by ISIL, a holistic approach will
be necessary. Military steps are necessary, but not
sufficient. We will need to invest in security, justice and
long-term political stability, with a key role for women,
and in accountability for those who have committed
their heinous crimes. They need to be brought to
justice, preferably in Iraq or, if not, in the International
Criminal Court. We have to go beyond the borders that
ISIL has rendered futile. ISIL cannot be defeated in
Iraq alone and should be confronted in Syria as well.
ISIL constitutes a direct and imminent threat to the
region and countries around the globe, including mine.
ISIL is an insult to humanity, and it is mind-boggling
to see young people in my country, young men and
women, being attracted to that nihilistic ideology. It
is mind-boggling to see, this summer in the streets of
The Hague, a young boy of 10 years old wearing the
national soccer jersey of the Netherlands and waving
the black ISIL flag. How is that possible? How did that
happen in our societies? What went wrong? So what we
confront is not just the terrorists in Iraq and Syria. We
also confront an ideology that is destroying part of the
best people we have — our youth. So much is at stake.
Earlier today, Turkey opened up its border to
refugees from Kobani, Iraq. I really want to praise
Turkey for its display of humanity and underline the
importance of regional cooperation and more efforts.
We will contribute to looking after the refugees in that
region as well.
Today, the Netherlands renews its support for
the international fight against ISIL. We welcome the
participation of our regional partners in that effort, as
well as the recent outcomes of Jeddah, Saudi Arabia,
14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

and Paris. The Netherlands supports the Iraqi and
Syrian people with humanitarian, political and security
aid and is actively considering a military contribution
as well.
The President: Let me say that we all join in
congratulating Mr. Timmermans on the new role that he
will be playing. We are glad his passion and eloquence
are going to be continuing to fight for the principles
that bring him here.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Sameh
Hassan Shokry Selim, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Egypt. I want to thank Mr. Selim for his significant
efforts in the past months on a number of different
fronts. We truly appreciate Egypt’s leadership on the
ceasefire and engagement with respect to this issue,
Libya and others.
Mr. Selim (Egypt): I thank you, Mr. President, for
your kind words. We have undertaken that work in the
context of our responsibility and have been reinforced
by your support, so I thank you for all the efforts you
have exerted.
(spoke in Arabic)
Let me at the outset affirm the importance of this
call by the United States to convene this meeting of the
Security Council, since the Security Council has now
held a meeting following a series of other meetings
on regional and international efforts in order to help
achieve security and stability in Iraq. That requires
the mobilization of an international effort that can take
unified action against the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist groups, both in Iraq
and throughout the region, in order to pave the way for
eradicating a scourge that has festered and intensified
in the past decade, especially in the Middle East.
Egypt joined a number of other Arab States and
the United States of America at an important meeting
in Jeddah on 10 September to consider how to deal
with the spreading terrorism in Iraq and in the Arab
region in general. We focused on addressing ISIL
because it is the gravest threat currently confronting
our region. That is in accordance with resolution 2170
(2014) and the ministerial decision of the Arab League
of 7 September. And, last Monday, Egypt participated
in the Paris conference on peace and security in Iraq,
at which the Iraqi Government reaffirmed its request
for military assistance to combat terrorism and the
provision of assitance to terrorists.

S/PV.7271

Our meeting today in the Security Council is
an expression of the international determination
to coordinate the efforts of all institutions and
regional powers in confronting the Iraqi crisis. That
coordination is needed. Egypt hopes it will continue
and be strengthened to maintain the overall momentum
that we have seen in the recent past. It is logical for such
action to be taken in a country like Iraq, with its vast
territory and rich heritage.
We look forward to relations of mutual respect
among the States of the region, including respect for
their sovereignty and security. We hope that the new
Government will represent all parts of Iraqi society
and that it will be able to face the threat of terrorism
and sectarianism. Egypt is stands ready to provide all
support necessary to help Iraq. We will cooperate at
the regional and international levels in the effort to
overthrow ISIL and all heinous terrorist organizations
throughout the world.
Allow me to repeat in the Council Egypt’s position,
which is that every effort must be made to revitalize the
concept of the nation State free from any sectarianism.
We met in Jeddah and we are meeting again in this
Chamber today to support Iraq against ISIL. It
represents a global threat that faces us all, particularly
in the Arab region, and it runs directly counter to the
concept of a modern State.
Ideology is being used to justify barbaric acts
against anyone and anything that is different. ISIL is not
limited to one or two or three movements. It is one evil
ideology that expresses itself under various slogans and
names and is developing in different parts of the world.
At the end of the day, it is a worldwide organization.
Egypt, more than any other State, is well aware
of the threat of such terrorist organizations. We have
confronted that phenomenon and its evil plots. Such
confrontations led, on 30 June, to our elimination of
the Muslim Brotherhood, with its ideology based on
violence — the very ideology that is the basis of all
contemporary terrorist organizations. Those and similar
organizations need to be confronted — in fact, they
have been: in Libya, for example. That is important,
as they are a threat to international peace and security.
At a time when we are stressing the importance
of not ignoring the political and social reasons for the
emergence of ISIL, the international community must be
fully aware that it cannot stop at containment and halfsolutions in confronting such extremist organizations.

14-5419129/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

We must confront the States that are helping the
terrorist organizations to achieve their narrow political
aims on the international scene. We have to assume our
common responsibility and acknowledge our common
humanity in order to confront and defeat this barbaric
phenomenon.
The President: I thank you, Sameh, for your
patience today and for taking the time to come to be
here. In particular we you for your leadership on this
issue.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Shaikh Khalid
Bin Ahmed Al-Khalifa, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Bahrain.
Mr. Al-Khalifa (Bahrain): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this timely special
meeting of the Security Council on Iraq. I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/20), which is very comprehensive and
which we subscribe to. I would also like to thank our
former colleague and now Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq for his very comprehensive
and helpful report on the situation in Iraq. I would
also like to congratulate my colleague, His Excellency
Minister Ibrahim Al-Jaafari, on assuming his post. I
look forward to working with him, especially at this
very important time.
The security situation in Iraq and the spread of
Daesh in the past couple of years in Syria and Iraq
is a serious regional and global concern. Daesh has
exhibited an appalling level of brutality and disregard
for human life, as demonstrated by the murders of
journalists, aid workers and countless Iraqi and Syrian
civilians. Our shared objective should be no less than
the complete annihilation of that terrorist group.
The fight against Daesh requires joint action at
the regional and international levels in three crucial
arenas — the military, the financial and the ideological.
Concerning military operations, it is essential that
countries join Iraq in its fight against Daesh by
providing the requisite level of support. When it comes
to regional security, Bahrain has always assumed its
fair share of the burden. We joined our friends and
allies in securing Afghanistan and in the fight against
pirates and corsairs in the Indian Ocean, and by keeping
a watchful eye around the waters of the Arabian Gulf.
Today, Bahrain stands ready to join its allies in the
region and the world and to contribute its share to the

30/43

19/09/2014

necessary fight against Daesh. We firmly believe that
the time has come for countries of the region to take the
lead in fighting the terrorist groups among us.
Moreover, Islamic institutions and scholars around
the Arab and Muslim world must not hesitate to point
out the clear deviation of Daesh and similar terrorist
cults, and to delegitimize any religious justification
that they may give. In that regard, Bahrain commends
the condemnations of Daesh from various centres of
Islamic authority and scholarship, and urges scholars
to continue doing so without any hesitation to help
us defeat that clear danger threatening Muslims and
non-Muslims alike.
Stopping the flow of fighters and financial resources
to Daesh is crucial to defeating it. The Kingdom of
Bahrain, as a longstanding Islamic and conventional
financial centre with a proven history of combating the
financing of terrorism and money laundering, will host
a high-level Government conference to discuss ways
of enhancing efforts to combat the funding of terrorist
organizations both within and outside of the Middle
East and North Africa.
The conference to be held during the first week
of November in Manama will aim at agreeing a road
map/action plan on how to further combat terrorist
financing and to ensure that the financial institutions
and charitable organizations of the Middle East and
North Africa are not used to channel funds to terrorists
or for other illegal activities.
With respect to stopping the flow of fighters,
Bahrain continues to monitor the flow of individuals
to affected areas in order to ensure that those with the
intent to join Daesh or similar groups are stopped before
leaving the country. In addition, those who return after
joining such groups are immediately apprehended.
Further, no less important than the fight against
Daesh is the effort to alleviate the day-to-day difficulties
and challenges that the Syrian and Iraqi people have
to face. Minority groups in particular have suffered
disproportionately in recent years, and the international
community, through the relevant United Nations bodies
and other international and national organizations,
must do all it can to provide the necessary aid.
I would like to take this opportunity to
offer Bahrain’s support to His Excellency Prime
Minister Haider Al-Abadi and his newly formed Cabinet.
We are confident that the new Iraqi Government is
seeking to set a new way forward for Iraq, one that will
14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

return the country to the path of peace, security and
stability.
Finally, we must remember that fighting terrorism
is a regional responsibility and that all countries of the
region must adopt the same position regarding terrorism
wherever it may surface and whatever its sectarian
leanings. There are terrorist groups no less criminal
than Daesh operating across the Middle East — from
Egypt to Libya to Lebanon and Syria and to Yemen to
the Gulf. State-sponsored terrorist organizations such
as Hizbullah and other proxies continue to terrorize and
kill innocent people all over the region. It is therefore
necessary — as I and many of us here have heard my
colleagues say — to adopt a holistic approach that
identifies, confronts and eventually defeats terrorists
in an effective manner.
The President: I thank Minister Al-Khalifa for
the important list of commitments that Bahrain is
prepared to make. We all look forward to taking part
in the conference, which will be a very important part
of success.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Khalid
Bin Mohamed Al-Attiyah, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Qatar, whom I thank for the early and defined
commitments that his country has already made to our
effort.
Mr. Al-Attiyah (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for holding this
meeting at such a critical juncture in the history of Iraq
and the region. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his valuable efforts. And I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mladenov for
his briefing.
The State of Qatar welcomes the presidential
statement adopted this afternoon (S/PRST/2014/20).
I also welcome the election of Mr. Fuad Masum as
President of Iraq and of Mr. Salim Al-Jabouri as
the Speaker of the National Assembly, as well as
Mr. Al-Abadi’s assumption of the new Government’s
premiership. Such developments are promising and
should reflect positively on the situation in Iraq after
long years of very painful events in the country.
At a time when we are looking forward to the
completion of the formation of the Iraqi Government so
that it can take up the momentuous tasks of addressing
the country’s challenges — mainly terrorism — it
is important for all Iraqis to come together and take
part in Iraq’s management; it is, in fact, the only way

S/PV.7271

that the serious challenges facing the country will be
addressed. The Iraqi people should express national
unity by supporting the Government. You might agree
with us, Mr. President, that such unity can be achieved
only through a serious, comprehensive national
dialogue. We in Qatar would support our Iraqi brothers
and sisters in taking any step that would maintain the
territorial integrity of Iraq and defeat terrorism.
The world is following with grave concern and
interest the horrendous and heinous acts of killing and
intimidation perpetrated by terrorist organizations in
Iraq and the region at large. As we discuss options for
facing terrorist groups and addressing the danger to the
region and the world, we think that the international
community can be successful in its response only if
it shows political will, makes concerted international
efforts and tackles the underlying causes that have
led to an environment that incubates terrorism. More
important, terrorist organizations need to be cut off
from their sources of funding.
We should not submit to terrorist blackmail. We
should also not link terrorism to any religion, nationality
or region.
The lesson that we draw from the spread of terrorist
organizations in the region is that such organizations
have benefited from dictatorships’ oppressive policies,
which have caused a security gap and frustration
among the public, leading to a growing number of
grievances. Ironically, some of those regimes, after
having been abandoned by the international community
due to their criminal policies and grave violations
of international law and human rights, now market
themselves as partners in the international campaign
against terrorism. However, we think that terrorist
organizations and such regimes are two sides of the
same coin; both work against the interests of people and
against peace, security and stability in the world.
The political and security challenges facing the
international community should not distract us from
tackling the deteriorating humanitarian situation in
Iraq. As the number of internally displaced persons and
victims was reaching horrifying levels and in response
to the ordeal of our Iraqi brethren, Qatar established
an air bridge to deliver humanitarian aid to face the
current circumstance. Qatar will continue to work in
the direction of such a response.
The President: I appreciate that and look forward
to continuing to work with Qatar in the days ahead.

14-5419131/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

19/09/2014

This week will be important as we develop some of our
efforts.

into other States, which could strongly undermine the
credibility of the international community.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Yousef
Bin Al-Alawi Bin Abdulla, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Oman, to whom and through whom I offer
my profound thanks to His Highness the Sultan and
to himself with respect to a number of initiatives, but
most recently their generous support for the Palestinian
economic initiative.

My country, as has always been the case, will
support these praiseworthy international efforts, and we
hope that this will lead to victory for the international
community — a victory that would show that the
world will not accept this organization or others that
constitute a challenge to human civilization. We remain
at your side and continue to support such efforts as we
have in the past, so as to ensure that no group is able
to score a victory. This also makes it possible to attain
the objectives of the United Nations in the area of the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Mr. Abdullah (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): May I
begin by hailing you and thanking you, Mr. President,
for holding today’s special Security Council meeting.
We thank you, Sir, for having invited us to
participate in the debate on the difficult context in Iraq
at present. This is a time for us to see how to tackle the
terrorist challenge represented by the so-called Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant.
As you know, Sir, we hope that efforts by the
international coalition to vanquish terrorist groups and
terrorism itself in the Middle East will be successful.
We also hope that peace and stability will triumph in
that region of the world, and indeed in the world as a
whole.
Terrorism striking Arab States in whatever forms
or manifestations it takes, whatever its motives or
justifications, should be condemned as reprehensible
in every regard. My country therefore deplores all
heinous and inhuman terrorist crimes perpetrated by
the non-Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.
Iraq is the cradle of civilization. Thanks to the
support of the international community, it will succeed
in gaining the upper hand over this phenomenon. Iraq,
which has built its civilization over millennia, will not
be defeated by terrorism. The barbarous acts that we
are witnessing in Iraq today perpetrated by the Islamic
State have nothing to do with humanity or with religion.
These groups must be rooted out and eradicated.
The international community must come together in
combating this phenomenon, which is so destructive to
human civilization, through means to be determined by
the Security Council.
The world must come together so as to eradicate all
manifestations of violence, terrorism and extremism.
Thus, through means and arrangements to be determined
by the Council, victory will be ours over these groups.
Effective punitive measures should be urgently taken,
otherwise this group and others will cross borders

32/43

The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Oman for all of the things that his country
is doing.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Maia
Panjikidze, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Georgia.
Ms. Panjikidze (Georgia): We are meeting today
at a pivotal time for the security and stability of the
Euro- Atlantic area and beyond. The latest developments
have clearly demonstrated that we cannot take our
security for granted and that in today’s uncertain world,
all like-minded democracies must stand united to
protect and promote freedom, democracy and a rulesbased world order.
European security is being significantly challenged
by Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine.
Georgia has also suffered from Russia’s military
aggression in 2008 and the ongoing occupation of its
two regions. This worrisome pattern aimed at forcefully
altering European borders poses significant threats to
the strategic vision of a Europe that is whole, free and
at peace.
With regard to the Middle East, we are deeply
shocked and distressed by the violent developments
and rapid deterioration of the security situation in
Iraq. I would like to express strong support to the new
Government of Iraq, headed by Prime Minister Haider
Al-Abadi, and its efforts to ensure an inclusive political
process and to improve security and stability in Iraq,
despite the challenges presented by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). At the same time, I would
like to reiterate Georgia’s unwavering support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Iraq and express the hope that during this difficult
time, the Iraqi people will be united in confronting this
common challenge.
14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

Georgia condemns in the strongest terms all
despicable acts of terrorism and violence against people
based on their religious and ethnic affiliation. Terrorist
groups such as ISIL pose a threat not only to the nations
in the Middle East but also to those in Europe, North
America and beyond.
It is only through our joint efforts and commitment
that we can stop, reverse and prevent such violent
actions.
Georgia, as a reliable ally and capable partner,
has been consistent in its efforts to ensure security
and stability around the globe. We have contributed to
peace and development in Iraq, and we are currently
continuing to do so in Afghanistan and the Central
African Republic. Our commitment to global peace and
stability is firm. Georgia fully supports the efforts of the
coalition to defeat ISIL and bring peace to the region.
We stand ready to provide humanitarian assistance to
those who have been affected by the brutal actions of
the terrorist groups.
Furthermore, Georgia’s valuable experience in
combat missions as well as its successful defence
transformation can be effectively used to enhance the
capabilities of the Iraqi and other security forces as
they fight the ISIL terrorists.
We look forward to working with the United States
and other coalition partners in the coming days and
weeks to identify areas where Georgia’s contribution
can provide added value.
The President: I appreciate enormously your
contribution. I thank you for all the things that you are
doing, notwithstanding the other challenges that we
know you are facing.
I now give the floor to His Highness
Sheikh Abdullah Bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the United Arab Emirates. Let me
also say how important a partner in many of these efforts
the United Arab Emirates has been. We appreciate it
enormously, and thank you for your advice and counsel.
Sheikh Abdullah Bin Zayed Al Nahyan (United
Arab Emirates): Thank you, John, for your friendship
and for your leadership.
(spoke in Arabic)
Allow me at the outset, Mr. President, to express
to you my appreciation and gratitude for the convening
of this important meeting at this critical time, which

S/PV.7271

requires a quick response and the coordination of
international efforts. I should like also to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq for all his efforts.
The United Arab Emirates reaffirms its support
for the security, stability and territorial integrity of
Iraq and welcomes the recently formed Government of
National Unity, under the leadership of His Excellency
Haider Al-Abadi, which deserves the full support of the
international community. The United Arab Emirates
wishes also to emphasize that the country should not
fall back once again into the sectarian and exclusionary
policies that triggered the political and security crises
affecting Iraq.
The United Arab Emirates stands firmly against all
those who would attempt to compromise the security
and stability of Iraq and reaffirms its support for
international efforts aimed at combating the terrorist
acts committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria
(ISIS). It also repeatedly stressed its position during the
NATO Summit held in Wales and at the 7816th meeting
of the Arab Ministers for Foreign Affairs; the meeting
held in Jeddah, at which you, Sir, were present; and at
the Paris conference on security and peace in Iraq.
From this rostrum I, as an Arab and a Muslim,
categorically reject the terrorist entity Daesh being
called the Islamic State. I call upon all present to join
us in that rejection and to show solidarity with the
hundreds of millions of Muslims around the world in
condemning the desecration by the criminal terrorist
gang Daesh of what is dear to us all. They are a
criminal gang, no more than that. The United Arab
Emirates believes that the war against ISIS should not
result in the marginalization of the Sunni community,
which should play an important role in Iraq’s political
future. It is vital that we all work together to maintain
Iraq’s unity, both politically and geographically. ISIS
must be prevented from establishing a safe haven for
extremists in our region, a task we can achieve through
immediate and comprehensive international action,
in coordination with the Iraqi Government, resulting
in the development of a comprehensive international
strategy.
The threat of terrorism is not limited to this
particular terrorist organization. It extends to the
ongoing conflicts in Yemen, Afghanistan, Lebanon,
Somalia, Egypt, Libya, North Africa and the Sahel
region of Africa. These terrorist groups continue to

14-5419133/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

exploit the chaos in Syria in order to achieve their
goals, without the slightest regard for sovereignty or
national borders. The crimes of these and other terrorist
organizations know no boundaries and follow no
principles. Such oganizations are simply opportunistic,
with no relevance to any religion or standards. They
grow only in environments infested with sectarian
extremism.
In that connection, I would like to highlight the
issue of foreign fighters, which has become a concern
for many countries. I would like to thank the United
States of America for organizing a Security Council
meeting, to be presided over by President Obama, on
this topic. The extremists are trying to establish safe
havens in areas already embroiled in conflict and to
recruit fighters in order to ensure their survival. This
vile phenomenon has dangerous repercussions that can
threaten countries outside the Arab and Islamic worlds.
We must create international partnerships aimed at
combating such terrorism by addressing its root causes,
partnerships that are built for the long term, so they are
not limited to combating ISIS alone.
The United Arab Emirates reiterates its total
rejection of violence and extremism, its commitment
to tolerance and moderation and its willingness to
cooperate with international partners in fighting
terrorism and to partner with moderate forces. We
also emphasize the importance of working to prevent
political and social tensions in Iraq by adopting a
genuine, comprehensive national programme for
renouncing violence and uniting the Iraqi people,
including every faction and excluding no groups. In
that context, we believe that the Kurds have proved
their ability to take on an important role in the Iraqi
Government. We commend the Kurdish forces for the
part they have played in fighting ISIS, and hope that
the region of Kurdistan will remain strong, stable and
an integral part of the Republic of Iraq. The United
Arab Emirates has always supported the Iraqi people
in all circumstances, including backing Iraq’s political
process and national reconciliation efforts. We have
undertaken ongoing initiatives designed to provide
humanitarian assistance to those populations affected
by violence and instability. My country will continue
to provide that support.
Finally, I would like to point out that the United
Arab Emirates welcomes the Security Council’s work
in combating terrorism and suppressing its use of
resources for recruitment and financing, particularly

34/43

19/09/2014

through the adoption of resolution 2170 (2014). In
that context, we emphasize the importance of the
international community’s role in giving its full,
constructive support to the Iraqi Government.
The President: I thank you very much, Your
Highness. I hope you will pass on our thanks to His
Highness Sheikh Mohammed for the support that we are
receiving with respect to this coalition and initiative.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Armand
de Decker, Minister of State of Belgium.
Mr. de Decker (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
would first like to thank the United States for its very
timely convening of today’s meeting.
Belgium is extremely concerned about the presence
in Iraq and Syria of a terrorist group such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which has been
responsible for kidnappings, heinous massacres and
numerous other crimes. This is not only a threat to the
region, it is a threat to us all. That is why it requires
that the international community mobilize to an
unprecedented degree. But while military intervention
may be needed to stop ISIL’s progress on land, we
believe that any long-term solution must be a political
one.
The establishment of a new Government in Iraq
and the appointment of a new Prime Minister are of
course steps in the right direction. But it should be
made clear as quickly as possible to the people, in
all their diversity, that the Government’s policies are
and will be inclusive at every level. Restoring social
cohesion is a crucial step that devolves primarily on the
Iraqi Government but that will require the long-term
commitment and support of the entire international
community. No political solution has yet emerged in
neighbouring Syria, and Belgium supports the work of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, who will be responsible for designing one.
Along with this political commitment, the
international community must demonstrate greater
solidarity on the humanitarian front. Belgium has
already committed a concrete contribution to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and to delivering aid to Erbil. We will continue, at the
national, European and international levels, to mobilize
a response adequate to the serious humanitarian crisis
in the region. We must also make genuine efforts to
combat ISIL, including by ensuring that it cannot
benefit financially from petroleum revenues. Belgium
14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

is currently analysing how it can best play a role in that
area, in close cooperation with its partners.
As my colleague from the Netherlands emphasized
a short while ago, thousands of Western jihadists are
fighting in Iraq and Syria, and Belgium has not been
spared. Hundreds of young Belgians have joined the
conflict or are considering it, and a murderous attack
by a jihadist who had returned to Belgium took place
in the heart of Brussels in May. The cooperation that
exists between many Belgian institutions is enabling us
to develop an inclusive strategy not only to fight this
phenomenon but to address its roots as well. We are of
course cooperating in this area with many States.
Regarding actual military action, Belgium urges
that any international action’s legitimacy be reinforced,
insofar as political conditions permit, by a United
Nations resolution. We expect to contribute to the
military coalition initiated by the United States in Iraq,
whether through air support missions, transportation
support, military training or other means. Given
the fact that the current Belgian Government is in
transition, that contribution will have to be approved
either by Parliament or by the new Government, which
will soon be in place. Belgium showed in Libya that it
can support its partners effectively.
It is critical for every country in the region,
including Iran, to mobilize against the terrorist threat
that ISIL represents and to contribute to the various
components of collective action. This is also a valuable
opportunity to overcome regional divisions. It will be
essential if we want to succeed in our goal of protecting
freedom, democracy, peace, respect for all our cultures
and respect for human rights.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Abbas Araghchi, Deputy Foreign
Minister for International and Legal Affairs of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Araghchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let
me begin by expressing my appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate to discuss
the situation in Iraq, which has taken a new and more
troubling turn in the past three months. I also thank
His Excellency Minister of Foreign Affairs Al-Jaafari
for his remarks, and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his briefing. We hope that
today’s meeting of the Council will help to increase
awareness and focus on the veritable and critical crisis
in the Middle East, which has major repercussions for
the whole world.

S/PV.7271

Violent extremism, mostly embodied these days by
the so-called Islamic State in Syria and the Levant (ISIL)
and its abhorrent brutality and shocking savagery, is
chief among the threats that ravage Iraq and Syria and
cast gloom over the horizons of the Middle East. I could
not agree more: that group is neither Islamic nor a State.
We utterly reject the stereotypes that attach the name
of Islam to the bloody and violent acts committed by
such a despicable group, which is nothing more than a
terrorist organization that has emerged from the chaos
of the past decade and the assistance it has received.
While we all have a common interest in defeating
the emerging danger of ultra-violent extremist and
sectarian groups, we need first and foremost to be
aware of the situation and mindset that gave rise to
them. The so-called ISIL is not a new phenomenon. It
and similar groups developed following the invasion of
Iraq and during the years of occupation and ensuing
instability. With the Syrian crisis and the support they
received from certain States and quarters within and
outside the region, they found a new breeding ground,
fabricated a new false cause and became a monster that
now threatens even its own creators.
In addition to military interventions, attempts to
socially engineer Middle Eastern societies — reflected,
inter alia, in the failed initiatives that originated in
and were sponsored by certain Western Powers — are
another aspect of the illusions held by certain outside
Powers over the past decade. The military adventures
and non-military interventions in the region, along with
the ensuing waves of slaughter and blood feuds, have
helped to radicalize vulnerable youth and have created
the perfect conditions for vicious bands of extremists to
turn to their advantage. I doubt that anybody disagrees
with me that extremism is much stronger and more
widespread in the Middle East today than it was in
2001.
In view of the foregoing, and based on the
experience built up over the past decade, we believe
that any real and genuine initiative to remedy regional
predicaments must originate from within the region
and be based on regional cooperation. Combating
extremism is not an exception to that rule. Looking
forward, we hope that all States in the Middle East have
fully realized by this point that extremism is as much
of a threat to them as it is to Iraq or Syria. Those who
thought otherwise need to reconsider their 11-year-old
policies and commit themselves to promoting stability
and thwarting extremism. The international coalition

14-5419135/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

against ISIL that is said to be in the offing has yet to
decide to pursue a serious strategy. In our view, to
defeat extremism, a comprehensive strategy should
address several key points.
First, it must fully comply with the norms and
principles of international law and the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations with respect to conducting
any military actions against terrorist groups.
Two, it must expand support for the Iraqi
Government as it fights ISIL, helping it to strengthen
the national unity and territorial integrity of Iraq and
encouraging its all-inclusive political system. That
approach requires discouraging centrifugal forces and
avoiding any attempt to tinker with Iraq’s ethnic and
sectarian mosaic.
Three, it should encourage all States and tap
all capacities in the region to fight the war against
extremism and terrorism with the assistance of the
international community and it should work to unify
and coordinate policies. Any loophole or foot-dragging
will leave a vacuum that will be used by extremists.
Four, consistency in fighting ISIL is crucial,
wherever it is present — in Iraq, Syria, Lebanon or
elsewhere — and whomever it threatens. A successful
fight against ISIL requires helping the relevant central
authorities to deal with that menace. Any strategy that
undermines those authorities, including the Syrian
Government, which resisted ISIL for several years, or
that differentiates between segments of the population
in terms of protection, will be a recipe for defeat. It
was regrettable that the city of Sanjar was left to the
mercy of ISIL and that Amerli agonized for more than
two months under a ruthless siege that was apparently
due only to the fact that its people belong to a different
segment of the population.
Five, a peaceful settlement to the crisis in Syria can
be achieved only by encouraging a political solution to
the protracted war in that country and by rectifying the
mistakes made in the past.
Six, all regional States and international actors
must commit to denying extremists access to funds,
recruits and other means that they use to spread terror
across the region and beyond. That should include
resolute actions to halt the moral and financial support
for extremists that have flowed from some quarters
within certain countries in the region. That is important
especially in the light of the fact that groups such as
ISIL will not be uprooted by air strikes alone.
36/43

19/09/2014

Seven, the Israeli occupation of Arab lands must
end, and Israel must not be allowed impunity for its
war crimes against the Palestinians, as was recently the
case. The reaction of some Western Powers to what can
only be called genocide by the Israeli regime against the
people of Gaza is a good rallying cause for extremist
groups such as ISIL.
Finally, it is important to counter Islamophobia,
which lumps together violent extremists and true
Muslims, directly lending credence to the message of
the extremists.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is the only country in
the region capable of showing unqualified determination
to help the Iraqi Government and coordinate with it to
assist all those threatened by ISIL, and we have done
so. We rose to the challenge early on and helped save
Baghdad, Erbil and Amerli from ISIL, and we were
there with advisers and equipment before any other
help arrived on the scene. Likewise, my Government
is ready to continue to assist the Iraqi Government and
other Governments threatened by ISIL.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Kentaro Sonoura, Parliamentary
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan.
Mr. Sonoura (Japan) (spoke in Japanese;
interpretation provided by the delegation): At the outset,
I would like to express my sincere appreciation for this
opportunity to set forth the position of the Government
of Japan at this very important meeting. Today, the
international community once again forms a united
front to counter the threat of the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), while also supporting the efforts
made by the Iraqi Government.
ISIL has unilaterally declared the establishment
of its self-proclaimed State across existing national
borders. The brutalities of ISIL pose a serious threat
not only to the Middle East region but also to the very
order of the international community. We fully share
the sense of urgency that an immediate and united
response is necessary. The Government of Japan firmly
denounces any form of terrorism and strongly supports
the fight against terrorism conducted by the Iraqi
Government and other States.
In order to effectively counter the threat of ISIL,
it is imperative first and foremost to achieve political
stability in Iraq. In that regard, I should like to welcome
the recent establishment of the inclusive Government in
Iraq. I hope that efforts towards national reconciliation
14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

and unity will make further strides under the able
leadership of Prime Minister Al-Abadi.
Japan has long contributed to the nation-building
of Iraq in various areas, such as energy, infrastructure
and health. We will continue to support the new Iraqi
Government through such efforts. Although it is
difficult for Japan to make a military contribution,
we will actively engage in humanitarian assistance
and counter-terrorism measures. As part of our effort
to address the challenges posed by ISIL, I would like
to announce that Japan will provide $25.5 million in
assistance, in addition to the $7.8 million that we have
already disbursed.
Providing emergency humanitarian assistance will
not be sufficient when we try to prevent extremists
from taking root in the region and to ensure the region’s
lasting stability. It is important to firmly assist Iraq and
other neighbouring countries so that they can exercise
effective governance, which needs to be underpinned
by a stable economy and society. Efforts to strengthen
governance take various forms, such as capacitybuilding in the public sector and the development of
a domestic legal system. Those matters are exactly
what Japan is good at. As a responsible member of the
international community, Japan will continue to make
active contributions to this great cause.
It is essential to counter-terrorism off the flow
of funds, weapons and personnel to the terrorist
organizations in order to degrade their strength when
we strive to effectively address the threat. The issue of
foreign terrorist fighters is a serious challenge that could
potentially spread the threat of terrorism worldwide.
Japan will steadily implement relevant Security Council
resolutions, in close coordination with other countries.
We will also take various measures in other areas, such
as countering violent extremism, countering terrorism
financing and exercising appropriate immigration
control, and we will pursue our strenuous efforts to
contain the threat of terrorism.
Let me conclude by saying that, at the end of today’s
meeting, we hope that the commitments and efforts of
individual countries will be united in support of the
new Iraqi Government, and that we will be able to send
the strongest possible message to the world that we are
absolutely determined to roll back ISIL.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Ulrik
Vestergaard Knudsen, Permanent Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs of Denmark.

S/PV.7271

Mr. Knudsen (Denmark): I thank you, Madam
President, for this opportunity to participate in this
important debate on the situation in Iraq, as well as on
the violent extremist forces affecting the wider region
and, indeed, the international community as a whole.
Denmark stands ready to join the Members of
the United Nations in collectively confronting the
growth of extremism embodied in the brutal shape
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), an
organization that is fundamentally opposed to the
values and principles at the core of the United Nations.
ISIL is an organization that, in the most brutal way,
now controls large areas of Iraq and Syria and has the
ambition to go even farther. It is an organization that
has managed to amass hundreds of millions of dollars
through kidnappings, robberies and illegal oil sales, but
it is also an organization that will not be allowed to
achieve its goals if we, the international community, all
stand united.
Like many previous speakers today, Denmark
welcomes the recent formation of a new inclusive
Government in Baghdad, committed to empowering
marginalized groups in the country. Good governance
will be absolutely essential to meet that end, as well
as to overcome the pervasive sense of distrust and
discontent that ISIL has been able to prey upon.
Denmark is committed to supporting Iraq and assisting
its Government in its fight against ISIL. We have
already provided political, military and humanitarian
assistance. A Danish military transport aircraft and a
logistical team have assisted the forces combating ISIL
in Iraq through airlifting military equipment. On the
humanitarian side, so far in 2014 Denmark has provided
assistance totalling $50 million to internally displaced
persons in Syria and Iraq. Politically, we have engaged
with the Iraqi Government, with members of the core
coalition and other partners in the region and beyond to
shape a common strategy to combat ISIL.
However, as requested by the United States delegation
at the beginning of this meeting, Denmark stands ready
to do even more. We plan to increase our humanitarian
assistance to the region. We want to establish a strong
partnership with the Iraqi Government to launch longterm stabilization and development projects that help
eliminate the root causes of radicalization. We will
maintain a close dialogue with the Iraqi Government,
the United States and other partners in the coalition
to jointly consider the optimal contributions Denmark

14-5419137/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

can make to the ongoing efforts, be they humanitarian,
diplomatic, political or military.
We also find it essential for all States Members
of the United Nations to share best practices and
lessons learned on how to most efficiently prevent
radicalization and groups like ISIL from emerging.
The Danish Foreign Minister, together with the Foreign
Minister of Mali, will therefore co-host an event here
in New York on Tuesday, 23 September, to advance that
common agenda.
To achieve our goal of disabling and dismantling the
threat posed by ISIL, we will need to craft a response
that recognizes at least three principles. First, the world
must recognize that ISIL is a regional and global threat
to our collective peace and security. As such, success
will require us to forge a broad and deep alliance that
can effectively neutralize that heinous and totalitarian
terrorist organization. Secondly, the international
community must be steadfast in its support to moderate
forces, not only in Iraq but also in neighbouring
countries, especially of course in Syria, where the
long-term goal of peace must still be sought. We must
aid groups willing to counter the influence of ISIL and
instead present a more inclusive and peaceful vision for
the future of their societies. Thirdly, we must ensure
that our unity of purpose persists. We must remain
united in our support to Iraq’s Government and show
the commitment required to deal with this challenge.
In conclusion, Denmark is firmly resolved to
counter the threat of ISIL. Our common approach must
be both comprehensive and holistic. We know that this
will require patience and stamina. We will need to see
greater collaboration and greater coordination among
key actors in the region. In other words, countries
will need to be prepared to overcome their individual
differences and rivalries. They will instead need to
seek common ground where there are common interests
to be found.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Peter
Stenlund, Secretary of State at the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs of Finland.
Mr. Stenlund (Finland): At the outset, Madam
President, let me express our sincere thanks to the
United States delegation for convening this very
important debate.
The situation in Iraq remains critical on the
humanitarian and security fronts. The advance of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has
38/43

19/09/2014

been a shock. It is a matter of grave concern for the
international community. The brutal terrorist actions of
ISIL must be unequivocally condemned.
The recently appointed Government in Iraq
represents an important step forward. The international
community needs to continue its support to Iraq in
maintaining its territorial integrity and strengthening
the inclusiveness of its governance structures.
Responsible religious and traditional leaders can
play a constructive role in reconciliation, uniting the
population and fighting ISIL.
The humanitarian situation is a priority. In Iraq,
1.8 million people have been forced to leave their homes,
while refugees from Syria pose an additional burden.
To respond to the needs of displaced people in Iraq,
Finland has allocated €500,000 through the World Food
Programme. By the end of this year, with an additional
allocation of €2.5 million, our humanitarian assistance
to the Syrian crisis will amount to €31 million. This,
we hope, will also help to alleviate the situation in Iraq.
As far as development cooperation with Iraq
is concerned, €800,000 will be channelled through
the Danish Refugee Council to ease the situation of
women refugees from Syria in northern Iraq. Finland is
convinced that women’s full participation is a priority
in efforts to build an inclusive society. We have also
donated €500,000 to a UN-Women project that increases
women’s political participation in Iraq. Finland is
considering giving further assistance, primarily to
Syria, based on needs and financing requirements,
thereby helping the region as a whole.
The global threat of ISIL can be successfully
countered only by means of a broad and inclusive
coalition supported by the United Nations. It is important
that the Governments most directly threatened by ISIL
play a prominent role in this endeavour. We welcome
the United States initiative to build such a coalition to
address the danger posed by ISIL. We also welcome
the fact that the Security Council has voiced itself clear
on this subject, and hope that the Council remains
persistent in supporting the international efforts.
As President Obama underscored, success will not
be achieved only by military means. It is also essential
to adopt a long-term, comprehensive approach with a
wide range of measures, including capacity-building,
humanitarian assistance and actions to prevent terrorism
and extremism. Finland is committed to participating,
together with the international community, in

14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

addressing the threat of ISIL. We recognize the need
to respond through military means, although we are
not planning to participate in combat actions or arms
deliveries.
Finland is in favour of an active role for the
European Union (EU) in supporting Iraq. Support
for capacity-building to address challenges related to
fighting a terrorist organization like ISIL should be
further explored by the EU. The protection of civilians
and respect for international law and international
humanitarian law could form part of the EU’s capacitybuilding assistance. Finland would be prepared to
contribute. International assistance to building the
capacities of security sector structures is crucial.
Finland could look at certain niche capabilities, such as
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear, provided
an appropriate framework is available. We attach great
importance to addressing the issue of foreign fighters.
In that regard, we are currently assessing our national
measures and look forward to finding solutions in
cooperation with the European Union and beyond.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): First, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on your country’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of September. I also thank you for having convened
this important meeting and for your country’s steadfast
efforts in support of the people of Iraq, who are at a
decisive crossroads that we hope will lead to stability,
security and prosperity. I would like to welcome
the Iraqi Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Ibrahim
Al-Jaafari. I also thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Iraq, Nikolay Mladenov, for
his briefing. We welcome the presidential statement to
be adopted at the outcome of this meeting.
My country welcomes the formation of the new
Iraqi Government. We hope that the final appointments
will make its composition inclusive, thereby attaining a
political balance conducive to responding to the severe
crisis in the country. It is high time for Iraq to recover
its strength. To that end, the international community
should provide full support to create appropriate
conditions for the success of political reform and for
the enshrinement of rules of justice and equality among
all components of Iraqi society.
Since Iraq took its first steps to repudiate
sectarianism, put an end to foreign intervention in its

S/PV.7271

affairs and return to the Arab world, the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia has held out its hand to all sectors
of the Iraqi people. His Majesty King Abdullah Bin
Abdulaziz Al-Saud, the Custodian of the Two Holy
Mosques, has pledged $50 million in assistance for
Iraqi refugees and displaced persons. Sectarianism,
oppression and repression are factors that have created
fertile ground for the proliferation of transnational and
even transcontinental terrorism, of which the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is a prime example.
ISIL’s barbaric terrorist crimes have nothing to do with
Islam, which is completely at odds with such acts.
I wish to convey the words of King Abdullah
Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, alerting the international
community to the danger of transboundary and
transnational terrorism. We need a collective vision
and specific goals to guide our efforts to overcome
terrorism. The timely actions taken by the Government
of Saudi Arabia, which called for the Jeddah conference
a few weeks ago and issued a statement afterwards,
are the expressions of our determination to resolutely
continue along this path.
We thank Secretary of State John Kerry for the role
of the United States.
In response to the so-called Islamic State and other
groups that use religion as a justification for their
existence and to propagate terrorist thinking, the ulemas
and other Islamic teachers have condemned the teaching
of ISIL and its adherents and the financing of its acts as
a crime. This is the content of the following statement,
issued by the Ulema Council on 14 September:
“Terrorist acts perpetrated by certain groups,
such as ISIL, Al-Qaida, Asaib Ahl Al-Haq and
Hizbullah, as well as the terrorist actions of the
Israeli occupation and the terrorist criminal acts
perpetrated by groups claiming to belong to Islam,
are all prohibited actions and are deemed to be
crimes.”
The statement of the Ulema Council also prohibits
entering the conflict zone and joining the insurrection.
The instigators of these crimes are criminals
themselves. They are leading others into error, and
should be punished.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was one of the first
States in the fight against terrorism by extirpating its
root causes. Moreover, the Kingdom has been a victim
and remains a target of terrorism. In that regard, I
highlight the support provided by the Kingdom of

14-5419139/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

Saudi Arabia to the United Nations Centre for CounterTerrorism (UNCCT) in the amount of $100 million. The
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques has called on other
States to contribute to the UNCCT, which is one of the
most important bodies working against the scourge of
terrorism. So long as the Council and the Organization
lack a wide-ranging comprehensive strategy to address
the root causes, all efforts to counter the scourge will
be in vain.
The ongoing occupation by Israel of the Arab
terrorities in Palestine, Syria and Lebanon is a factor
contributing to the development of terrorist thinking,
which justifies terrorism as contributing to the fight
against occupation. Sectarianism and extremism
fostered the emergence of ISIL, as well as the war
machine of the Syrian regime, which persists in
committing crime after crime against the Syrian
people. All of that has created a vacuum that terrorists
have rapidly exploited.
Terrorist actions should be tracked and counterterrorism efforts must be strengthened by putting a
stop to the prime source of all of the violence, namely,
the Syrian regime. ISIL and the Syrian regime are but
opposite sides of the same coin; therefore, concerted
action should be based on supporting the legitimate
Syrian opposition, represented by the Syrian National
Coalition, to enable it to respond both to ISIL and to the
regime, which is supporting ISIL in its own interests.
My country will continue its efforts to stand by the
Iraqi people and to help that kindred country regain its
rightful place in the Arab world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Just as
Lebanon’s present situation cannot be separated from
the history of Mesopotamia, our common future is
equally connected to the present situation in Iraq.
That is by no means an exaggeration. There is a little
bit of Iraq in each and every one of us. We eat what
we harvest today because humankind discovered
agriculture between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers.
We have treaties, constitutions and laws that govern
our relations today because the oldest code of law
known to humankind is that of King Hammurabi. And
we acknowledge the importance of science, reason and
culture in the progress of the human race because of
the role played by Harun al-Rashid’s Abbasid capital,

40/43

19/09/2014

Baghdad, in hosting scholars, philosophers and artists
with their richly diverse creations.
Today Iraq is in danger and that which threatens
it also threatens our future and that of our countries,
peoples and societies. A wave of blind terror has
invaded parts of Iraq. If we do no act quickly to end it,
it will spare no one inside or outside of Iraq, for it does
not recognize countries, acknowledge their borders
or accept their institutions. It is barbarism that knows
no religion, ethics or values, although it pretends to
follow Islam and hides behind its precepts. Muslims are
innocent of it. It is obscurantist in its war on modernity
and civilization and in its aggression against human
rights and human dignity, as well as in its denial of the
principle of freedom and the concept of difference.
Lebanon appreciates the role of the Council in
adopting resolution 2170 (2014) and today’s presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/20. Lebanon calls upon the
Council to remain united and to advance further with
the necessary international policies or decisions aimed
at mobilizing the resources required to eliminate the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other, similar
terrorist organizations. It must work to prevent terrorists
from avoiding punishment and hold them accountable
for their crimes.
We all know that successful efforts to eliminate
terrorism cannot be limited to military operations and
financial measures, however important they may be.
Such efforts will also require a comprehensive political,
economic and social approach to deal with the roots of
terrorism. We welcome the formation of a new Iraqi
Government and the confirmed policy of openness
and national unity. We expect the Council to provide it
with all support necessary to succeed in its functions.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm that an Iraq with
a firm foundation of national unity to safeguard its
national, religious and cultural aspects will benefit
not only Iraqis, but all Arab and Muslim peoples and,
indeed, all of humankind.
Lebanon has suffered and continues to suffer from
terrorist acts, the latest of which took place this morning
against its armed forces in the region of Arsal, after the
kidnapping of a number of its soldiers. Lebanon stands
with all countries represented here, as it did recently
in Jeddah and in Paris, in our common war against
terrorism. This war will require the Council to help my
country by supporting its armed forces, its economy
and its national institutions.

14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Winid (Poland): I would ask you, Madam
President, to convey our thanks to Secretary of State
John Kerry for organizing this meeting. I would also
like to express thanks to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Nickolay Mladenov for his detailed
and very useful briefing.
We are seriously concerned about the evolving
crisis in Syria and in Iraq. Extremists are waging a
brutal campaign of terror against the local population,
and especially ethnic and religious minorities, including
Christian minorities. Poland has been involved in the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq since 2003.
In those days, we helped the Iraqi authorities to restore
peace and security in the provinces of Karbala, Babil,
Al-Qadisiyah and An-Najaf. Accordingly, we condemn
the terrorist activity of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) which includes hijackings, torture and
brutal killings.
We also take note of the growing number of
internally displaced persons and refugees. We call for
free access of humanitarian assistance, especially for
the most vulnerable groups, including women, children
and disabled persons. We call on the Iraqi Government
to do its utmost to protect civilians, including members
of all ethnic and religious minorities. Crimes committed
by terrorists in northern Iraq should be investigated
by international criminal mechanisms so that those
responsible for the violations can be held accountable.

S/PV.7271

While reaffirming Iraq’s independence, unity,
territorial integrity and sovereignty, we welcome
the establishment of the new Iraqi Government. We
are certain that it will be a Government of national
reconciliation that represents the interests of all Iraqi
citizens regardless of ethnic and religious divisions.
We pledge our support for the Iraqi people and the
Iraqi authorities and hope they will be able to restore
public order and the rule of law, promote intercultural
and interfaith dialogue and preserve the extremely rich
cultural heritage of Iraq. The international coalition
formed at the meetings in Jeddah and Paris deserves
our recognition and support. We are aware of the fact
that a strategy to combat ISIL cannot limit itself to a
military operation. It requires the preparation of a
plan for a political solution both with regard to Iraq
and to Syria. Our common efforts should help Iraq to
fully reintegrate into the region and the international
community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Albania.

The terrorist structure seeking an Islamic
caliphate poses a direct threat to international peace
and security, which demands an urgent response from
the international community. The unprecedented
growth of ISIL and the spread of extremism in all its
manifestations, especially in the form of sectarian
tensions, have negative consequences for the security
and stability of the entire region of the Middle East and
beyond.

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Allow me to thank you,
Madam President, and Secretary Kerry for having
convened this meeting on one of the most pressing
current challenges to international peace and security
and for the invitation to take part. Like the rest of
the world, we are shocked by the terrible actions
committed by terrorist groups in Iraq and, most
notably, by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). For months now, wherever ISIL fanatics have
set foot, terror has been the norm, brutality the method
and the massacre of innocents their footprint. Their
actions have caused heavy human casualties, including
children, the displacement of more than 1 million Iraqi
civilians, including forced deportation under the threat
of execution, and threats against all religious and ethnic
groups. Albania condemns in the strongest terms all
terrorist attacks committed by terrorist groups and
organizations in Iraq, including, and especially, ISIL.

We are participating in efforts to help civilians in
need in the region. On 17 August, just two days after
the European Union decided to support Iraq in its fight
against ISIL, the first Polish Hercules transport plane
delivered eight tons of assistance to northern Iraq. We
have also funded facilities for a newly built school
in Erbil for refugee children. The Polish Minister for
Foreign Affairs awarded a number of scholarships for
Iraqi students at our universities. We will of course
continue the delivery of humanitarian aid.

ISIL represents a real, clear and current
danger to Iraq, to the countries of the region and to
broader international peace and security. We, as the
international community, cannot cannot stand by while
ISIL fanatics massacre entire villages, attack Iraq’s
religious minorities, destroy their places of worship and
threaten the integrity and sovereignty of independent
countries. We cannot remain silent while that scourge
marches through borders, imposing its obscurantist
oppressive rule.

14-5419141/43

S/PV.7271

The situation concerning Iraq

It must be said and highlighted that ISIL is in no way
representative or in accordance with the mainstream
teachings of Islam. On the contrary, it is a disgrace to
the faith that it proclaims to defend. Countless Islamic
groups around the globe have vehemently rejected
ISIL and its abhorrent actions. They are right — ISIL
is simply an abomination to Islam. They are mere
terrorists and ruthless assassins, ready to slaughter
whoever stands in their way.
While ISIL is a direct threat to Iraq and Syria, it is
also a threat to peace and security at large and to human
values, human life and our common civilization. The
adoption by the Council of resolution 2170 (2014) was a
first step in the right direction, but there is an urgent need
for bolder action. We welcome presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/20, adopted earlier this afternoon. We
applaud in particular the firm stand taken by the United
Sates, as outlined by President Obama a few days ago
and by Secretary Kerry here this afternoon, as well as
the actions taken by other partners and allies.
For all those reasons, from the beginning of the
crisis, Albania joined the international coalition so as
to fight and to eradicate ISIL. Albania has welcomed
and has taken concrete steps to support the new Iraqi
Government in its fight against terrorism. It remains
committed to continuing to engage and to providing both
military and humanitarian assistance. We have already
contributed to the fight against ISIL, providing a sizeable
quantity of weapons and ammunition to the Iraqi armed
forces. We will continue to help Iraq in the future.
Let me also recall the particular assistance that
Albania has provided to the refugees of the Camp
Hurriya. Few people may know that, since the appeal of
the Secretary-General two years ago (see SG/SM/15415),
Albania has accommodated 240 of the approximately
377 relocated refugees on a humanitarian basis. That is
more than double the total number of those absorbed by
the rest of the world.
In conclusion, terrorism has become a challenge
not only for one country or region but for the entire
community of nations. It will take a resolute and joint
effort to deter and finally defeat it. In our view, that is
the only way to deal with a global phenomenon that is
fed by distorted religion, poverty and ignorance. It is
the best way to restore hope, peace and security in all
affected regions. Albania is and will be a part of that
joint effort.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.

42/43

19/09/2014

Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand thanks
you, Madam President, and Secretary of State Kerry
for having convened this very important debate. I place
on record New Zealand’s continued and deep concern
about the situation in Iraq. Like others, we have been
outraged by the brutal actions of the Islamic State of
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). We have been appalled by
the loss of life, the large-scale displacement of innocent
civilians and the widespread abuse of human rights, all
of which deserve the strongest condemnation. We have
been shocked by the resulting humanitarian crisis.
Since June, New Zealand has made two
humanitarian contributions, through the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as
Secretary of State Kerry mentioned earlier, to assist
those displaced by the violence in Iraq. We commend the
efforts of members of the international community that
have provided relief assistance to those in the greatest
need. New Zealand therefore takes this opportunity to
express solidarity with the people of Iraq as they deal
with the crisis.
We specifically offer New Zealand’s support to the
newly formed Government of Prime Minister Al-Abadi.
We welcome his stated commitment to an inclusive
Government, which will be fundamental to addressing
the root causes of Iraq’s recent internal challenges.
The New Zealand general election takes place
tomorrow, Saturday 20 September. That imposes
constitutional limits on our ability today to respond
further, in the manner of some others. However,
within those necessary constraints, we welcome the
determination of the United States and of others to
address the global threat posed by ISIL and the ongoing
humanitarian crisis in Iraq. We particularly welcome
the support that such an effort has received from
regional players, including the Arab States.
An effective response must have the support of those
of the wider region. If that response is to be enduring,
it must recognize their legitimate interests, not least the
concern voiced by the United Arab Emirates that ISIL
could provide a safe haven for terrorists. In the end,
as emphasized earlier by the representatives of Saudi
Arabia and Lebanon, the evolution of ISIL must be
seen as the result of much broader dynamics and causes
that extend beyond Iraq and affect the entire region.
That means that, in responding to the specific threat
posed by ISIL, the international community must take
account of the impact on the wider region.

14-54191

19/09/2014

The situation concerning Iraq

Against that background, New Zealand remains
committed to offering the utmost political and
humanitarian support to the people of Iraq as they face
these grave challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to join my colleagues who have
thanked you, Madam President, for having convened
this very important meeting with the presence of the
United States Secretary of State regarding the situation
in Iraq. I am pleased that Mr. Al-Jaafari of Iraq and
Mr. Mladenov are here.
We hope that the Iraqi authorities and the brotherly
Iraqi people will have every success in restoring peace
and security throughout the country and combatting
and putting an end to terrorism. Some speakers today
have gone beyond the agenda item under consideration,
which is the situation in Iraq. That is what is on the
agenda. They have spoken about the situation in my
country in a misleading and very provocative manner, in
particular with respect to the fight against the terrorist
group of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
I was very interested to hear the preliminary
statement by Mr. Kerry. I noted the balanced wording
of his statement, which reflected the importance of
the challenge in Iraq and the region, in particular with
respect to terrorism and the threats posed by ISIL and
other terrorist organizations in the region. Some of the
other statements, unfortunately, attempted to divert our
attention from the crucial issue at hand today, that is,
the support to be provided to two Governments and
two peoples, Iraq and Syria, in combatting ISIL, Jabhat
al-Nusra and other affiliated terrorist organizations in
line with resolution 2170 (2014). The war in Syria and
Iraq against terrorism is a single war against the same
enemy. The victims in both countries are the victims of
one single heinous terrorist group.
My country’s Government is an active participant in
combatting the terrorist groups ISIL and Jabhat al-Nusra.
We have undertaken those activities unilaterally within
Syria over the past three years. We always emphasize
the importance of counter-terrorism efforts, putting
an end to terrorist financing and combating terrorists

S/PV.7271

who come to our country from other countries. We also
stress the importance of accountability with respect to
countries and States who support terrorism.
Today, we are extremely relieved to hear the
international community acknowledge the facts that
we have transmitted tirelessly to the Council and to
Member States. We have always spoken of terrorism, the
existence of terrorism and incitement to terrorist acts.
We have highlighted those Governments supporting
terrorism, the media’s support for terrorism, fatwas and
the people who claim to be ulamas and who support
such terrorism. There are indeed training camps for
terrorists. Some of those camps are in neighbouring
countries. Moreover, some attempt to mask the identity
of those who support terrorism.
The international awakening in the fight against
ISIL and Jabhat al-Nusra, even if tardy, is a matter
of relief. We therefore reaffirm that any international
counter-terrorism efort must be based on full respect
for the Charter and the provisions and principles of
international law, in particular those upholding the
sovereignty of States. Accordingly, there is a need to
coordinate upstream with the Syrian Government in the
framework of any credible efforts to combat terrorism.
In conclusion, an effective fight against ISIL
requires combatting its ideologies, based on the
obscurantist Saudi Wahhabi ideology, which is the
source of extremism in the Arab and Muslim world.
I recall that thousands of Saudi terrorists have joined
ISIL in Syria and Iraq. The majority of the terrorists
who carried out the 11 September attack were Saudis,
not Syrians. In addition, the ideas of Bin Laden also
came from Saudi Arabia. I would like to reiterate that
the events that are throwing the region into turmoil are
the result of collusion between Saudi Arabia, Turkey
and Qatar and are undermining the future of the region.
The President: I thank all the speakers who have
participated in today’s very productive meeting.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

14-5419143/43
