General A1aembl:,-Twent:,-aeeond Senion

40

2333 (XXII). Creation of the post of United
Nation■ High Commlesioner for Human
Righte
The General Assembl)•,
Recalling its resolution 2062 (XX) of 16 December
1965 relating to the creation of the post of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1237
(XLII) of 6 June 1967, in which the Council endorsed
the recommendation to the General Assembly contained in the draft resolution proposed by the Commission on Human Rights, 6 and Economic and Social
Council resolution 1238 (XLII) of 6 June 1967 on the
same subject,

Regretting that, despite its decision at the 1498th
plenary meeting, held on 19 December 1966, to approve
the Third Committee's recommendation that the consideration of agenda item 61 should be postponed to
the twenty-second session, the consideration of this
question has not been possible at the present session
owing to the heavy programme of work,
1. Decides to give high priority, in accordance with
the aforementioned resolutions and decisions, to the
consideration of this question at its twenty-third session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
General Assembly at its twenty-third session with all
the relevant information prepared in conformity with
the resolutions of the Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Commission on Human Rights
on this matter.
1638th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.

2334 (XXII). Capital puniehment
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1396 (XIV) of 20 November 1959 and 1918 (XVIII) of 5 December 1963 on
the question of capital punishment,
Noting that the heavy agenda of the Commission on
Human Rights at its recent sessions has not permitted
it to study the report entitled Capital Punishment, 1
and that therefore the Secretary-General could not present to the General Assembly the report called for in
paragraph 3 of resolution 1918 (XVIII),
Noting also Economic and Social Council resolution
1243 (XLII) of 6 June 1967 transmitting a draft resolution, submitted by the delegations of Sweden and
Venezuela, for a decision by the General Assembly as
to what further steps should be taken in the matter,
Regretting that the workload at its twenty-second
session has not permitted the General Assembly to consider the substance of the item on capital punishment,
1. Decides to consider the question of capital punishment at its twenty-third session ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
General Assembly at that session with pertinent information prepared in the light of Assembly resolution
1918 (XVIII);
6 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Forty-s,cond Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/4322 and C.orr.1),

chapter XVIII, draft resolution IV.
7 United Nations publication, Sales No.: 62.IV.2.

3. Invites the Economic and Social Council:
(a) To instruct the Commission on Human Rights
to consider the question of capital punishment, including the draft resolution submitted by the Council in
resolution 1243 (XLII), and to transmit its recommendations on the matter through the Council to the
General Assembly at its twenty-third session;
( b) To seek the views of the Consultative Group
on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders concerning the draft resolution submitted by
the Council in resolution 1243 ( XLII), requesting the
Secretary-General to transmit these views to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session.
1638th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.

2335 (XXII). United Nations Children's Fund
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter XI, section IV, of the
report of the Economic and Social Council, 8 dealing
with the United Nations Children's Fund,
Welcoming the fact that the Executive Board of
the United Nations Children's Fund had reviewed the
assistance policies of the Fund, which are focused not
only on the immediate needs of children but also on
preparing children to contribute to the social and economic development of their countries,
Noting with approval that the United Nations Children's Fund continues to provide emergency aid to
children and mothers in situations of urgent need,
while placing increasing emphasis on long-term programmes,
Noting that co-operation between the United Nations Children's Fund and the Department of Economic
and Social Affairs and the Division of Human Rights
of the United Nations Secretariat, the specialized agencies and the relevant technical and other agencies in
the United Nations family continues to be close,
1. Endorses the policies and programmes of the
United Nations Children's Fund;
2. Congratulates the United Nations Children's
Fund on the occasion of its twenty-first anniversary;
3. Commends the United Nations Children's Fund
for its very substantial and significant achievements
during its twenty-one years of operation, particularly
on behalf of the children of the developing countries;
4. Expresses the hope that the United Nations Children's Fund's goal of $50 million income from voluntary contributions by Governments and private sources
will be attained by the end of 1969, thus enabling the
Fund to continue the constructive work which merited
for it the award of the Nobel Peace Prize for 1965.
1638th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.

2336 (XXII). Freedom of information
The General Assembly,
Considering that because of its heavy agenda the
Third Committee was unable to consider the draft Convention on Freedom of Information and the draft
Declaration on Freedom of Information at the twentysecond session,
8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sec01ltl
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/6703 and C.orr.1).
