Requests the Security Council to reconsider, before the end of the present session of the General
Assembly, the application of Italy, in the light of
this determination of the Assembly.

Prie le Conseil de securite de proceder, avant la
fin de la session en cours, un nouvel examen de
la demande d'admission de l'Italie, a la lumicre
de la presrnte declaration de l'Assemblee.

G
The General Assembly,
Noting that nine members of the Security

G

Council on 1 October 194 7 supported a draft
resolution recommending the admis.5ion to the
United Nations of Finland, but that no recommendation was made to the Assembly because of
the opposition of one permanent member, although that member had previously expressed
the belief that Finland was eligible for membership;

Considering that the opposition to the abovementioned application was based on grounds not
included in Article 4 of the Charter,
Determines that Finland is in its judgment a
peace-loving State within the meaning of Article
4 of the Charter, is able and willing to carry out
the obligations of the Charter, and should therefore be admitted to membership in the United
Nations, and
Requests the Security Council to reconsider the
application of Finland, in the light of this determination of the Assembly.

a

L' Assrmblee generate,
Prenant acte du fait que neuf membres du
Conseil de securitc, le 1er octohre 1947, se sont
dcclan':: en faveur d'un projet de resolution recommandant !'admission de la Finlande a !'Organisation des Nations Unics, mais qu'aucune recommandation n'a ete faite a l'Assemblee par
suite de !'opposition d'un membre permanent,
bien que cc mcmbre se fut prcccdemment declare
d'avis que la Finlande etait admissible a!'Organisation des Nations Unies;
Considera11t que cette opposition a la demande
d'admission mcntionnee ci0 dessus se fondait sur
des raisons que ne prevoit pas l'Article 4 de la
Charte,
Declare que la Finlande est, a son avis, un Etat
pacifiq ue au sens de I' Article 4 de la Charte,
qu'elle est capable de remplir les obligations que
lui impose la Charte et disposec a le faire, et
qu'ellc devrait, par consequent, ctre admise
comme Membre des Nations Unies;
Prie le Conseil de sccuritc de proceder a un
nouvcl examen de la demande d'admission de la
Finlande, a la lumicre de la prescnte declaration
de l' As.5emblce.

H

H

The General Assembly,
Noting that eight members of the Security
Council on 21 August 1947 supported a draft
resolution recommending the admis.5ion to the
United Nations of Austria, at such time and
under such conditions as the General Assemblv
might deem appropriate, but that no recommen'dation was made to the A~sembly because of the
opposition of one permament member,

L'Assemblee generale,
Prenant acte du fait que huit membrcs du
Conseil de securitc, le 21 aof1t 194 7' SC sont declares en faveur d'un projct de rcwlution rccommandant l'admis.5ion de l'Autrichc Ji !'Organisation des Nations Unics, a tclle date et darn tellcs
conditions que l'Asemblcc gcncralr pourra jugc.r
approprices, mais qu'aucune rccommandation
n'a cte faite a l' A'i.~cmblcc par suite de !'opposition d'un mcmbrc pcn11a11cnt,
Declare quc rAutriche est, a son avis, un Etat
pacifique au scns de !'Article 4· de la Charte,
qu'elle est capable de rcmplir lcs obligations que
lui impose la Chartc, et en consequence
Prie le Conseil de securitc de proceder a un
nouvel examcn de la demancle d'admission de
I'Autriche, a la lurnicrc de la prcsente declaration
de l'Assemblee.
Cent-dix-huiti;,m,, Jeancc pleniere,
le 17 novembre 1947.

Is of the opinion that Austria is a peace-loving
State within the meaning of Article 4 of the Charter, and consequently
Requests the Security Council to reconsider the
application of Austria, in the light of this expression of opinion of the Assembly.
Hundred and eighteenth plenary meeting,
17 November 1947.

114 (II). Relations of Members of the
United Nations with Spain

114 (II). Relations des Etats Membres de
!'Organisation des Nations Unies avec
l'Espagne

Where as the Secretary-General in his annual
report 1 has informed the General Assembly of the
steps taken by the States Members of the Organization in pursuance of its recommendations of 12
December 1946, 2

Considerant quc le Secretairc general a, clans
son rapport annud 1, inforrnc I' Asscmblcc gcneralc des mesures prises par lcs Etats Membres
de !'Organisation <'.n application d<" S('~ rccommandations du 12 d{ccmbre J<H 6 2 ,

1
Sec Official Records of the second session of the General Assembly, Supplement No. !, pages 2-4.
2
See Rewlutions adopted by the General Ass.embly during the second part of its first session, resolution 39 (I),
page 63.

1

Voir lr-~ Documents ofllcids dr la dtuxiim, stJJinn de

l'Assemblie tinhale, Supplhn~nt No I, pages '.l-5.
'Voir Jes Resolutions adof1ths par l' A.<sr.mblee ,:lncrale
pendant la scconde parti~ d(• sa prcrniere srs5ion, rC:solu-

tion '.\'l (I. , pai:,., 6'.l-(i 1

21

The General Assembly
Expresses its confidence that the Security Council will exercise its responsibilities under the Charter as soon as it considers that the situation in regard to Spain so requires.
Hundred and eighteenth plenary meeting,
17 November 1947.

L'Assemblee generale
Exprime sa confiance que le Conseil de sccurite
exercera ses responsabilites conformement a la
Charte, aussitot qu'il jugerait que la situation eu
egard a l'Espagne l'exige.
Cent-dix-huitieme seance pleniere,
le 17 novembre 1947.

115 (II). Report of the Security Council

115 (II). Rapport du Conseil de securite

The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the Security
Council.1
Hundred and twenty-second plenary meeting,
21 November 1947.

L'Assemblee generale
Prend acte du rapport du Conseil de securite'.

116 UI). Rules governing the admission of
new· Members

116 (II>. Regles applicables a !'admission
de nouveaux Membres

The General Assembly
Decides to adopt the following new rules, for
insertion in the provisional rules of procedure of
the General A'ISCmhly as adopted on 17 November 1947:

L'Assemblee generate
Decide d'adopter les nouveaux articles suivants
destines a etre inseres clans le reglement interieur
provisoire de l'Assemblee generate, tel qu'il a cte
adopte le 17 novembre 194 7 :

XVII. ADMISSION OF NEW MEMBERS TO THE

XVII. ADMISSION DE NOUVEAUX MEMBRES

Cent-vingt-deuxieme seance pleniere,
le 21 novembre 1947.

UNITED NATIONS

New rule 113
Any State which desires to become a Member
of the United Nations shall submit an application
to the Secretary-General. This application shall
contain a declaration, made in a formal instrument, that it accept<; the obligations contained in
the Charter.

N ouvel article 113
Tout Etat qui desire devenir Membre des
Nations Unies adresse une demande au Secretaire
general. Cette demande doit contenir une declaration, faitc clans un instrument formel, par laquelle
cct Etat accepte lcs obligations de la Charte.

New rule 114
The Secretary-General shall send for information a copy of the application to the General Assembly, or to the Members of the United Nations
if the General Assembly is not in session.

N ouvel article 114
Le Secretaire general adresse, a titre d'information, une copie de la demande a l'Assemblee
gencrale ou, si celle-ci n'est pas en session, aux
:t-.fcmbrcs des Nations Unics.

New rule 116
If the Security Council does not recommend
the applicant State for membership or postpones
the consideration of the application, the General
Assembly may, after full consideration of the special report of the Security Council, send back the
application to the Security Council, together with
a full record of the discussion in the Assembly, for
further consideration and recommendation or
report.

N ouvel article 116
Si le Conseil de securite ne recommande pas
!'admission de l'Etat qui fait la demande, ou remet a plus tard l'examen de la demande, l'Assemblce generalc peut, apres examen approfondi du
rapport special du Conseil de securite, renvoyer
la demande au Conseil de securite, accompagnee
du compte rcndu complet des debats de l'Assemblee, afin q ue le Conseil procede a un nouvel
examen et formule une recommandation ou etablisse un rapport.

New rule 117
The Secretary-General shall inform the applicant State of the decision of the General Assembly. If the application is approved, membership
will become effective on the date on which the
General Assembly takes its decision on the application.
Hundred and twenty-second plenary meeting,
21 November 1947.

Nouvel article 117
Le Secretaire general communique la decision
de l'Assemblee generate a l'Etat interesse. S'il est
fait droit a la demande, l'Etat interesse est
c:onsidcre comme Membre de !'Organisation a la
date a laquelle l'Assemblee generate prend sa
decision sur la demande d'admission.
Cent-•vingt-deuxieme seance pleniere,
le 21 novembre 1947.

1
Document A/3G6 to be published as Supplement No. 2
to the Official Record, of the second session of the General Assembly.

1
Document A/366 qui constituera le Suppl~ment No 2
aux Documents officiels de la deuxieme seuion de l'Assemblie glnlrale.

22
