V.

14. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Mozambique;
(b) To keep the situation in Mozambique under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financial institutions and other bodies concerned and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second
regular session of 1981, of the current status of the special economic assistarce programme for Mozambique:
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation of Mozambique and the progress made in organizing and implementing the special economic assistance
programme for that country in time for the matter to be
considered by the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/100.

157

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Assistance to Zimbabwe

The General Assembly,
Noting the statement made before the General
Assembly at its eleventh special session, on 26 August
1980, by the Prime Minister of Zimbabwe, 217 in which he
outlined his Government's economic development
priorities and invited the international community to
render assistance in dealing with serious economic and
social problems in Zimbabwe, and having heard the
statement made before the Assembly by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe, on 29 September 1980, 2 1x
in which he described the serious economic and social
problems facing his country,
Recalling Security Council resolution 460 ( 1979) of
21 December 1979, in which the Council called upon the
international community to provide urgent assistance
for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Zimbabwe,

Having studied the report of the Secretary-General of
25 'August 1980 219 on assistance to Zimbabwe,
Stressing the necessity for major programmes for reconstruction and rehabilitation of both rural and urban
areas in Zimbabwe and the fact that the country inherited at independence an obsolete and worn-out infrastructure, showing obvious signs of lack of repair and
maintenance,
Noting the heavy burden of resettling returning
refugees and displaced people in Zimbabwe,
Also noting the significant role which an independent
and economically strong Zimbabwe can play in the economic development of the southern African region,
Deeply concerned, however, that the assistance so far
provided or pledged by the international community
falls far short of the amount needed for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Zimbabwe,
1. Endorses fully the assessments and recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General
and draws the attention of the international community
'" Official Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh Special Session, Plenary Meetings, 4th meeting, paras. 2-90.
'" Ibid., Thirty-fifth Session, Plenary Meetings, 15th meeting.
paras. 158-192.
219
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fifth Year. Supplement for July, August and September /9i/O, document S/ 14121.

to the requirements for assistance to carry out the projects and programmes identified in that report
" Appeals to Member States. regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental
bodies to provide effective and continuous financial,
material and technical assistance to Zimbabwe to help
that country to overcome its financial and economic difficulties:

3. Appeals to the international community to contribute to the special account which was established by
the Secretary-General for the purpose of facilitating the
channelling of contributions to Zimbabwe:
4. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the World Bank and the International
Fund for Agricultural Development to bring to the attention of their governing bodies, for their consideration, the special needs of Zimbabwe and to report the
decisions of those hodies to the Secretary-General by
15 August 1981;
5. Requests the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system to report
periodically to the Secretary-General on the steps they
have taken and the resources they have made available
to assist Zimbabwe;
6.

Requests the Secretary-General:

To continue his efforts to mobilize resources for
an effective programme of financial, technical and
material assistance to Zimbabwe:
(b) To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to continue the mobilization of
international assistance for Zimbabwe;
(c) To keep the situation in Zimbabwe under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financial institutions concerned and to apprise the Economic
and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1981,
of the current status of the special economic assistance
programme for Zimbabwe;
(d) To arrange for a review of the progress made
in organizing and implementing the assistance programme for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session:
(a)

7. Expresses its appreciation to those States and organizations that have provided assistance to Zimbabwe
in response to the appeals by the Security Council and
the Secretary-General;
8. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees for co-ordinating a
programme for the return to Zimbabwe and resettlement of refugees and displaced people.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/101.

Assistance to Saint Lucia

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 32/ 186 of 19 December 1977,
33/152 of 20 December 1978 and 34/194 of 19 December 1979, in which it. inter alia, stressed the urgency of
