United Nations

S/PV.6648

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6648th meeting
Thursday, 3 November 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Moraes Cabral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Portugal)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Sangqu
Ms. Hendrie
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that country
(S/2011/655)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-57874 (E)

*1157874*

S/PV.6648

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on
the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that
country (S/2011/655)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Angola and Guinea-Bissau to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her
Excellency Mrs. Helena Embaló, Minister of Economy,
Planning and Regional Integration of Guinea-Bissau.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Her Excellency Ambassador
Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, in her capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/655, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on developments in GuineaBissau and on the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that country.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Joseph Mutaboba and Ambassador
Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mutaboba.
Mr. Mutaboba: I am honoured to present to the
Council the latest report of the Secretary-General on
the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
(S/2011/655). I believe that this is a timely opportunity
to share with the Council the most recent developments

2

in Guinea-Bissau and review the current situation and
the best course of action for future efforts to
consolidate stability in the country, as this is our last
meeting before the end of the current mandate of
UNIOGBIS, in December this year. The national
authorities, with the assistance of international
partners, have continued to steer the country in the
right direction and have consolidated important recent
gains, resulting in a better political and security
environment. There is nevertheless a need to continue
to build upon these gains, as we gradually approach
critical phases of the reform process that require strong
international support, and as the country embarks on a
sensitive electoral process in 2012.
UNIOGBIS has continued to support national
efforts to effectively coordinate international assistance
for credible security sector reform (SSR) under the
principle of full civilian control of the military. In that
context, significant work has been done to
operationalize the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP) road map for
fast-tracking SSR. Following the approval of the
document at the highest level by the three parties
concerned — the Government of Guinea-Bissau,
ECOWAS and the CPLP — a memorandum of
understanding detailing the modalities governing the
implementation of the road map on the ground is
expected to be signed by the three parties in the
coming weeks.
Throughout the negotiations between the three
parties, UNIOGBIS was regularly consulted and
insisted on the importance of framing the memorandum
of understanding within the context of existing
provisions related to the SSR implementation,
including those deriving from Security Council
resolutions and the outcome of the consultations
between the European Union and the Government of
Guinea-Bissau. In the meantime, it should be noted
that the CPLP member States maintained their
engagement in connection with the implementation of
projects on the ground that are part of the road map and
contribute to overall SSR efforts.
The delays in the disbursement of international
financial assistance for the implementation of the road
map, including the $63 million pledged by ECOWAS,
remain a serious impediment to the activation of the
pension fund scheme for the retirement of military and
security personnel. The Government of Guinea-Bissau

11-57874

S/PV.6648

has already contributed $200,000 to the pension fund
and committed to providing an additional $300,000
before the end of the year. The Government
contribution is the only disbursement made to the
pension fund so far. Yet it is essential to guarantee the
financial resources necessary to launch the fund
without further delay, so as to allow for the expeditious
rejuvenation of the military leadership and the
enhancement of civilian oversight over the armed
forces. In that context, I welcome the efforts made by
the Peacebuilding Commission country-specific
configuration to hold a high-level event to raise
awareness about and seek the financial resources
necessary for the pension fund scheme. I cannot stress
enough the urgency of this matter.
In parallel, I am happy to report that the reform
of the policing services has seen substantial progress.
As a result of a thorough screening of police officers
through the first phase of the vetting and certification
process completed with the support of UNIOGBIS, the
reformed police services will be free of personnel
known to have demonstrated behaviour unfit for a
police officer. The first model police station in Bissau
is now operational. Its staff benefit from the advice of
United Nations police officers co-located on its
premises. Within the recently approved $16.8 million
second allocation of the Peacebuilding Fund for
Guinea-Bissau, $3 million will be allocated for the
construction of an additional 12 model police stations
throughout the country, which will contribute
significantly to the modernization of policing in
Guinea-Bissau and to the institutionalization of respect
for the rule of law, for the first time in Guinea-Bissau’s
recent history.
With regard to efforts to fight impunity, progress
has been conditioned not only by operational delays in
the establishment of capable law-enforcement
agencies, but also, and more importantly, by the
increasing strategic need, or obligation, to strike a
delicate balance between pushing for advancing the
prevalence of the rule of law while at the same time not
risking damaging the fragile stability in the country.
While some positive work has been done in the
development of the capacities of the various justicesector actors and in establishing good practices of
information-sharing among them, which has led to
positive results, the 2009 high-profile political cases
and related investigations remain to be concluded.
Additionally, the recent changes at the helm of the

11-57874

Judiciary Police and the subsequent replacement of the
Prosecutor-General,
while
generating
a
new
momentum considering the commitment made by the
newcomers to depoliticize the judiciary system, also
created inevitable additional delays, in addition to the
recent reshuffling in the key Government and judiciary
system positions.
The opposition political parties recently
organized a series of peaceful public demonstrations of
protest calling for progress on these very same
investigations. In this regard, UNIOGBIS played a
significant role in ensuring that these demonstrations
did not lead to further episodes of tension among key
political and military actors in Guinea-Bissau. We
believe that the chances of achieving concrete positive
results in the fight against impunity and the
consolidation of the rule of law in Guinea-Bissau,
without jeopardizing the existing stability prevailing in
the country, will benefit from a strong engagement of
the international community in the process, including
enhanced coordination among partners. The authorities
of Guinea-Bissau, the opposition, civil society
organizations and the population as a whole must feel
reassured that the international community will neither
tolerate further episodes of instability in the country
nor accept that the perpetrators of serious crimes
against the State remain unprosecuted. An important
factor in achieving this will be for Guinea-Bissau’s
international partners to remain committed to
advancing the institutional reforms envisaged in
Security Council resolutions 1876 (2009) and 1949
(2010), including SSR and the establishment of
political dialogue, while building the foundations for
justice, the rule of law and respect for human rights.
Regarding the national conference, I am pleased
to report that the preparatory phase — consisting in a
series of eight sessions for the defence and security
sectors, two conferences for the Guinea-Bissau
diaspora in Africa and Europe, and 12 regional
conferences — concluded at the end of October with
the last sessions held in Bissau. An in-depth analysis
and drafting of the results of the preparatory phases of
the process is now under way, under the guidance of
the organizing committee.
The national conference is scheduled to be held
between 15 and 18 December. We will continue to
assist the national authorities in the development of
follow-up mechanisms to be established following the
event in order to ensure continuity in the reconciliation

3

S/PV.6648

efforts by building upon the national conference
process. The objective is also to guarantee an inclusive
dialogue process open to all segments of society,
notably the opposition parties not represented in
Parliament, and to mainstream gender in this very
promising process.
UNIOGBIS has also continued to provide support
to the constitutional review process. The first phase of
the assistance consisted in a series of efforts aimed at
ensuring that those responsible for reviewing the
Constitution are in a position to do so in a broadly
informed manner. Consequently, the Parliamentary
Commission for the Review of the Constitution
established a drafting committee and appointed its
members, whose work will count on the support of
UNIOGBIS. In parallel, UNIOGBIS will also provide
technical and financial support to efforts that will be
carried out at the grass-roots level throughout the
country with a view to disseminating the work being
done and ensuring wide national ownership and
popular buy-in to the new draft constitution.
UNIOGBIS will also provide advice to the national
authorities to help ensure that the constitutional review
process remains non-partisan, particularly in light of
the upcoming legislative elections, scheduled for 2012.
Drug trafficking and organized crime remain a
constant threat to the fragile stability that GuineaBissau has enjoyed over the past 18 months, and bear
the potential to compromise major reforms, including
SSR. The efficient combat against drug trafficking in
Guinea-Bissau continues to be hampered by a variety
of internal and external political and technical factors.
Furthermore, the lack of reliable data on the actual
quantities of drugs that transit through the national
territory adds to the difficulties in addressing the
matter with the national authorities. This aspect was
discussed during Under-Secretary-General Fedotov’s
visit in Bissau on 27 October.
Increased international assistance and the
partners’ commitment remain imperative if we wish to
see improved results in the fight against drug
trafficking and organized crime in the country.
Initiatives aimed at pooling the efforts of countries of
origin, transit and destination of narcotics should
continue and translate into concrete operational
cooperation. The development and consolidation of
regional initiatives, including the West Africa Coast
Initiative, whose Programme Committee met in Bissau
on 27 October, will also contribute significantly to the

4

building of national capacities in Guinea-Bissau and
countries of the subregion.
I have tried to describe today the crucial juncture
we are approaching with our efforts to consolidate
stability and create conditions for long-lasting
development in Guinea-Bissau. Increasingly, strong,
coordinated international support for the reform
process is required, as is political backing for elected
authorities. In this context, I would like to stress once
again the cross-cutting dimension of the pension fund
scheme and the progress that even a limited amount of
funding could permit. Its quick operationalization will
have impact not only on efforts to advance SSR, but
also on our collective stabilization efforts, especially as
the country prepares for legislative elections in 2012.
The President: I thank Mr. Mutaboba for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Viotti.
Mrs. Viotti: I am pleased to brief the Council in
my capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. I
would like to extend a warm welcome to the Minister
of Economy, Planning and Regional Integration of
Guinea-Bissau, Her Excellency Ms. Maria Helena
Nosolini Embaló.
I also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, for his
briefing and for his work as head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS). I welcome Ambassador Ismael Gaspar
Martins, Permanent Representative of Angola and
Chair of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP).
Since I last briefed the Council (see S/PV.6569), I
had the opportunity to visit Guinea-Bissau in early
September. During my trip, I witnessed visible signs of
progress, in terms of both stability and economic
growth. The Government of Guinea-Bissau has made
considerable efforts to implement key peacebuilding
priorities in recent months. Concrete achievements in
the realm of macroeconomic improvements, fiscal
discipline and infrastructure development have induced
an important virtuous circle, in spite of the difficult
global economic environment.
On the political side, I was glad to note that
stability is taking hold. The current Government has
been the most stable and long-lasting since 1997. I also

11-57874

S/PV.6648

noted, however, that most interlocutors continue to
view stability as fragile. In this context, the full
implementation of security sector reform (SSR)
continues to be considered one of the highest priorities
and a step that will greatly contribute to sustainable
peace and development. Stability taking root is, of
course, contingent upon achieving other peacebuilding
priorities, notably upholding the rule of law, expanding
job creation and combating organized crime, including
illicit drug trafficking.
The urgency of focusing on SSR was widely
recognized by all interlocutors during my visit. To this
end, the launching of a pension fund for the armed
forces and security forces personnel to be demobilized
is regarded as an important instrument to assist the
reform. This process, coupled with the training of the
remaining contingent and the recruitment of new
personnel, will gradually improve the professionalism
of the armed forces and internal law enforcement
personnel.
The road map on SSR developed by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Community of Portuguesespeaking Countries offers a very relevant tool to
support governmental SSR efforts. It makes those
efforts part of a wider international cooperation
framework, built through a tripartite dialogue among
the Government of Guinea-Bissau, ECOWAS and
CPLP. This commendable example of regional
cooperation also enjoys the support of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The Government of Guinea-Bissau has already
implemented some of the requested measures, such as
instituting a follow-up committee on the pension fund,
revamping the SSR national steering committee, and
drafting a tripartite memorandum of understanding for
the implementation of the joint ECOWAS/CPLP road
map, which has been officially presented to ECOWAS
and CPLP for comments. The negotiations on the
memorandum of understanding are at an advanced
stage, and its signature is expected soon.
Coinciding with my visit to Bissau, the
Government deposited, on 2 September, a total of
$200,000, as a first tranche of its initial contribution to
the pension fund. The Government is also considering
making an additional contribution by the end of this
year. These are welcome signs of Guinea-Bissau’s
commitment and engagement in this process.

11-57874

During my stay in Bissau, I felt that the
Government is fully committed to SSR. It is now
essential that the international community provide
timely and steady support, in particular through
technical expertise and financial resources, to make the
pension fund operational. Although resources have
been pledged, they have not yet been disbursed.
In this regard, the Government of Guinea-Bissau
requested the assistance of the Peacebuilding
Commission to organize a high-level event on SSR in
New York by the end of this year. The holding of such
a high-level meeting can contribute to building trust
and to bringing international partners together to
support Guinea-Bissau in addressing key peacebuilding
challenges.
Members of the configuration have agreed that
the Peacebuilding Commission should present a list of
elements for the Government’s consideration, to assist
in the preparations for the proposed high-level event on
security
sector
reform,
especially
on
the
operationalization of the pension fund. I wrote to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guinea-Bissau on
24 September, listing those elements for the
Government’s consideration.
I am pleased to say that progress has also been
made in the fight against drug trafficking. The
Government of Guinea-Bissau adopted the operational
plan to combat drug trafficking. The Transnational
Crime Unit (TCU) is operational and its Management
Board has met regularly. INTERPOL has set up an
office in Bissau. Continuing international cooperation
will be needed to support the TCU in implementing its
ongoing activities. The configuration also shares that
concern, and intends to advocate for an increase in the
financial resources disbursed in support of the West
Africa Coast Initiative.
As I indicated previously, the Government of
Guinea-Bissau has been able to achieve important
progress in macroeconomic policy over the past few
years. Improvements in the economic sector resulted
from an exceptional cashew nut harvest, enhanced
financial and fiscal discipline and the implementation
of public work projects.
It is also worth noting that the Secretary-General
has allocated up to $16.8 million from the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) to the implementation of the
2011-2013 Peacebuilding Priority Plan for GuineaBissau. Likewise, the PBF Joint Steering Committee

5

S/PV.6648

has approved the four draft projects jointly designed by
the Government and the United Nations country team.
Those projects focus on supporting security sector
reform, promoting job creation as a peace dividend for
youth and women, and boosting political dialogue and
national reconciliation.
The Peacebuilding Commission continues to be
committed to a proactive approach in its engagement
with Guinea-Bissau. This will involve improving
coordination efforts with other actors. The national
authorities of Guinea-Bissau and international partners
must work towards a deeper relationship of mutual
commitment and trust, geared towards sustainable
peace and development for Guinea-Bissau and the
subregion. The international community should rise to
the challenge of supporting the maintenance of
political stability and economic progress that the
country has experienced over the past few years.
We must take advantage of this positive
momentum and persevere in our collective efforts to
support Guinea-Bissau.
The President (spoke in Portuguese): I thank
Mrs. Viotti for her briefing.
(spoke in English)
I now give the floor to Her Excellency
Ms. Helena Embaló, Minister of Economy, Planning
and Regional Integration of Guinea-Bissau.
Ms. Embaló (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in
Portuguese; English text provided by delegation): The
Prime Minister of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, His
Excellency Mr. Carlos Gomes Júnior, asked me to send
his warmest greetings to the Security Council and to
convey to it the importance that we attach to this
meeting of the Council, which once again confirms its
readiness to support the Government’s efforts to
stabilize the country.
Whenever we have an opportunity such as this,
we wish to highlight our recognition of how the
Security Council has played its strategic role of
maintaining international peace and security in a world
where threats and urgent and complex issues require
appropriate responses.
With regard to Guinea-Bissau, the Council’s
actions have been steady and careful, and have
revealed its proper understanding of the challenges we
face. That has been the basis for its effective action,

6

which has created the environment of confidence and
optimism that we are currently experiencing in our
country, supported by the assistance that we have been
receiving from the United Nations.
We therefore welcome United Nations efforts to
promote stability and peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau,
and for that reason we pay tribute to the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS), through its Head and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mr. Joseph
Mutaboba, who, with integrity and great sense of
purpose, has contributed to revitalizing and
strengthening national reconciliation and dialogue.
Allow me to express what an honour and
privilege it is for me to participate in this meeting of
the Security Council to outline the developments in
Guinea-Bissau since the Council’s most recent meeting
on the topic (see S/PV.6569).
Over the past three years, my country has shown
perseverance and determination in implementing its
governmental agenda. The acceleration of structural
reforms in areas critical for development has helped to
normalize the social and political spheres and restore
public trust. The long periods of political instability
that dragged the country into a vicious circle of serious
imbalances and exacted a massive toll by delaying the
normal course of development, have now given way to
a more favourable political context, characterized by
economic recovery and the renewed confidence of
internal and external partners.
Today, I can report that our people enjoy, with
some sense of euphoria, the gains that governmental
stability has brought to the country. That progress has
enabled the country to move from a dramatic budgetary
situation to a more stable position, thanks to greater
control over public spending, increased tax revenues
and the substantial reduction of public debt.
Despite the massive uncertainties currently
prevailing in the international context, rising exports
have benefited the national economy and have
compensated for shrinking international aid flows. In
that regard, the country’s GDP growth has surpassed its
historical trend of 1.8 per cent over the past 10 years
and is forecasted to reach 5.3 per cent this year,
compared with 3.5 per cent in 2010, in a context of
moderate price stability. Those successes were based
on careful and efficient economic governance, building
on bold reforms and on the gradual improvement of

11-57874

S/PV.6648

living conditions, thanks to the revitalization of some
industries and improvements in basic infrastructure and
the delivery of social services.
In the framework of implementing security and
defence sector reform, it is worth highlighting the
Government’s efforts to set up a special pension fund.
The special pension fund is a step in the process of
restructuring the defence and security forces and will
ensure that all members who retire from active duty for
reasons of age, seniority or disability receive a fair
pension.
Despite the consensus reached on the essential
role of the pension fund as a key pillar of security and
defence sector reform, its start-up of operations is
significantly behind schedule, owing mainly to delays
in the financial contributions that will constitute the
fund.
Guinea-Bissau has shown its firm commitment to
promptly beginning the process by adopting most of
the legal instruments that frame the reforms, in
accordance with the expert studies carried out in the
framework of our cooperation with the European
Union.
As evidence of that commitment and along the
lines previously agreed and accepted by all, the
Government organized the public bidding process to
select the banking institution to be entrusted with
management of the fund. More recently, it deposited
40 per cent of its annual contribution into the account
opened in the bank selected, and made a commitment
to deposit an additional $300,000 by the end of the
current budget year, which will complete the target
amount set for this year.
Once we receive the contributions announced by
some donors, namely, the United Nations through the
Peacebuilding Fund, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the European Union (EU)
and Angola, the Government is ready to offer the
additional guarantees necessary to safeguard the
exclusive use of the fund’s resources for the purposes
for which it was created. In that regard, the framework
agreement signed between the Government and the
bank in question provides for the signature of
additional protocols to ensure that the specific financial
procedures of each donor are respected.
At this stage in the process, the financial
contribution of ECOWAS is contingent on the

11-57874

signature of a memorandum of understanding between
ECOWAS, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP) and the Government to implement
defence and security sector reforms.
As is well known, the framework of support for
and follow-up to the road map is established in the
memorandum, as is a set of priority actions, such as the
operationalization of the pension fund. A draft
memorandum of understanding is already available,
and its signature will be made possible with the final
decision of ECOWAS. The Government estimates that
a rapid response from that institution will allow for the
implementation of the decision of the Conference of
Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS which, in
March 2011, approved the special financial package to
support the road map in the amount of $63 million and
will have the additional merit of highlighting the role
of ECOWAS in the consolidation of the process of
regional integration and, in particular, in the
strengthening of peace and security in Guinea-Bissau.
The conclusion of consultations with the
European Union until article 96 of the Cotonou
Agreement and the resulting commitments undertaken
by the Government created the conditions for the
resumption of EU support for security sector reform.
As the Council is aware, the Government has
maintained a constructive political dialogue with the
European Union in a follow-up committee that meets
regularly to assess the implementation of the road map
that emerged from the consultations. To complete the
picture of the commitments already announced for the
financing of the pension fund, it is worth mentioning
the contributions of the Government of Angola in the
framework of our bilateral cooperation and of the
Peacebuilding Fund. The Government welcomes these
efforts and calls for their implementation as soon as
possible.
The efforts of the Government that I have just
described should be appreciated and valued by the
donor community, which must show greater flexibility.
One can only be healed after treatment and not the
other way around. It is therefore only reasonable to ask
for results after creating the conditions necessary for
obtaining them. In order for the work done so far not to
be seen as a handful of salt thrown into the sea, to use
a popular expression, and in order for our
commitments not to be reduced to mere rhetoric, we
must proceed to the high-level meeting scheduled to
take place later this month under the auspices of the

7

S/PV.6648

United Nations. The meeting, which is part of a
strategy to deepen the political dialogue with the
Government, should continue to receive special
attention.
Indeed, it was in this conviction — which we
understand is shared by our partners — that we
adopted, without hesitation and often at high social and
political cost, the comprehensive legislative package of
reforms with a view to implementing measures to
monitor the payment of wages in the public sector,
including the defence and security forces, and to raise
awareness of and improve communication on the goals
of the reform and other elements deemed necessary to
ensure its operability.
In short, we have created the conditions, once
considered a major challenge, for the establishment of
the special pension fund and the launch of the
demobilization process. We now call for greater
engagement by all in these efforts, failing which we
risk undermining the significant efforts made to date
and sowing doubt among the beneficiaries of the
process with regard to the capacity and interest of some
in successfully concluding this process.
As far as the Government is concerned, the
process will begin so long as conditions are in place to
cover the costs related to the payment of pensions for
the first two years of the fund’s operation. The launch
of the fund will allow us to face many of the challenges
that we have been confronted with, such as the gradual
replenishment of the military command and improved
training for new recruits. Together with other actions,
including demobilization and reintegration into active
life, security sector reform will be further energized.
The Government welcomes the adoption of the
employment programme within the framework of the
Peacebuilding Fund, which includes employment
solutions for demobilized military personnel as well as
other projects of a similar nature already under way
with the support of the European Union.
The issue of impunity continues to be highlighted
as one of the causes of Guinea-Bissau’s fragility and as
a threat to social peace. The examples that are often
cited are the excessive delay in the investigation of
crimes, the lack of State authority, which would
indicate leadership deficits, and lack of technical and
financial capacities to ensure the rule of law. The
Government views these shortcomings as challenges

8

and is therefore committed to moving forward with its
programme of justice sector reform.
So far, clear results have been obtained in the
rehabilitation of prisons and penal system reform, in
strengthening criminal justice legislation and national
capacities, and in implementing mechanisms to
facilitate access to information and impartial justice.
These results demonstrate the appropriateness of the
choices made to strengthen the judiciary and improve
its operations in accordance with full respect for
democratic principles, in particular the principle of
separation of powers.
The creation of the first model police station, the
Offices of Information and Judiciary Support and the
creation of the Judiciary Training Centre fall within
this new dynamic. The promotion of professional
training for judicial officers, the access of all citizens
to justice and the dissemination of a new paradigm
between citizens and the police are critical factors for
the consolidation of democracy and the rule of law.
This framework also includes measures taken to
combat transnational organized crime, especially drug
trafficking, terrorism and money-laundering, at the
subregional level, through the West Africa Coast
Initiative, and at the national level.
The strategy and the action plan to combat drugs
were warmly welcomed by the Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), who has just completed a working visit to
Guinea-Bissau. In addition, the support provided by the
representative of the Attorney-General of the United
States should also be praised and enhanced so that we
can take advantage of their enormous experience in this
field.
With the assistance of UNODC and France, we
are working on a plan to combat money-laundering that
will also rely on the support of the Intergovernmental
Action Group against Money Laundering in West
Africa and the National Unit for the Processing of
Financial Information, which has already been created
in our country. There is also an ongoing programme to
strengthen the channels of communication among the
different agencies of the system and to enhance the
sharing of information collected from different sources.
INTERPOL, which now has a local office, will play a
central role in this process.
The will and determination of the Government to
implement these strategies is a necessary but

11-57874

S/PV.6648

insufficient condition for their success. The lack of
financial means and the imposition of conditionalities
for their disbursement have been the main causes of
delays in the process.
The interconnection in Guinea-Bissau among the
political, security, justice, economic and social
development dimensions is unequivocal and generally
accepted by donors and local actors, as well as by
national civil society institutions, all of which
recognize that only in a climate of peace and political
stability can the country achieve sustainable
development and economic and social progress. That is
why, in the recently revised and reformulated country
strategy paper, defence, security and justice sector
reforms were included in the first section under the
title “Strengthening the rule of law and republican
institutions”. This axis refers to the structures and
authority of the State, as well as to its ability to
implement
new
practices
of
political
and
administrative governance in order to establish the rule
of law and lasting security for the population and its
property. Among the actions to be taken in this area, I
note measures to improve the human rights situation
and mechanisms to prevent and manage crises.
The separation of powers, the primacy of the law
and the establishment of an independent and
technically and culturally able judiciary are the
cornerstones of the rule of law that we wish for our
country. For us, that necessarily implies accelerating
and stabilizing the defence and security sector reform
process. Respect for democratic principles, particularly
through holding free, transparent and regular elections
and leaving behind the former practice of seizing
power through force, completes the picture outlined
above, incorporating the democratic components
within the regular functioning of institutions. That will
be the main guarantee of stability for our country,
which will allow it to turn a corner and break the cycle
of political instability that has marked it in recent
years.
The other elements of the national poverty
reduction strategy aim at providing responses to the
characteristic challenges of the country in the area of
development, where priorities and needs in the
Guinean context require a more inclusive approach in
which social and human needs cannot be relegated to
the background. The country still has a low level of
human development and faces complex and wideranging challenges in terms of poverty. Thus strategies,

11-57874

policies, programmes and actions that could
significantly reduce poverty in its multiple dimensions,
generate
increased
income
and
employment
opportunities, and improve access to basic public
services that meet basic quality standards have been
envisioned over a five-year period.
As we have reiterated several times in
international forums, implementation of those
strategies depends on the effective support of the
international community, particularly in the social
sectors. To follow up those ideas, we have already
started preparations to organize a donor round table
next year with a view to mobilizing funds to implement
the national plan to combat poverty.
The high-level meeting on defence and security
sector reform scheduled for this year is part of the
Government’s strategy to raise awareness and mobilize
resources and partnerships. We hereby renew our
appreciation for everything that has been done by those
who have supported us in this massive effort to raise
awareness and begin implementation of the reforms. I
refer to the Economic Community of West African
States, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, the African Union, the European Union, and
particularly to countries such as Angola, Brazil, Cape
Verde, Portugal, Nigeria and Senegal for all they have
done to ensure that the voice of Guinea-Bissau is heard
around the world.
We count on the wholehearted support of the
Security Council and of the entire international
community, from whom we ask for engagement with
Guinea-Bissau, as has already occurred with some of
our partners, so that we can jointly implement the
programmes that will boost the country’s economic and
social development and transform it into a prosperous
and exemplary nation. Those are the matters I wish to
highlight at this juncture.
The President (spoke in Portuguese): I thank the
Minister for her statement.
(spoke in English)
I now give the floor to Mr. Ismael Abraão Gaspar
Martins, Permanent Representative of Angola, who
will also speak on behalf of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola) (spoke in
Portuguese; interpretation provided by the delegation):
I address the Security Council on behalf of the member

9

S/PV.6648

countries of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP): Brazil, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe, TimorLeste and my country, Angola, which is the current
President of the Community.
I would like to pay tribute to Her Excellency
Helena Embaló, Minister of Economy, Planning and
Regional Integration of Guinea-Bissau.
It is with great satisfaction that we participate in
this important meeting of the Security Council, which
has Brazil and Portugal as non-permanent members.
The meeting focuses on the report of the SecretaryGeneral
on
the
United
Nations
Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
(S/2011/655), which has been presented by our friend
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Joseph Mutaboba.
I wish to highlight the issues related to security
sector reform. Guinea-Bissau faces challenges in
several areas, such as the need to subordinate military
power to the civil authorities, the demobilization and
reintegration of members of the armed forces and the
struggle against impunity and drug trafficking. We
should recognize the progress made in those areas in
recent months and encourage the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to intensify its efforts towards stability
and development.
The security sector reform road map for GuineaBissau developed by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the CPLP is an
indispensable contribution to the response to the
various challenges facing the country. As demonstrated
in the recent summit in Luanda, the CPLP is committed
to the effective implementation of the road map,
including the operationalization of the pension fund for
retired armed forces and police personnel. However,
the operationalization of that fund is conditioned on the
availability of financing from the other partners to the
stabilization process in Guinea-Bissau.
We welcome the decision of the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to deposit $200,000 into the pension
fund, despite the country’s known financial limitations.
That deposit will be followed by another contribution
of $300,000 by the end of 2011, which will create
conditions for the effective establishment of the
pension fund. That is an essential condition for the
success of the demobilization and reintegration of the
armed forces of Guinea-Bissau. In that context, the

10

CPLP also encourages the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF)
to make available $3 million to accelerate
establishment of the pension fund in Guinea-Bissau.
Implementation of the ECOWAS-CPLP road map
will not be possible without the understanding of the
international and bilateral partners with respect to the
need to mobilize additional funds to contribute to the
success of the process. We consider that to be an
essential element in ensuring the sustainability and
irreversibility of the peacebuilding and political
stabilization processes in Guinea-Bissau. The lack of
financial resources and sometimes the excessive
politicization of the assistance required by GuineaBissau have been a negative influence in the dynamic
of that process.
Faced with that reality, the technical, material and
financial contributions made available by CPLP and
ECOWAS, and bilaterally by the Republic of Angola
and other CPLP members, are examples to be followed
as to how the principle of solidarity and international
cooperation should be applied. Each member of the
CPLP has its own experiences and lessons learned with
respect to peacebuilding. The CPLP considers that
complementarity between the various aspects of peace
and security, economic recovery, and the rule of law is
fundamental in the process of political stabilization and
national reconciliation.
The rule of law and the struggle against drug
trafficking are some of the elements of the
peacebuilding
process.
Therefore,
international
mobilization of additional resources that may
contribute to the implementation of the national
poverty reduction strategy cannot be put in second
place. Also in this area, the PBF contribution to various
socio-economic projects could serve as an example for
other partners to follow.
The CPLP welcomes the visit by the delegation
from the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and the United Nations Office for West Africa to assess
the negative impact of drugs on Guinea-Bissau and the
West Africa subregion. At the same time, the CPLP
congratulates and supports the recent commitment of
ECOWAS authorities to mobilize the West African
countries in the combat against transnational organized
crime. Close collaboration with the High-Level Policy
Committee of the West Africa Coast Initiative (WACI)
is fundamental. WACI offers a response that is
appropriate to the transnational nature of drug

11-57874

S/PV.6648

trafficking through the establishment of transnational
crime units in the countries that join the Initiative. It is
urgent that the international community supports the
operationalization of those units in Guinea Bissau.
To conclude, the CPLP is convinced that the
international community must remain engaged in the

stabilization process in Guinea Bissau. We hope that
the United Nations can continue to play a central role
in that process.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

11-57874

11
