S/2009/67

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 February 2009
Original: English

Letter dated 2 February 2009 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to inform you that I have received from the Government of
Pakistan a request that I establish an international commission in connection with
the assassination on, 27 December 2007, of the former Prime Minister of Pakistan,
Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto. I am mindful of the determination and efforts made by
Pakistan to search for the truth and bring to justice all financiers, perpetrators,
organizers, sponsors and conspirators of this terrorist act so that they will be held
accountable.
Following receipt of the request from the Government of Pakistan, and after
extensive discussions with the Pakistani authorities as well as with members of the
Security Council, it has been agreed that the international commission should be
fact-finding in nature and that its mandate would be to determine the facts and
circumstances of the assassination of former Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mohtarma
Benazir Bhutto.
On this basis, I wish to accede to the Pakistani request and intend to establish a
three-member Commission of Inquiry.
I enclose with the present letter the draft terms of reference for the proposed
commission (see annex). You will note that the commission’s mandate would be of a
limited duration (a maximum of six months), and would not extend to carrying out a
criminal investigation. The duty of determining criminal responsibility of the
perpetrators of the assassination would remain with the Pakistani authorities. The
international commission would enjoy the full cooperation of the Pakistani
authorities and be accorded the privileges, immunities and facilities necessary for
the independent conduct of the inquiry, including, in particular, unhindered access to
all relevant sources of information. The international commission may request
cooperation of a third State in the collection of materials or information relevant to
the case. I count on the full cooperation of Member States with such a request.
The international commission would be composed of a panel of three eminent
personalities having the appropriate experience and a reputation for probity and
impartiality. It would be staffed in a manner to enable it to carry out its duties
effectively. The specific details of the logistical, financial, security and human
resources requirements of the commission would be determined based on the results
of a small security and technical mission that would be dispatched to Pakistan and
other places, as necessary, in light of the Security Council’s support for the
establishment of the commission.
09-22666 (E) 040209

*0922666*

S/2009/67

The international commission would be funded by voluntary contributions
from Member States. Pakistan has offered to provide “seed money” to an
appropriate United Nations trust fund to help an early deployment of security and
technical assessment missions. The Secretariat is engaged in discussions with the
Pakistani authorities as to the size and nature of a Pakistani contribution, mindful of
the importance of maintaining the independence and impartiality of the commission.
I shall decide upon a date for the international commission to commence its
operations once I have received sufficient voluntary contributions to cover the work
of the commission in its entirety.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

2

09-22666

S/2009/67

Annex
Terms of reference of the Commission of Inquiry
1.
At the request of the Government of Pakistan that the Secretary-General
establish an international commission for the purpose of investigating the
assassination, on 27 December 2007, of the former Prime Minister of Pakistan,
Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto, and after extensive consultations with Pakistani officials
as well as with members of the Security Council, I have decided to appoint a threemember Commission of Inquiry to determine the facts and circumstances of the
assassination of the former Prime Minister.
2.
In the conduct of its inquiry, the Commission shall enjoy the full cooperation
of the Government of Pakistan. The Government shall comply with the requests of
the Commission for assistance in collecting the required information and testimony,
and shall provide it with the necessary facilities to enable it to discharge its
mandate. It shall, in particular, guarantee to the Commission:
(a) Freedom of movement throughout the territory of Pakistan, including
facilities of transport;
(b) Free access to all places and establishments relevant to the work of the
Commission;
(c) Freedom of access to all sources of information, including documentary
material and physical evidence, freedom to interview representatives of
governmental, as well as other institutions and, in principle, any individual whose
testimony is considered necessary for the fulfilment of its mandate;
(d) Appropriate security arrangements for the personnel, documents,
premises and other property of the Commission;
(e) Protection for all those who appear before or provide information to the
Commission in connection with the inquiry; no such person shall, as a result of such
appearance or information, suffer harassment, threats of intimidation, ill-treatment,
reprisals, or any other prejudicial treatment;
(f) Privileges, immunities and facilities necessary for the independent
conduct of the inquiry. In particular, members of the Commission shall enjoy the
privileges and immunities accorded to experts on missions under article VI of the
1946 Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, and to
officials under articles V and VII of the Convention.
3.
The Commission may approach third States with a request for cooperation in
the collection of material or information relevant to the case and provision of expert
personnel. In so doing, it may seek the assistance of the Government of Pakistan.
4.
The Commission shall be composed of a panel of three eminent personalities
having the appropriate experience and a reputation for probity and impartiality. The
panel shall be assisted by the necessary staff as well as by administrative, security
and technical staff.
5.
The location of the Commission of Inquiry shall be determined by the
Secretary-General.

09-22666

3

S/2009/67

6.
The Commission shall submit its report to the Secretary-General within six
months from the start of its activities. The Secretary-General will share the report
with the Government of Pakistan and submit it to the Security Council for
information.
7.
The Commission shall be funded by voluntary contributions from Member
States. A United Nations trust fund will be utilized to receive such contributions.
8.
The Commission shall commence its activities on a date to be determined by
the Secretary-General, which will be officially communicated to the Government of
Pakistan.

4

09-22666
