S/2019/207

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 March 2019
Original: English

Implementation of paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2423 (2018)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 6 of Security Council
resolution 2423 (2018), in which the Council requested me to report, six months after
the presidential inauguration, on progress achieved in the implementation of the
measures referenced in paragraph 4 of the resolution and of the benchmarks
developed in the framework of the Pact for Peace.

II. Overall assessment of progress in the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
2.
In preparation for the report, my Special Representative and Head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
Mahamat Saleh Annadif, continued to work closely with all the parties to review
progress made and accelerate the implementation of key measures under the 2015
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. My Assistant Secretary-General for
Africa of the Departments of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and of Peace
Operations, Bintou Keita, and my Assistant Secretary-General for Peacebuilding
Support, Oscar Fernández-Taranco, visited Mali from 7 to 12 December 2018 to take
stock of the implementation of the Agreement. In Bamako, they met the President of
Mali, Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, the Prime Minister, Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga,
members of the Cabinet, signatory armed groups, political stakeholders,
representatives of civil society and international partners, including the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel, MINUSMA and the United Nations country team.
They also visited Mopti and Gao. My Special Representative re -engaged key
stakeholders, beginning in February, to further review the progress made.
3.
Interlocutors were aware of the deep frustration of the Security Council over
persistent delays in the full implementation of the Agreement. In signing the Pact for
Peace on 15 October 2018, the Government of Mali ha d reaffirmed its commitment
to the full implementation of the Agreement following the signing, by the signatory
parties on 22 March 2018, of the road map for the implementation of priority
measures under the Agreement. The signatory armed groups stated the ir full
adherence to the Pact through an annex signed on the same day, while also agreeing

19-02648 (E)

120319

*1902648*

S/2019/207

to launch the accelerated disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and integration
process.
4.
In the meetings with my Special Representative and my Assistant
Secretaries-General, both President Keita and Prime Minister Maïga reaffirmed their
commitment to accelerating the full implementation of the Agreement.
Representatives of the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad and the Platform
coalition of armed groups recognized the efforts of the Prime Minister to accelerate
the implementation of the Agreement and welcomed the creation of a dedicated
ministry tasked with coordinating the implementation of the peace process and more
regular consultations. There was less clarity on the sequencing and the timetable of
practical steps.
5.
Positive developments were noted in the implementation of the Agreement since
the presidential election held in July and August 2018. Overall, there was renewed
focus by the parties on the peace process and more trust among the signatories.
International pressure, including through the prospect of sanctions, was viewed as an
important factor in accelerating the process. Some partners, including the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
independent observer appealed for a more realistic approach to deadlines for some of
the politically sensitive reform processes in order to allow time for inclusive
consultations among key stakeholders and the achieveme nt of meaningful and
sustainable results.
6.
Interlocutors commended the efforts of Prime Minister Maïga to reach out to
stakeholders from across the political spectrum to build the consensus necessary to
pass the key institutional and political reforms envisioned in the Agreement. In their
meeting with my Assistant Secretaries-General, representatives of the political
opposition emphasized their lack of inclusion in the political and reform processes.
Representatives of civil society, especially women, underscored the need for more
effective communication regarding the Agreement and inclusiveness in the
implementation process to ensure that peace is owned by all segments of society.
7.
The national referendum to amend the Constitution was identified as an
indispensable milestone in underpinning key institutional and administrative reforms.
The Government established a committee of experts on constitutional reform on
14 January and appointed its 11 members, including 2 women. The committee is
mandated to develop the draft law revising the Constitution, building on relevant
proposals developed in the past. The decision was met with criticism among the
political opposition. They said that they had not been consulted and called for political
dialogue to ensure a consensual reform process. On 20 January 2019, the Government
announced that a national consultation framework on constitutional reform had been
created on 17 January, which includes signatory groups, political parties and civil
society. It held its first meeting on 31 January. My Special Representative continued
to actively work with stakeholders across the political spectrum to resolve their
differences through dialogue and in a spirit of national unity.
8.
The launch on 6 November 2018 of the accelerated disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and integration process in Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu was
an important step in beginning the much broader process of security sector reform.
The accelerated process will allow eligible Operational Coordination Me chanism
personnel, who have registered and handed in weapons, to be integrated into the
national army. A successful disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
integration process, however, requires substantive progress in the implementation of
other key measures under the Agreement and on security sector reform. In the meeting
with my Assistant Secretaries-General in Bamako, representatives of signatory groups

2/16

19-02648

S/2019/207

reiterated that progress on the political track was a prerequisite for their combatants
to put aside their arms once and for all.
9.
Under the Agreement, signatories have committed themselves to conducting an
in-depth reform through the establishment of a national council for security sector
reform tasked with developing a national vision of the security and defence sector. A
comprehensive national strategy for security sector reform was adopted on 6 July
2018, which envisages the development of a concept and a plan for the reconstitution
of the defence and security forces through the integration o f eligible combatants of
the signatory groups, the deployment plan of the defence and security forces to the
northern regions, the establishment of the territorial police and the creation of
counterterrorist units within the framework of the reconstituted defence and security
forces.
10. Notwithstanding significant international efforts, the security situation has
continued to deteriorate, with an increase in the number of terrorist attacks targeting
national and international forces, MINUSMA and civilians since 2016 (183 attacks in
2016, 226 in 2017 and 237 in 2018). The threat continues to spread from northern
Mali to the centre, increasingly diverting attention from and complicating the
implementation of the Agreement. The security situation is growing i n complexity in
central Mali, where intercommunal violence is exacerbated by the expansion of
extremist armed groups, with a significant rise in explosive incidents affecting
security forces and civilians, while the number of displaced persons is increasin g.
MINUSMA is engaging the Government to define the political parameters framing
the approach in the centre and is stepping up its support to the authorities in
responding to the rapidly evolving situation and protecting civilians, in coordination
with the country team.
11. The visit of my Assistant Secretaries-General to Gao and Mopti confirmed that
the lack of tangible progress on the ground and the absence of peace dividends for the
Malian people remain an important challenge, although progress was regis tered in the
deployment of interim administrations in northern Mali. Insecurity, unemployment,
the lack of participation of women and young people in the peace process and the
absence of development and education were the main concerns raised by
representatives of civil society. They felt that the proposed action under the peace
process did not sufficiently capture development issues.
12. The reconciliation, justice and humanitarian pillars of the Agreement appear to
have received less attention over the years with regard to implementation. The Truth,
Justice and Reconciliation Commission mandated to investigate all gross human
rights violations committed in Mali between 1960 and 2013 is in the process of
collecting and archiving information. Its six regional antennas have received more
than 11,000 statements from victims over the past two years. Investigations, public
hearings and the development of a comprehensive strategy on reparations are planned
to be completed in 2019. The debate in the National Assembly on the draft Loi
d’entente nationale has been repeatedly postponed as a result of divergent views on
its content and in the light of the criticism by human rights organizations.
13. MINUSMA, in its current configuration, continues to play a critical r ole in
support of the implementation of the Agreement. All interlocutors recognized the
effective way in which MINUSMA discharges its political mandate through the good
offices of my Special Representative. They recognized the active role played by
MINUSMA in amplifying the political process, while carrying out a number of
essential security-related tasks in close coordination with other security presences on
the ground, including the Malian defence and security forces, the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel, French forces and the European Union missions in Mali.
In the absence of effective State authority and a limited presence of the country team,
19-02648

3/16

S/2019/207

MINUSMA is often expected to provide services that should be delivered by the
Government or other partners. MINUSMA has increased its capacity to repel complex
attacks, and the Mission’s contribution remains essential in preventing terrorist
groups from taking control of areas in northern Mali where the presence of the State
remains limited in some areas or non-existent in others.
14. The contribution of the international forces and regional actors has been equally
important in responding to the crisis in Mali and in establishing lasting peace and
stability. The Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel remains an instrumental
part of the response to counter the threat of violent extremism and transnational
organized crime in the region. Once fully operational, it will help the Group of Five
for the Sahel countries to increase control over their com mon border areas in a first
phase and throughout their relevant territories in a second phase. Operations of the
Joint Force resumed on 14 January in the centre of Mali after a six -month hiatus
following the deadly attack against its headquarters in Sévaré in June 2018. Further
operations are planned in other sectors of the country. The absence of predictable and
sustainable funding for international support to the Joint Force has contributed to
delays in the resumption of operations and full operationalization in general.
United Nations Integrated Strategic Framework
15. In keeping with paragraph 29 of Security Council resolution 2423 (2018),
MINUSMA and the United Nations country team developed the United Nations
Integrated Strategic Framework, which sets out the Organization ’s overall vision and
joint priorities. The Framework is a product of months of intensive efforts by
MINUSMA and the country team to strengthen coordination and promote integration.
Following workshops held in December 2018 and January 2019, the Senior
Leadership Forum, chaired by my Special Representative, approved the Integrated
Strategic Framework at the country level on 12 February, and it was subsequently
endorsed by the Inter-Agency Task Force on Mali at Headquarters on 21 February.
16. The United Nations Integrated Strategic Framework has a three -year time frame
and identifies joint priorities based on the priority tasks contained in Security Council
resolution 2423 (2018) to strengthen support for the implementation of the Agreement
and for stabilization efforts in the centre of Mali. It is therefore structu red according
to five thematic areas throughout the mandates of the Mission and the country team,
in support of national efforts to restore State authority in the north and centre,
strengthen the promotion and protection of human rights in affected regions , rebuild
the capacity of rule of law, security and justice institutions, strengthen social
cohesion, conflict prevention and national reconciliation, and support elections and
constitutional reform.
17. The United Nations Integrated Strategic Framework outlines an internal division
of labour based on comparative advantages. In supporting national efforts to restore
State authority in the north and centre of Mali, for example, MINUSMA and the
country team committed themselves to delineating their efforts t owards the full
operationalization of the interim administrations. MINUSMA will focus on using its
good offices to ensure the timely appointment and deployment of authorities at all
levels and provide technical assistance, while the United Nations Developm ent
Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) will concentrate on the capacity development
of relevant institutions. With regard to support for elections and constitutional reform,
it is envisaged that MINUSMA will use its good offices in northern Mali to promote
a conducive environment for the holding of peaceful elections, while providing
logistical, technical and security support. UNDP will focus on building the capacities
of relevant institutions and raising the awareness of voters through civil society
organizations, while UN-Women will champion efforts to promote women’s
4/16

19-02648

S/2019/207

participation in the electoral processes through the provision of training for women
and political parties.
18. The United Nations Integrated Strategic Framework also provides the basis for
the Mission and the country team to deploy the various funding and programming
instruments effectively and in complementarity to one another, reducing the risk of
competition or duplication. A specific joint annual planning exercise will establish
the sequencing of initiatives and the specific availability of funding and related needs
for the year. Consultations are ongoing to develop a transition plan, with a view to
handing over relevant tasks to partners, including the country team, on the basis of
their mandates and comparative advantages. Preparations are under way among
MINUSMA, agencies, funds and programmes to conduct a mapping of capabilities
and gaps, which will be informed by the common country analysis currently being
developed as part of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework for the
period 2020–2024.

III. Implementation of measures referenced in paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 2423 (2018)
A.

Holding of the presidential election in a peaceful environment,
with the support of the signatory groups
19. The presidential election was held on 29 July 2018, with a run-off on 12 August,
in a generally peaceful environment, notwithstanding some security incidents in the
north and centre of Mali. President Keita was re-elected with 67.16 per cent of the
vote and opposition leader Soumaïla Cissé came in second, with 32.84 per cent. After
the results had been announced on 17 August, Mr. Cissé contested the election ’s
results and filed a complaint with the Constitutional Court, which was rejected.
President Keita was subsequently sworn in on 4 September and formed his
Government on 9 September.
20. The political climate in the weeks leading up to the polls and after the first round
was tense, amid allegations of fraud against the Government by several opposition
candidates and concerns as to whether security conditions in the north and centre of
the country were conducive to holding elections. The good offices of my Special
Representative, in close collaboration with other international partners, including the
African Union Mission for Mali and the Sahel, ECOWAS, the European Union and
the International Organization of la Francophonie, were instrumental in alleviating
concerns and preventing escalation. MINUSMA supported the electoral process
through logistical, financial and technical assistance to the electoral management
bodies, including the transportation of 110 tons of electoral material and the provision
of training and support to outreach and awareness-raising activities. The Mission also
provided training for the Malian authorities in the prevention of elections-related
violence.
21. The Malian defence and security forces were deployed to provide security for
the electoral process and secured polling stations, except in some areas in the centre
and the north of the country, with support of the international forces and MINUSMA.
The signatory armed groups, including the Coordination des mouvements de
l’Azawad and the Platform coalition of armed groups, as well as the splinter
movements, such as Mouvement pour le salut de l’Azawad and Coalition du peuple
pour l’Azawad, constructively contributed to the holding of the elections in the areas
where they were present, including by securing the polling stations in accordance
with the agreed security arrangements with the Government. This was facilitated by

19-02648

5/16

S/2019/207

the nomination of interim authorities at the district level and the deployment of
personnel from the electoral body, including prefects and sub -prefects.
22. The holding of the presidential election, within the constitutional time frame,
was considered by electoral observers to be an important step towards stabilizing the
country. National and international observers from the African Union, ECOWAS, the
European Union and the International Organization of la Franc ophonie concluded that
the elections had been held under satisfactory conditions, notwithstanding
irregularities observed, including with regard to the distribution of voter cards, an
incomplete voters’ list and unequal access to the media for some candidates.
Observers also noted that some polling stations and workers had been targeted by
extremist armed groups in parts of the north. In addition, a substantial number of
people in the central regions were unable to vote owing to a deteriorating security
environment caused by violence across communal lines.
23. Observers encouraged the Government to undertake reforms to increase the
transparency and credibility of elections, while improving participation in the
electoral process. Main recommendations, in line with the letter dated 18 January
2019 from Prime Minister Maïga to the President of the Committee for Constitutional
Reform, included making the electoral roll more inclusive through a special extended
census, accompanied by a comprehensive registration campaign for young people,
and establishing a body to manage elections by consensus and a review of article 142
(3) of the electoral law to increase the time between the first and the second round of
the election.

B.

Progress in the decentralization process
24. While important steps were taken to put in place the legislative framework for
the decentralization process, its implementation hinges on the revision of the
Constitution, the elections of the members of the decentralized authorities, the
transfer of authority and the required resources envisaged in the Agreement.
25. The Code des collectivités territoriales and the Loi portant conditions de la libre
administration des collectivités territoriales, both promulgated on 2 October 2017,
set the foundation for the administrative reform and decentralization processes. They
provide for an election of the members of communes, cercles and regional bodies by
universal suffrage and the transfer of 30 per cent of State revenue to decentralized
authorities. In line with the Constitution, the Code refers to the elected regional bodies
as regional councils. Signatory groups, however, insist that, in keeping with the
Agreement, these entities should be called regional assemblies and that their decisions
cannot be overruled by appointed State representatives. As stipulated in the road map
signed on 22 March 2018, these issues will need to be resolved and reflected in the
revised Constitution, as necessary, before regional, local and communal elections can
be held. The parties are yet to resume discussions on the Code in accordance with the
priority measures identified in the road map.
26. A draft decree, providing for the partial transfer of decentralized State services
to local authorities with human and financial resources, was approved by the Council
of Ministers on 20 February and submitted to the President for promulgation. The
promulgation and implementation of this decree is a prerequisite to enable Mali to
achieve the transfer of 30 per cent of State revenue to local authorities, as required
under article 14 of the Agreement. The present level of transfers stands at
approximately 19 per cent. Some 15 of 42 areas of State competences, including
education, health, water and sanitation, agriculture and social d evelopment, have been
devolved to local authorities by decree. Areas of competence, for which decrees

6/16

19-02648

S/2019/207

delegating authority remain outstanding, include local taxation, territorial police,
mining, the empowerment and employment of young people and energy.
27. The establishment of a territorial police force was discussed during the
high-level meeting on the operationalization of the priority actions in the areas of
defence and security referenced in paragraph 36 below. The parties agreed to place
them under the authority of elected local officials (mayors) in conformity with the
Code des collectivités territoriales. They also decided that there would be a minimum
of 30 personnel per commune who would discharge municipal policing duties (law
enforcement, traffic policing and assistance to tax authorities), while also being at the
disposal of the cercles and regions. A decree establishing the powers and composition
of the police force is being drafted jointly between the parties. The deadline for the
development of the legislative framework for the territorial police was set for 2020.
28. As outlined in my previous report (S/2018/1174), the Government initiated
consultations on a draft law on administrative and terr itorial restructuring in
November 2018. The restructuring process is aimed at rationalizing local government
by ensuring improved State presence and efficiency of service delivery, as well as
enhancement of the benefits of local taxation through the creati on of new
municipalities. In keeping with article 6 of the Agreement, the Government ’s proposal
also envisages an increase in the number of electoral districts and seats in the National
Assembly to enhance the representation of northern populations in nati onal
institutions. Concerns persist in some areas, in particular in Gao, where strong civil
society mobilization prevented the holding of the consultations, that the découpage
would disadvantage specific communities and that the proposed reform would not b e
sustainable financially.

C.

Operationalization of the interim administrations in the north
of Mali
29. Appointed through a presidential decree on 14 October 2016, all the regional
interim administrations are now functional and strive to provide basic services to the
population, for example, by initiating the construction of 1 clinic in Ménaka and
9 primary schools and 24 boreholes in Taoudenni region. Notwithstanding progress
in the establishment of the interim administration and the increase in funding over the
past year, the effectiveness of the interim authorities continues to be hampered by
technical and logistical challenges and the lack of infrastructure. Some civil society
organizations raised concern about the lack of accountability and pu blic meetings to
discuss local authority accounts, even though this was envisaged in the Code des
collectivités territoriales.
30. Following intense negotiations between the signatory parties facilitated by
MINUSMA through the good offices of my Special Representative, on 26 July 2018,
the Government named 288 members, including 14 women, to the interim
administrations and collèges transitoires in 21 of the 24 districts of the northern
regions. Appointments are pending for three districts in Taoudenni. Div ergent views
between non-signatory compliant armed groups, in particular between the
Coordination des mouvements de l’entente and the Congrès pour la justice dans
l’Azawad, appear to be holding up the appointment of interim administrations in the
three remaining districts of Taoudenni, namely, Al-Ourche, Bou Djébéha and Foum
el ’Alba. Nominated members would benefit from capacity-building initiatives, in
particular in the area of financial resources management.
31. Interim authorities played a key role in support of the organization and conduct
of the presidential election, through contributing to voter education, the distribution
of voter identification cards and the provision of support to local authorities in

19-02648

7/16

S/2019/207

conducting elections-related operations, such as the deployment and collection of
voting materials. They also worked closely with regional reconciliation teams to
prevent election-related violence by raising the awareness of the population in Gao,
Ménaka and Timbuktu on the electoral process.
32. Funding allocated by the Government to the interim authorities (regional and
district levels) stood at $19.5 million as at 26 February 2019. They were allocated to
cover the operations costs ($2.15 million), capital investment ($10 million) and
implementation of key projects under the respective interim administrations ’ priority
action plans ($7.5 million), adopted in Gao, Ménaka, Taoudenni and Timbuktu in
September 2017, and in Kidal in October 2017. Those priority action plans facilitated
access to State funds in support of projects to strengthen the delivery of basic services,
social cohesion and economic recovery. In addition to the $19.5 million allocated by
the Government to fund the priority action plans, another $9 million has been
committed to funding future projects at the district level.
33. The Government, with the support of the United Nations, has been intensifying
its efforts to address challenges hampering the effective functioning of the interim
authorities. In December 2018, the Government committed $2.9 million to further the
operationalization of the interim authorities, including for the training and
deployment of personnel (27 staff in Timbuktu, 12 in Gao, 12 in Ménaka, 11 in Kidal
and 10 in Taoudenni). MINUSMA and the country team provided capacity-building
support to the interim administrations.

D.

Progress in the cantonment and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes, as well as in an inclusive and consensual
security sector reform
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
34. Notwithstanding the lack of agreement on the integration quota, on 6 November,
the National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission and the
Commission on Integration, with support from MINUSMA, launched the accelerated
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and integration process. Between 6 and
30 November, 1,423 ex-combatants from the Coordination des mouvements de
l’Azawad and the Platform coalition of armed groups, along with ex-combatants from
non-signatory but compliant armed movements, were disarmed, demobilized and
registered, including undergoing screening for security and human rights violations.
The operations took place in Gao, Timbuktu and Kidal. The last phase is expected to
target the remaining 417 ex-combatants (235 in Gao and 182 in Timbuktu) who did
not participate in the first phase. Moving forward, the former combatants will be
transferred to three facilities in the south of country (Koutiala, Séguéla and Markala),
where they will undergo three months of military training between March and June
2019 under the auspices of the Malian Ministry of Defence, with the support of
MINUSMA and the European Union. Upon completion of their training, they will
return to Gao, Timbuktu and Kidal to begin their first deployment as members of the
Malian armed forces and as part of the three Operational Coordination Mechanism
units tasked with providing security for the eight cantonment sites of the National
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Programme. In th e meantime,
MINUSMA continues to deliver community violence reduction projects in the areas
surrounding the cantonment sites to prepare the communities for the return of former
combatants who will participate in the Programme.
35. Between February and October 2018, approximately 36,000 combatants were
pre-registered by the National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission. Of this number, it is estimated that some 17,000 could meet the

8/16

19-02648

S/2019/207

eligibility criteria for weapon possession to participa te in the accelerated
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and integration process or the National
Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration Programme. A total of 1,840 elements
are to be integrated into the Malian armed forces through the Operation al
Coordination Mechanism units as a result of the accelerated process, while the
Government has indicated that approximately another 2,000 could obtain civil service
positions, including in the forest protection services and customs. The remaining
13,000 eligible for the Programme would be reintegrated into civilian life. The World
Bank has earmarked $15 million to support the Programme for the first 4,000
ex-combatants who have chosen this latter option.
Security sector reform
36. From 12 to 14 December 2018, the signatory parties held a high-level meeting
in Bamako on the operationalization of the priority actions in the areas of defence and
security outlined in the road map of 22 March 2018. The meeting led to the signature
of an updated action plan and timeline for the reconstitution and redeployment of the
defence and security forces, the establishment of special counter-terrorism and
transnational crime units under the command of the Chief of Defence Staff, the
establishment and deployment of a territorial police force and local consultative
committees on security and the finalization of action plans of the national security
sector reform strategy.
37. An understanding was reached on the provisional integration of specific
high-ranking civilian and military personnel from the signatory groups into a new
structure, the High Authority for Peace and Stability, under the auspices of the Head
of State. The Authority’s role will be to follow up on the implementation of the
Agreement. The parties also agreed on modalities for the reintegration of former
members of the defence and security forces at the same rank as upon departure. A
decree was subsequently adopted on 6 February 2019 on the criteria of age, training
and professional qualification required for the integration of ex-combatants of
movements into the armed forces, the national police, civil protection, customs, water
and forest services, corrections and prison administration, and other bodies of the
public service. The attribution of ranks for senior military personnel will be jointly
decided on a case-by-case basis. The Government invited former members of the
defence and security forces to register from 26 to 30 January 2019 in the closest
military region. As a result, 494 former military personnel were registered in various
regions, and by 26 February, 453 of them had been transferred to three training
centres: Bamako (20 officers), Markala in Ségou region (155 non -commissioned
officers) and Séguéla in Kayes region (278 soldiers).
38. The issue of the integration quota for the army remains unresolved. The
Government maintains that this number will be 4,900, while the signatory armed
groups are pressing for 10,000. It appears, however, that the parties are willing to
continue with the integration of signatory armed groups into the operational
coordination mechanism, with the understanding that those integrated into the army
will obtain full status as soldiers in the defence forces, although the question of rank
harmonization for 100 field commanders of the signatory armed groups has also not
been resolved. The parties have agreed to continue discussions on the issue, with
facilitation by MINUSMA and the President of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee.
39. With the support of the European Union missions, EUCAP Sahel Mali and the
European Union military mission to contribute to the training of the Malian Armed
Forces, the Malian defence and security forces continued to enhance their capacities,
while increasing their deployment to northern and central Mali.

19-02648

9/16

S/2019/207

Operational Coordination Mechanism
40. Efforts to screen and register the 1,423 mixed unit Operational Coordination
Mechanism personnel contributed to enhancing confidence among signatory parties
and splinter armed groups. A total of 403 combatants were initially found unsuitable
for integration following medical examination but will be given the opportunity to
undergo a second medical test in Gao for a final decision on their suitability. This
process will be done simultaneously with the disarmament and demobilization of the
remaining 417 ex-combatants.
41. Until the start of the accelerated disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
integration process in November, the operationalization process of mixed units of the
Operational Coordination Mechanism had continued in Timbuktu, Gao and Kidal,
with patrols conducted in Gao and Timbuktu. As indicated in my previous reports,
efforts to fully operationalize the mixed units of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism faced several challenges, including disagreements among the signatory
armed groups on the modalities. In Kidal and Timbuktu, the first companies of the
mixed units had reached only half of their expected numbers. At the same time, the
mixed units in Gao lacked heavy weapons and were not able, as a result, to provide
security to the electoral process as planned.

E.

Socioeconomic development of the north of Mali
42. Economic growth in Mali stood at 5 per cent in 2018 (5.3 per cent in 2017). That
growth was attributable mainly to a dynamic agriculture sector (cotton) and services
(financial activities and trade). The Government made efforts to reduce the budget
deficit to 2.5 per cent in 2018, compared with 2.9 per cent in 2017, and the economy
continued to perform well in 2018, consolidating growth with low inflation. Since the
International Conference for the Economic Recovery and Development of Mali, held
in Paris in 2015, at which donors pledged $4.24 billion, $3.1 billion had been
disbursed until 2017. The disbursement rate was estimated to be 90 per cent in 2018.
Of those funds, 40 per cent was earmarked for the north to supplement the budget of
the Government to implement the development measures contained in the Agreement.
43. Limited progress was made towards improving the socioeconomic conditions of
the population in the north. The structure of the economic growth is not inclusive,
although growth remained stable in 2018. The poverty rate was estimated to be
53.6 per cent in rural areas, compared with 32.9 per cent in urban areas. The economic
growth contributed to a minimal decrease in the poverty rate and was not high enough
to trigger a significant reduction in the number of poor people in Mali. The poverty
rate remained acute in northern regions, specifically in Gao (50.5 p er cent) and in the
centre, with an estimated rate of 51.1 per cent in Ségou and 59.5 per cent in Mopti.
Owing to security concerns, the presence of the State and development agencies
remains limited in the north.
44. Poverty and a lack of livelihood opportunities for young men and women
persist. The last semester of 2018 and the first one of 2019 were marked by a spate of
unrest led by civil servants. Social pressure stemming from the disconnect between
economic growth and stagnant living conditions have triggered protests, sparked by
a public backlash against the low level of salaries and non-payment of arrears. In
addition, the already fragile social situation further deteriorated and was exacerbated
by population displacements. In 2018, there were some 61,400 internally displaced
persons in Mali and 138,700 Malian refugees in Burkina Faso, Mauritania and the
Niger. The main regions of displacement in Mali are Timbuktu, Mopti and Ménaka.

10/16

19-02648

S/2019/207

45. Responsibility for the creation of a development zone in the no rthern regions
falls under the authority of the Ministry of Planning. On 11 January 2019, members
of the relevant subcommittee of the Agreement Monitoring Committee expressed
their concerns regarding the delays in the creation of the zone which, according to the
road map of 22 March 2018, was supposed to have been created by November 2018
at the latest. The subcommittee requested that the draft decree establishing the zone
be shared no later than the end of March 2019. On 30 January 2018, Parliament
created a sustainable development fund to provide a guarantee for the specific strategy
for the development of the northern regions. On 16 July 2018, the Government
launched a new strategic framework for economic recovery and sustainable
development, based on the Sustainable Development Goals and the prospective vision
for Mali 2040.

F.

Ensuring equal and meaningful participation of women, including
through greater representation of women in the mechanisms
established under the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali
46. President Keita has made an effort to increase the number of women in
decision-making positions. A total of 11 of 32 ministers in his Government are
women, including Kamissa Camara, the country’s first women Minister for Foreign
Affairs, and the Ministers of Transparency and of Energy. For the first time, the
Government met the goal of 30 per cent women representation, in accordance with
the 2015 law instituting measures to promote gender equality in access to nominative
and elective functions.
47. Overall, however, women’s participation remains limited in the peace process
and in political and public life more broadly. A total of 9.5 per cent of elected
representatives in the National Assembly are women and, of the 288 members
appointed to the interim authorities in the five northern regions, only 14 are women.
At the regional level, of 69 members, there is only 1 woman. Women are also
underrepresented in the mechanisms for implementing and monitoring the
Agreement, with only 1 among the 34 members of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee.
48. Historically, women in Mali had not participated in political negotiations, nor
were their interests and experiences adequately represented or considered.
Stereotypes and beliefs associated with gender prevail and prevent women from
running for public office or making their voices heard. Achieving greater
representation of women would require the support of national and local stakeholders,
including religious and traditional leaders, who have opposed ref orms to combat
discrimination or revise the family code in the past.
49. In the run-up to the presidential election, the Ministry for the Promotion of
Women, Children and the Family, supported by MINUSMA and UN-Women,
organized women-led discussions throughout Mali on the advancement of women’s
rights as candidates and voters. According to the final report of the European Union
electoral observer mission in Mali, however, the quota and gender programmes have
had limited impact to date. Only 1 woman, Djeneba N’Diaye, ran for president (of
24 candidates). She obtained the lowest number of votes.
50. An ad hoc working group was created during the twenty-ninth meeting of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee, in November 2018, with the objective of
developing concrete options to enhance the participation of women in the peace
process. The group met on 6, 14 and 21 December 2018 and recommended the
inclusion of women in the follow-up mechanism of the Agreement through the direct

19-02648

11/16

S/2019/207

participation of women in the Committee and other follow-up mechanisms and the
establishment of an independent women’s observatory to monitor the implementation
of the Agreement.

G.

Pact for Peace
51. Following the signature of the Pact for Peace on 15 October 2018 by the
Government and the United Nations, the signatory armed groups stated their full
adherence to the Pact and their dedication to the full implementation of the Agreement
through an annex to the Pact signed the same day. Within the framework of the Pact,
the Government commits itself to taking stock of the status of the implementation of
the road map of 22 March 2018, which had identified priority measures for the
acceleration of the peace process. Of the 21 action points identified in the road map,
9 had been completed by 28 February 2019, including the launch of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism in Timbuktu and Kidal, the beginning of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process and consultations on administrative
restructuring and constitutional reform. An additional 8 action points are currently
being implemented. Going forward, added focus will be required to agree on the
sequencing for the implementation of the remaining action points and realistic
timelines.

IV. Observations
52. Notwithstanding the multiple challenges facing Mali, many of which have yet
to be addressed, I appreciate the progress registered by the Government and the
signatory armed groups since the inauguration of President Keita on 4 September
2018. More was achieved within the past six months than ever before since the signing
of the Agreement in 2015. The presidential election was held on time and in an overall
peaceful environment, with the support of the signatory armed groups. I am
encouraged by the renewed commitment to the peace process by all signatories and
the apparent increased trust among them since the presidential inauguration and the
signing of the Pact for Peace. This positive dynamic yielded a number of concrete
results: district-level interim administrations were established in the Kidal, Ménaka
and Timbuktu regions, more than 1,400 former combatants have put aside their arms
and discussions on enhancing participation of women in the peace process have
commenced as part of the Agreement Monitoring Committee. Important political and
institutional reforms are envisaged under the Agreement. Given the scope and
complexity of these reforms, there is a need for prioritization. I call upon the
Government, signatory groups and other key stakeholders to agree on the sequencing
of the execution of the measures listed in the Agreement and, in doing so, to prioritize
the pivotal steps that condition the implementation of others.
53. The constitutional reform stands out as one of these priority measures. Not only
is it a prerequisite for the key institutional and political reforms and the holding of
local and senatorial elections, but also it will demonstrate the commitment of the
Malian people to the reforms and their irreversible nature. I welcome the creation o f
a committee of experts, which will play an important role in this process. Initial
reactions, however, are a reminder that this reform remains a highly delicate political
process, as controversies over past initiatives have shown. I commend President Kei ta
and Prime Minister Maïga for initiating extensive consultations with stakeholders
across the spectrum. I call upon all political leaders to engage constructively in the
process and resolve their differences through dialogue. Only by working together can
the groundwork for a Malian nation State be laid and a more peaceful and stable future
for all its people secured.
12/16

19-02648

S/2019/207

54. Successful reforms require national ownership and the buy-in from a broader
segment of the Malian society, including women and young people. While mindful of
the need to avoid any further delays, I consider it equally important for the parties to
be allowed sufficient time to collectively address and resolve contentious issues to
ensure a truly inclusive political reform process. I welcome the creation of the Cadre
de concertation national, a dedicated consultation mechanism for the Government,
political parties and civil society to discuss key reform proposals on constitutional
referendum, territorial and administrative reforms, découpage and amendments to the
electoral law and related timelines. This is a vital step towards ensuring more
inclusive support for the political process throughout Malian society and enhanced
ownership. Furthermore, I encourage all parties to consider the recomm endations of
the ad hoc working group on the participation of women in the peace process.
Experience has shown that meaningful participation is linked directly to more
sustainable peace.
55. The start of the accelerated process of disarmament, demobilizat ion and
integration is an important step in the much broader process of reconstituting and
reforming the Malian defence and security forces envisaged under the Agreement.
For the first time since the beginning of the peace process, combatants disarmed,
demobilized and registered for integration into the army. This is a critical step, which
indicates the readiness of the signatory armed groups to put aside their arms, cease
hostilities and reject the recourse to violence. I call upon all parties to build on the
momentum and resolve the issue of the integration quota for the army without further
delay, so as to proceed with the training and integration of those who had handed in
their weapons. This will also enable the authorities to enter the next phase, the launch
of the National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Programme, for
which more than 36,000 combatants have already expressed their interest in joining.
56. Ensuring the longer-term success of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of the former combatants requires progress in reforming the security
sector. Steps were taken to lay the groundwork for this important reform with the
adoption of the national security sector strategy and its action plan. There is an urgent
need for a national vision for the reformed and reconstituted security and defence
forces that enjoy broad support beyond the signatories of the Agreement. I call upon
the Government to finalize this vision, in close collaboration with the signatory armed
groups and other key stakeholders, and to establish a plan for the recruitment and
integration of former combatants and a clear timeline for the effective redeployment
of reconstituted Malian defence and security forces to northern Mali.
57. The progress over the past six months notwithstanding, the road to sustainable
peace and stability in Mali remains long and filled with challenges. Precious time was
lost owing to repeated delays in the implementation of the Agreement, compounded
by the complex security challenges that the country continues to face. I recognize that
the implementation of the Agreement is not taking place in a post -conflict context, as
initially hoped for upon its signature, but in a context of continued crises, terrorism
and extremist violence. The Agreement nevertheless remains the only valid
framework for the peace process, and its implementation must be leveraged and
accompanied by broader political efforts by Malian, regional and international actors.
I therefore call upon the signatories to stay the course and fulfil their obligations – to
their own people and to the family of nations. The people of Mali are yet to receive
the peace dividends and improvement in living conditions that they deserve.
58. I am profoundly saddened by the death of 18 peacekeepers and the injuries
inflicted to 77 others as a result of attacks against the United Nations in the past six
months. I take this opportunity to express once again my condolences to the families
and to the Governments of the deceased peacekeepers and wish a full and speedy
recovery to those injured. I condemn in the strongest possible terms attacks against
19-02648

13/16

S/2019/207

United Nations personnel and convoys and reiterate my calls upon the Malian
authorities, as well as the signatory armed groups to the peace agr eement, to spare no
effort in identifying the perpetrators of those attacks so that they can be brought to
justice as swiftly as possible. Attacks targeting United Nations peacekeepers may
constitute war crimes under international law. I call upon all sign atory armed groups
to take concrete steps to enhance their cooperation and coordination with the
Government of Mali and cut off all ties with terrorist organizations.
59. The contribution of the Mission in its current configuration remains critical to
the stabilization of Mali. Notwithstanding these tragic losses, the Mission has
increased its ability to repel complex attacks by terrorist groups, illustrating its
robustness, resilience and the critical role that it continues to play in support of the
Government to create space for the political process to unfold and prevent parts of
northern Mali with limited or no State presence falling under the control of terrorist
groups. Many of the heinous attacks against our peacekeepers were repelled by our
uniformed men and women with bravery and professionalism and without inflicting
civilian casualties. MINUSMA has made great strides in strengthening the protection
of its personnel, camps and convoys, including through enhanced measures to prevent
attacks with improvised explosive devices and other indirect weapons, while taking
measures to improve its capacity to anticipate such attacks. I encourage all countries
contributing troops to MINUSMA to continue with their efforts to upgrade the
equipment of their contingents deployed in Mali. In the spirit of shared responsibility,
I also reiterate my call upon bilateral donors to step up their support to troop - and
police-contributing countries in these efforts.
60. The protection of the territory and its people is first and foremost the
responsibility of the Government. Encouraging progress was achieved in building the
capacities of the Malian defence and security forces over the past years with the
steadfast support of the European Union. This will enable further prog ress in the
redeployment of the national defence and security forces to northern Mali, which
remains a critical priority. I strongly condemn the persistent attacks against Malian
defence and security forces in northern and central Mali and the many losses that they
incurred. I commend the forces for their bravery and dedication in defending the unity
and territorial integrity of Mali and the safety of its citizens. I remain concerned about
the continuing deterioration of the security situation in central Ma li, where the
increasing presence of extremist groups has exacerbated longstanding intercommunal
tensions and conflicts. I applaud the efforts of the Government to address this
worrying situation in central Mali by implementing its integrated security plan . At the
same time, I would like to reiterate that a stand -alone security response will not be
sufficient to address the crises in Mali, the root causes of which are inherently
political and developmental.
61. Addressing the challenges facing Mali will require considering the complex
cross-border dynamics and drivers of conflict occurring within the broader regional
context. I reiterate my call upon national, regional and international actors to redouble
their efforts to tackle the multiple threats facing Mali and the Sahel region, which
cover all aspects relating to peace, development and security, under the framework of
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel and its support plan. There will
be no lasting peace in Mali and the region without sustainable development and no
progress in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda
2063: The Africa We Want, without peace and stability. More needs to be done to
implement measures under section IV, on socioeconomic and cultura l development,
of the Agreement. I am encouraged by the resumption of the operations of the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel in central Mali. I call upon the Group of Five
for the Sahel member States to make arrangements to sustain such opera tions and
international partners to provide the Joint Force with the support that it requires.
14/16

19-02648

S/2019/207

62. In conclusion, I would like to thank my Special Representative, Mahamat Saleh
Annadif, for his excellent leadership and the personnel of MINUSMA and the cou ntry
team in Mali, who continue to exemplify the highest aspirations of the Organization
by working with dedication and at great personal risk for a more peaceful and stable
Mali. I would also like to express my appreciation to all troop - and
police-contributing countries for their continued commitment. Lastly, I am grateful
to the African Union, ECOWAS, humanitarian organizations and donors, as well as
non-governmental organizations, for their important contributions and steadfast
commitment to Mali.

19-02648

15/16

S/2019/207

Map
16/16

Annex

19-02648
