S/PV.8127

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8127th meeting

Friday, 8 December 2017, 9.50 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Miranda Rivero
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Vaverka
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Tachco
Mr. Rosselli Frieri

Agenda
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-42755 (E)
*1742755*

S/PV.8127

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 9.50 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the outgoing Chairs of the subsidiary
bodies of the Council according to the year of adoption
of the related Council decisions: Ambassador Fodé
Seck, Permanent Representative of Senegal and
Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015) and Chair of the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations; Ambassador
Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta, Permanent Representative
of Egypt and Chair of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1373 (2001), 1518 (2003) and
1533 (2004); Ambassador Volodymyr Yelchenko,
Permanent Representative of Ukraine and Chair of
the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1591 (2005) and 2127 (2013); Ambassador Sebastiano
Cardi, Permanent Representative of Italy and Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006); Ambassador Elbio Rosselli Frieri, Permanent
Representative of Uruguay and Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012) and of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals;
and by myself, as Permanent Representative of Japan
and Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1636 (2005) and 2140 (2014) and of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and other
Procedural Questions.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Seck.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the
opportunity to reflect on our collective efforts regarding
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan, which Senegal has
had the honour to chair for the past two years. I would
also like to thank the troop- and police-contributing
countries, the Security Council Affairs Division,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support for their generous and
efficient support of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations. My thanks also go to the Panel of Experts
2/13

08/12/2017

on South Sudan, the staff of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan and the sanctions secretariat for their
commendable efforts to ensure the effectiveness of the
Security Council sanctions regime for South Sudan.
With regard to the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, I would like to share with the Council some
lessons that we have learned during the two years of
Senegal’s chairship. The main point to be made is the
renewed interest in dialogue with the Security Council
and the Secretariat, particularly on the part of the
troop- and police-contributing countries, which has
been demonstrated by major active participation in
the work of the Working Group. The Working Group
agreed ahead of time on its programme of work for
both 2016 and 2017, since it was essential to arrive at a
consensus on the various issues, most of them complex,
to be put on its agenda. The major issues included
the role of technology in peacekeeping operations;
the partnerships between the United Nations and
regional organizations and how to strengthen regional
stakeholders during peacekeeping operations; the issue
of complementarity between United Nations counterterrorism entities and peacekeeping missions; the
political frameworks for intelligence in peacekeeping
operations and the issue of strengthening the links with
political strategies for the protection of civilians. That
was the programme for 2016.
In 2017, the Working Group considered the subject
of developing synergies in consolidating and sustaining
peace in Africa and addressing ways in which the United
Nations, the African Union and regional mechanisms
could continue to build on their strategic partnership.
The second major issue for 2017 was that of compiling
and analysing information for updating and getting
feedback from the Secretariat about developments
regarding policies on intelligence in peacekeeping.
The third major issue was the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the challenges and
prospects involved. The fourth was the special meeting
with the troop- and police-contributing countries on
the reform of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
It will be important to capitalize on this positive
dynamic with a view to further strengthening the
strategic dialogue between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing States,
especially in the context of the feelings of trust and
frustration shared by all parties. Needless to say, we
need a more substantial dialogue between the various
17-42755

08/12/2017

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

stakeholders if we are to improve our impact on the
ground. That is the point of reflecting on ways and
means of improving this triangular dialogue, in synergy
with the ongoing initiatives in the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34), with a view to
combining our efforts and taking better account of the
views of the troop- and police-contributing countries.
The meeting of the Working Group on
10 November — on this issue of improving the
triangular dialogue, which was held in partnership
with the United Kingdom and Pakistan, the facilitators
of the C-34 consultative process — and the Group’s
3 October meeting with the United States on the reform
of United Nations peacekeeping operations helped to
initiate a push for greater cooperation between the
Security Council, the troop-contributing countries
and the Secretariat. In our view, we must maintain that
dynamic if we are to lay the foundations for renewed
trust, which is crucial to ensuring a more productive
dialogue that meets the various stakeholders’
expectations. The Security Council, the C-34 and the
Secretariat should work to strengthen that triangular
cooperation in order to ensure frank and permanent
dialogue between the various actors and to promote
productive discussion based on in-depth and objective
analysis of situations on the ground and the capacities
needed to deal with them.
As the conclusions of the most recent meeting of the
Working Group made clear, the challenges to achieving
a more inclusive and substantial triangular dialogue
include a lack of timely information, insufficient
time for stakeholders to prepare for meetings, and the
frequently perfunctory nature of the informal meetings.
In our view, therefore, it will be important to ensure that
the following procedures are observed for triangular
dialogue discussions. Enough notice should be given
for the consultations so that there is time to consult with
the relevant stakeholders and gather information from
them prior to the meeting. The purpose of the meeting
and the documents to be discussed should be agreed
and clear to all parties before the meeting. Whether
formal or informal, meetings should be conducted in
the most effective format possible. Lastly, meetings
should be announced early enough to enable all the
parties concerned to prepare to participate actively.
Regarding the format for meetings, it was suggested
that triangular consultations be held in the format of
regular informal and private meetings between the

S/PV. 8127

Security Council, the Secretariat and the major troopcontributing countries.
Those are the recommendations and proposals
that we have focused on with regard to improving the
triangular dialogue, in addition to those contained
in the revised note on the working methods of the
Security Council (S/2017/507) formulated under Japan’s
efficient presidency. But what matters most, in my
humble opinion, is that troop- and police-contributing
countries should be able to express their concerns and
that they should receive the welcome and attention
they need. Finally, better use should be made of
the work of the Working Group by ensuring that its
recommendations and conclusions are better reflected
in the decisions of the Council.
As Council members know, Côte d’Ivoire will
chair this Working Group starting on 1 January, and I
therefore wish its delegation every success in leading it.
With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan ,
I would like to note first of all that Senegal assumed
the chairmanship of the Committee six months after
the first and only designation of sanctions by the sixperson Committee and several months after the Panel
of Experts first recommended that the Security Council
impose an arms embargo on South Sudan.
We have all seen that, between 2016 and 2017, the
conflict in South Sudan deteriorated dramatically.
There is no need to return to this in detail at this
time, since briefings and consultations have already
allowed us to take the full measure of the gravity
of the situation. In December 2016, I visited Juba,
Malakal and the countries of the region so as to better
understand the situation there and to have a better idea
of developments on the ground.
In 2017, we have witnessed a resurgence of fighting
in many parts of South Sudan. On several occasions,
the Security Council has turned to the region for advice
on the possible impact of an arms embargo and new
sanctions on South Sudan. We should consider whether
the Council should gather and take into account
the views of the region before considering further
measures. This discussion led to the preparation of a
draft resolution submitted to the Security Council on
23 December 2016, which proposed the establishment
of an arms embargo with an annex containing a list of
four additional names to be designated for immediate

17-427553/13

S/PV.8127

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

sanctions. As this text did not receive the necessary
nine votes, it was not adopted.
During 2017, I briefed the Committee, in particular
on 18 January, on my visit to South Sudan and the
region, and on 21 March the Committee heard briefings
by Special Representatives on children and armed
conflict and sexual violence. On 10 November, the
Committee held a joint meeting with the Committees
on Libya and on the Sudan on the activities of armed
groups from Darfur in the region.
I would like to note that in my 2017 interim report,
which the Committee recently considered, the Panel of
Experts reiterated its August 2015 recommendation to
impose a general arms embargo on South Sudan and to
mandate the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
to monitor the implementation of such an embargo, if
adopted, and allocate the means to do so effectively.
In this document, the Panel also recommended that
the Committee identify those responsible for actions
and policies that threaten peace, security and stability
in South Sudan. In addition to the confidential annex
submitted by the Panel to the Committee in 2016, the
experts indicated in their interim report and previous
reports that they had provided evidence of several
individuals responsible for or complicit in the actions
and policies described in paragraph 9 of resolution
2290 (2016).
As you know, Mr. President, Poland will chair the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) starting on 1 January 2018. The delegation of
Senegal wishes the Polish delegation every success in
this endeavour.
The President: I thank Ambassador Seck for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Aboulatta.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): Over the past two years,
I have had the honour of chairing the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1518
(2003). I would like to use this special occasion to
reflect both on my role as Chair of these Committees
over the course of the past two years and the work
accomplished in that time.
4/13

08/12/2017

Before assuming our chairmanship of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC), we were expecting the
ongoing battle against terrorism to be a long one. We also
expected that in the following stage we might witness
intensified terrorist attacks by Da’esh and others that
would send the message that terrorism exists, is effective
and can distract attention away from efforts aimed at
achieving development and prosperity. Accordingly,
there was a dire need for the international community
to act swiftly and robustly, using a comprehensive,
coordinated and consistent approach. In this context,
we have intended for our tenure as the Chair of the CTC
to be creative, pragmatic and action-oriented as it could
be. As the Chair of the CTC, our main objective was to
ensure the full implementation of the core mandate of
the CTC in monitoring, facilitating and promoting the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005)
and 2178 (2014).
Against this backdrop and over the past two
years, the Committee has conducted 22 assessment
visits to Member States in all five regional groups
of the United Nations. These visits have enabled the
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) to engage in direct
dialogue and interaction with Member States on their
counter-terrorism implementation efforts and identify
progress, shortfalls, technical-assistance needs, good
experiences and effective practices.
Two further useful tools for understanding
Member State progress and needs are the detailed
implementation survey and the overview of
implementation assessment prepared by CTED experts.
Over the past two years, the Committee has approved
over 30 overviews of implementation assessment and
detailed implementation surveys on Member States’
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005)
and 2178 (2014).
As the main policymaking body within the
Security Council with regard to counter-terrorism,
the CTC, in Egypt’s view, needed to have a serious
and in-depth discussion of some of the most important
and top-priority aspects in relation to coumtering
terrorism efforts. In this regard, the CTC, with the full
support of CTED, held in 2016 and 2017, 21 special
meetings, open briefings and technical-assistance
meetings, in addition to 24 plenary meetings. These
meetings covered a wide range of issues, including
preventing the use of information and communication
technologies for terrorist purposes, terrorism financing
17-42755

08/12/2017

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

and the role of financial institutions and other entities
in preventing terrorism financing, aviation security,
international judicial and law-enforcement cooperation
in counter-terrorism matters, preventing terrorists
from acquiring weapons, implementation of resolution
2178 (2014) by States most affected by the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters, legal challenges related
to the treatment and prosecution of returning foreign
terrorist fighters, developing national and regional
comprehensive and integrated counter-terrorist
strategies, and denying safe haven to those who finance,
plan, support or commit terrorist acts.
The technical guidance of CTED assists with the
implementation by Member States of relevant Security
Council resolutions, and I encourage Member States
to make the best possible use of that guidance as an
important reference tool. That includes the technical
assistance follow-up in Iraq, technical assistance
identification in Afghanistan, challenges of countering
terrorism in Libya and in West Africa, as well as
integrating human rights, the rule of law and gender as
cross-cutting issues. It also includes the comprehensive
international framework to counter terrorist narratives
and meeting with academic institutions and think tanks.
In order to ensure transparency and the full
participation of all stakeholders, Egypt has been
keen to have most of the CTC’s meetings open for
the participation of the wider membership, relevant
organizations and other partners. We urge the
incoming Chair and Security Council members to
continue to follow that approach. We believe that open
meetings and events provide an excellent platform for
interactions between members of the Committee and
the wider membership, and help to strengthen dialogue
between United Nations entities and international and
regional organizations, as well as external partners,
through the analysis and discussion of emerging
issues, trends and developments relating to resolutions
1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014), as well as
subsequent resolutions.
Speaking of Council resolutions, over the past
two years the Council has adopted nine resolutions
on counter-terrorism. Those resolutions cover several
thematic areas, including promoting international
law enforcement and judicial cooperation in matters
relating to counter-terrorism, the use of biometrics, the
downgrading of intelligence, trafficking in persons for
terrorist purposes, protecting critical infrastructure,
countering terrorist narratives and welcoming the

S/PV. 8127

comprehensive international framework to counter
terrorist narratives, the use of data and battlefield
evidence, new border control measures, including
application programme interfaces and biometrics, the
use of the Internet for terrorist purposes, preventing
terrorists from acquiring weapons, and the links between
human trafficking and the financing of terrorism.
Those resolutions clearly reflect the commitment of
the international community to combating terrorism.
The CTC and CTED are mandated with a number of
tasks pursuant to those resolutions. In that regard,
I would like to draw the attention of the Council to
the necessity of providing CTED with the necessary
financial and human resources to make it capable of
untertaking and fulfilling its core mandate, as well as
its new and evolving task mandate, in accordance with
relevant Security Council resolutions.
As the Council is aware, the creation of the Office of
Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) represented a significant
evolution in the counter-terrorism architecture of the
United Nations. The Counter-Terrorism Committee,
CTED and UNOCT should continue to take steps to
strengthen their coordination with a view to enhancing
the impact of our counter-terrorism technical assistance
programmes and activities. The three subsidiary bodies
of the Security Council — the CTC, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) — continue to share
common objectives within their respective mandates.
I recommend that the three committees continue to
explore ways to further strengthen their cooperation.
I have chaired a meeting with my peers to discuss
areas of cooperation among those three bodies and
their experts.
I would like to make four general observations.
First, the Counter-Terrorism Committee, with the
support of CTED, plays a unique role and convening
power in monitoring, facilitating and promoting the
implementation efforts of Member States. In that
regard, I would like to thank CTED, as well as all
Security Council members from the 2016-2017 term,
for their full support to the Egyptian chairmanship of
the CTC. We really appreciate the support.
Secondly, with the recent reform of the counterterrorism architecture of the United Nations, United
Nations entities have a new opportunity to work in a

17-427555/13

S/PV.8127

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

coordinated, coherent and effective manner and to
avoid the duplication of efforts and competition.
Thirdly, Member States must continue to take
steps to fulfil their obligations pursuant to the relevant
Security Council resolutions on terrorism. The
United Nations has an obligation to assist Member
States in that regard, including by mobilizing the
necessary resources.
Fourthly, contemporary terrorist threats are
enormous and exceptional. Our actions should be at
least on the same wavelength.
Let me now turn to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1518 (2003) on Iraq. Although the
Committee did not hold any meetings over the course
of the past two years, there was a flurry of delisting
during that period. No individuals or entities had
been delisted since December 2011, but since August
2016 the Committee has delisted a total of 39 entities,
pursuant to delisting requests that the Government of
Iraq submitted.
Regarding the Committee pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, I started out my service as the Committee’s
Chair with a clear motivation. Like many of my
colleagues here today, I wanted to move the file
forward in order to demonstrate that over the course
of two years, it would be possible to make progress.
That was particularly important for my country, Egypt,
which, as an African State, has a keen interest in peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes Region.
Throughout our work, we have been convinced
that the success of the sanctions regime in attaining
its ultimate goal would depend on the cooperation of
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and regional States. Therefore, their continued
engagement with the Committee’s work and their
understanding of the Committee’s role and objectives
have been at the forefront of our priorities. To that end,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and regional
States have been regularly invited to meetings of the
Committee. Their views have been integrated into the
Committee’s deliberations on several subjects that
ranged from regional support and the neutralization of
armed groups to combating illicit trafficking in natural
resources and discussions about the reports of the
Group of Experts. Those meetings, together with the
two visits that I conducted to the region in 2016 and
6/13

08/12/2017

earlier this year, have helped to maintain a constructive
dialogue, which promoted a better understanding of the
implementation of sanctions.
Moreover, we firmly believe that many of the
challenges that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
faces can be effectively addressed only through a
holistic approach involving a wide range of regional
and international partners. In that light, we have been
eager to broaden the Committee’s engagement with
all relevant partners, including those in the United
Nations system. Therefore, the Committee regularly
has received briefings and held focused thematic
discussions with all relevant United Nations offices and
seniors officials.
In addition, the Committee has broadened its
engagement with the region to include important
subregional organizations and frameworks, in addition
to regular interactions with regional States. Committee
members have had two opportunities to interact with
the secretariat of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region on regional efforts to address
illicit trafficking and natural resources. During my
most recent visit to the region, I had the opportunity
to observe the ministerial meeting of signatory States
and guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, which took place on 17 October
in Brazzaville.
The Committee has also also keen to promote
synergy between its work and that of other relevant
regional and international stakeholders. For example,
in the area of natural resources, the Committee held
its first open briefing , which was available to all
Member States. The meeting ended up facilitating
a better understanding of the challenges related to
the effective management of natural resources in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It also promoted
collaboration among regional and international actors
and the Committee in reducing the illegal exploitation
of natural resources in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
During the two visits that I undertook to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region,
I was able to hold focused discussions with local
authorities, civil society organizations and United
Nations representatives in the capitals of the countries
that I visited. Based on those interactions, I believe
that I acquired a clear vision of the manner in which
17-42755

08/12/2017

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

the effective implementation of sanctions can help
facilitate building a space for peace.
More than ever, I am certain that the work that
we do here in New York has an impact on the ground.
The sanctions regime in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo affects armed groups in a number of ways.
The arms embargo reduces the potential of armed
groups to obtain weapons and ammunition. In addition,
the possibility of being included on the Committee’s
sanctions list serves as a deterrent from engaging in
destabilizing activities. That could possibly lead to
being the subject of investigations and prosecution by
Governments of the region. Therefore, the sanctions
can serve not only as a preventive tool, but also as a
tool to combat the rampant impunity of armed groups
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Finally, I note the importance of supporting
the work of the Group of Experts that supports the
1533 Committee. During my tenure as Chair of the
Committee, the Group of Experts has provided the
Committee with a considerable amount of information
concerning the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The experts went to great lengths to
obtain credible information with a view to improving
the situation and bringing peace to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In that context, members of
the Committee continue to mourn the loss of Michael
Sharp and Zaida Catalan and continue to expect that
their killers will be brought to justice in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I therefore urge all Member
States and stakeholders, in particular within the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to work towards
providing full support and collaboration with the Group
of Experts as well as the Senior Officer and his team
of four technical experts appointed by the SecretaryGeneral to assist the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
In conclusion, I should like to take the opportunity
today to convey my sincere thanks and appreciation
to all who have worked well and supported us during
the implementation of our mandate, notable our fellow
members of the Committee I had chaired and our
colleagues in the Sanctions Secretariat.
The President: I thank Ambassador Aboulatta for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Yelchenko.

S/PV. 8127

Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for having organized this briefing to share our
experiences as outgoing Chairs of the Security Council
subsidiary organs.
After joining the Security Council in January 2016,
Ukraine assumed the chairmanship of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003)
concerning Liberia, and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) and recently
extended pursuant to resolution 2339 (2017) concerning
the Central African Republic. However, in May 2016
the Security Council adopted resolution 2288 (2016),
which terminated the arms embargo against Liberia and
dissolved the 1521 Sanctions Committee. During my
short tenure as the Chair of that Committee, I focused
on maintaining the positive momentum in its work,
created by my predecessors, particularly the former
Jordanian Permanent Representative Dina Kawar.
In January 2017, Ukraine began to chair the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005) concerning the Sudan.
In my personal assessment, one of the main
tasks of a Chair is to deepen dialogue between the
Committee and the authorities of the government in
question. This is meant not only helping to strengthen
the implementation of sanctions regimes, but also
pushing forward the resolution of root causes of a
respective crisis or conflict, and to contribute to postconflict rehabilitation.
Bearing that in mind, during the past 24 months
I have dedicated myself, among other things, to
strengthening interaction between the Committees
that I chair, on the one side, and the Sudan and the
Central African Republic, on the other. Furthermore,
I also worked on enhancing the Committees’ contacts
with other Security Council subsidiary bodies, relevant
neighbouring countries and other stakeholders,
considering the latter as key in ensuring proper
implementation of the sanctions regimes. My visits to
the Central African Republic in 2016 and the Sudan
in 2017 were of great importance in building up trust
between the parties concerned and the Committees.
While on those visits, I also tried to strengthen the
cooperation between the Committees and the United
Nations entities on the ground.
The most important lesson, therefore, that I learned
was the value of dialogue. It is my firm belief that if
ones wishes to be an effective chair of a sanctions

17-427557/13

S/PV.8127

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

committee, one must engage in dialogue, build bridges
of trust and mutual understanding, speak frequently
with all relevant stakeholders and be ready to listen.
The time and effort invested in such endeavours will
ultimately determine one’s success in achieving one’s
goals as chair. Secondly, I tried to keep the Committees
as up-to-date as possible about the dynamics of conflict
resolution in the Central African Republic and the
Sudan. This allowed the Committees’ members to
take better-informed decisions on how to ensure full
implementation of the respective sanctions regimes.
For this purpose, with the valuable support of the
Secretariat, in both Committees I convened meetings
with the Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict and on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, as well as informal meetings with
civil society representatives, who briefed members on
the areas of their expertise. Worth mentioning are also
briefings by the United Nations Mine Action Service and
the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research
for the 2127 Committee on weapons and ammunition
management in the Central African Republic.
No less important were interactions with the
Special Representative, Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, and the Joint Special
Representative, Head of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. They in their
turn, and to the extent possible, kept the Committees
informed regarding the evolution of the security
situation and political process in the Central African
Republic and Darfur, respectively.
It is also difficult to overestimate the role of the
respective Panels of Experts in keeping the Committees
informed about the current political and security
situation in the countries concerned as well as, most
importantly, the current status of the implementation of
sanctions measures. Such up-to-date information from
the ground was especially valuable for those Security
Council members who do not have their own diplomatic
missions in these countries. I strongly encourage
incoming Chairs to maintain close cooperation with the
Panels of Experts and support their challenging work in
collecting such information.
In September, I initiated an open briefing of the
Central African Committee Committee with the
participation not only of the delegations of regional
States, but also of the broader United Nations
8/13

08/12/2017

membership to discuss that challenges that the
country and the region were facing, in particular in
the sphere of implementing the sanctions regime.
This event confirmed, among other things, the crucial
role of regional cooperation in ensuring the proper
implementation of the travel ban and in countering
illicit arms-trafficking and cross-border smuggling of
natural resources in the region.
In November, the Committee on the Sudan held
its first-ever joint informal consultations with the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan to discuss the spread of Darfuri armed groups
into Libya and South Sudan and to develop a common
approach to addressing the issue. I am convinced
that the holding of such joint informal consultations
should be viewed as the start of a holistic approach to
addressing the threats posed by those armed groups.
Key here is the diversity of sources of expertise and
openness to broader United Nations membership and
different United Nations entities.
I advise incoming Chairs not to assume that
chairing a sanctions committee is an easy task. There
are many challenges down the road.
Despite all the positive developments that I have
noted above, much remains to be done in order to
advance the role of the chair. In many instances, a
committee can be paralysed by totally unavoidable
politicization of its work and the abuse of the consensus
rule. It is from such abuse that, for example, in recent
years the Sudan Committee was unable to present its
90-day report in an open format to the entire United
Nations membership. It was just yesterday that we
managed to break this negative trend and I was able
to brief the Council about my recent activities in this
Chamber. I hope that this practice of open briefings
will continue by default.
The same relates to decision-making. Given that
the Committee reaches all decisions by consensus,
sometimes the Chair finds himself lacking a certain
level of autonomy. Almost all Chair’s actions must go
through a no-objection procedure. It starts with the
content of the Chair’s communications and ends up
with a format of meetings that the Chair proposes to
convene. However, according to the existing guidelines,
decisions on convening “informal informal” meetings
and inviting participants are left to the discretion of the
17-42755

08/12/2017

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Chair, and I tried to do my best to use this valuable
procedural opening to increase transparency.
I believe that the chair of a sanctions committee
should not be considered exclusively a troubleshooter.
He or she can play a much more relevant role,
particularly given the evolving nature of conflicts in
assigned countries and the need to ensure the full and
effective implementation of sanctions regimes.
Ukraine is among those countries that fully
recognize the importance of undertaking continuous
efforts, including periodic reviews, to further improve
the proper design, implementation, evaluation and
follow-up of sanctions regimes and to increase the
effectiveness of targeted sanctions. To this end, we are in
favour of further endeavours aimed at the independent
review of crosscutting issues and trends in sanctions’
application, best practices and challenges in their
implementation as well as preparing recommendations,
including with regard to practical options to better
support Member States’ capacities in this area. I want
to underline that serving as a committee chair is a
privilege and responsibility. Among other things, it
allows each individual Permanent Representative to
contribute to bringing peace to affected countries
and people.
Finally, I would like to thank the Secretariats of the
Committees I had the honor to chair for their dedication
and professionalism in supporting the Chair’s work.
My special appreciation also goes to the interpreters:
without their help, our work would not be accomplished.
I wish the best of luck to Poland and Côte d’Ivoire
as the incoming Chairs of the Sudan and the Central
African Republic Sanctions Committees.
The President: I thank Ambassador Yelchenko for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Cardi.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I welcome this opportunity as an
outgoing Security Council member to give a briefing
on the work I have done in leading a subsidiary body
of the Council and on the lessons learned. I will try to
draw some conclusions from my activity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) for the implementation of sanctions imposed
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. I will
also briefly refer to my experience as facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), which
endorses the Iranian nuclear deal.

S/PV. 8127

I would like to touch upon three main concepts that
inspired a reaction this year: effectiveness, unity and
transparency. Acting as Chairman and facilitator, I felt
that our main responsibility was to lead the work of
the 1718 Committee in the 2231 format by making a
constant effort to achieve consensus, not only because
of the decision-making rules that apply to all subsidiary
bodies, but also because of the importance we have
always attached to the principle of Council unity when
taking action.
A Council that can act in unity at the time of adoption
and throughout the implementation of its resolutions is
a stronger Council. As Chairs of subsidiary bodies, we
are tasked to provide crucial inputs for the second part
of the equation: implementation. The wide articulation
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea sanctions
regime and the quick succession of new measures in
recent months required the Committee to make a special
effort to assist United Nations Member States and
international organizations. Likewise, the innovative
set of provisions established by resolution 2231 (2015)
needed to be better understood and assimilated in
their second year of life. I could always count on the
constructive cooperation of other Council members in
these efforts, and today I wish to thank them all for
their continued support.
While unity is essential for the Council to deliver
effectively, transparency is key to fostering a better
understanding and, ultimately, a better implementation
of Council resolutions. This is where I have decided to
invest more time and resources for the benefit of the
United Nations membership as a whole. By organizing
two open briefings and five regional meetings in 2017,
we have tried to shed light on the evolving Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea sanctions regime while at
the same time providing Member States with a platform
to raise specific issues and establish a dialogue to
discuss implementation challenges. I have received
words of appreciation for this outreach initiative, and I
therefore wish to encourage future Chairs to follow this
path. Increased efforts can be made to build the most
solid relationship and a more proactive engagement of
Member States with the Council in working together
on implementation.
Let me also recall the June open briefing on
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/PV.7990), with a particular
focus on the procurement channel — a mechanism that
continues to be underexploited and which I believe
requires further attention. At last year’s briefings by

17-427559/13

S/PV.8127

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

the Chairs of the Security Council’s subsidary bodies
(S/PV.7845), the former Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) (2006)
said that the greatest joy of his mandate had been to
see that Committee disappear. I can only second those
words today, reiterating Italy’s unwavering support for
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and the need
for the full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Unfortunately, I cannot express myself in similar
terms on the 1718 Committee. While we hope for a
surge in diplomacy, Member States must redouble
their efforts for the full implementation of sanctions
in order to lead the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea back to the negotiating table. That is the crucial
purpose of the sanctions imposed on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea — to create conditions
conducive to restarting negotiations, while at the
same time hindering the development of the nuclear
and ballistic missile programmes of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
As repeatedly stated, in no resolution have sanctions
ever been meant to have a negative impact on the North
Korean people or affect the humanitarian situation in
the country. During our next meeting on 11 December,
Committee members will hear a presentation on United
Nations humanitarian operations in the field and have a
discussion dedicated to the subject. At the same time, it
remains entirely in the hands of Pyongyang to abandon
its nuclear and ballistic missile programmes and return
to international legality. We are also nearing the end of
a mandate; there is still work to be done.
In closing, allow me to wish my Dutch colleague,
Ambassador Karel van Oosterom, the best of luck.
I am sure he will do a superb job in his capacity as
the new Chair of a subsidiary organ. True to the spirit
of our split term, my team and I have been working
hand in hand with our Dutch colleagues to ensure a
smooth transition, and from 1 January we will be in the
front row to support their work from the other side of
the table.
Finally, allow me to express my gratitude for the
invaluable assistance received from the Subsidiary
Organs Bransh of the Secretariat and give a special
mention to the tireless work of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea Panel of Experts. Their cooperation
and advice have been fundamental to our task.
The President: I thank Ambassador Cardi for
his briefing.
10/13

08/12/2017

I now give the floor to Ambassador Rosselli Frieri.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I will address the Security Council in my capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2048 (2012) concerning Guinea-Bissau and
Chair of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals. I will share some exclusively personal
opinions with members regarding my responsibility
within these organs.
With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2048 (2012) concerning Guinea-Bissau,
Guinea-Bissau is experiencing a political crisis and
the root causes of instability in the country remain
unresolved. International and regional efforts to find
a lasting solution to the political crisis seem to have
no effect on the ground, as none of the provisions of
the Conakry Agreement has been implemented. This is
mainly due to a lack of political will. The international
community could encourage the use of different tools
such as dialogue, good offices, maintaining special
political missions in the field, sanctions and so on.
Ultimately, however, the solution to end institutional
instability and achieve peace in Guinea-Bissau lies in
the hands of its leaders.
The country continues to be affected by the
uncertainty of the political situation, without clear
indication of substantive progress towards the
achievement of a solution in the near future. Next
year will an electoral year in Guinea-Bissau, and the
stability, transparency and legitimacy of its institutions
will be the cornerstone of the democratic process and
crucial to consolidating peace in the country.
In June, I paid a visit to the country, where I
met with various political, military and civil society
representatives of Guinea-Bissau. It should be
highlighted that, in the five years since the sanctions
were approved, this was the first time that a Chair of
the Committee had visited the country. The visit on
the ground showed me that there is a need for greater
dialogue between the Committee — in fact, the Council
itself — and the citizens of Guinea-Bissau. In this
regard, I encourage the new Chair of the Committee
to make at least one visit to the country in order to
obtain information on the situation in Guinea-Bissau
first hand.
I have no intention of reiterating what I already
conveyed to the Council on 24 August (S/PV.8031), but
I would like to highlight some of the findings of my
17-42755

08/12/2017

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

briefing that are still valid. First, the lack of political
will to reach a solution is based on personal interests
and ambitions, and not on religious, ideological, ethnic
or philosophical differences.
Secondly, since 2012 the sanctioned military
officers have maintained a conduct that respects the
constitutional order and the laws of the country, and
abstained from interfering in the political life of GuineaBissau. It should be noted that these people continue to
rise in the ranks of the army and that some have been
promoted to higher ranks. This has contributed to a
certain climate of impunity.
Thirdly, since last year two persons listed on
the sanctions regime have travelled outside GuineaBissau. However, both were arrested at the airport of
destination and repatriated to Guinea-Bissau. I have
received no other information that other persons have
violated the travel ban. This is a positive indication that
Member States are maintaining the proper attitude and
are increasingly vigilant in enforcing sanctions.
Fourthly, the mission of the Economic Community
of West African States Mission in Guinea-Bissau has
played a vital role in contributing to preventing the
constitutional order from being threatened.
By way of striking a balance, I would like to
say that sanctions have played an important role in
maintaining the constitutional order in Guinea Bissau,
but they are not driving the current political situation.
As I have said on other occasions, I believe that it is
necessary to consider the sanctions list cautiously,
taking into account the current situation and events in
Guinea-Bissau. The imposition of sanctions as a means
or tool available to the Security Council to achieve an
explicit goal. Their maintenance or revision must work
to achieve that end.
In conclusion, it is important for the international
community to continue to support Guinea-Bissau
through various means, as has been done to date.
However, it is also vital that this support be accompanied
by positive signals and tangible progress being made by
the political leaders of Guinea-Bissau.
I shall now turn to my role as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on the International Criminal Tribunals.
During the past two years, the Group has met
regularly. As is its practice, it has also met before
presenting the semi-annual reports of the Courts to
the Security Council and when the situation required

S/PV. 8127

it, in order to discuss various cases, some of which
have been brought to the Council’s attention by the
Presidents of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. The Group also
prepared and negotiated the text of various Security
Council resolutions, such as that referring for example
to the appointment of the Prosecutor of the Residual
Mechanism, the amendment of the ICTY statute, or the
extension of the mandate of the President and Judges,
among other examples.
The annual reports of the Informal Working Group
on the International Criminal Tribunals have provided
detailed information on its activities. The Group has
also been able to monitor the work of these institutions
and their operation through its comprehensive and
detailed reports. Specifically, if we consider the ICTY,
we witnessed progress in the implementation of its
completion strategy. The Tribunal has been able to
successfully overcome the difficulties that arose and
complied with its forecasts and calendar of closures.
I note that on 31 December, the ICTY will reach the
end of its mandate, and we are currently drafting a
consensual press statement to mark that historical
event in a positive way.
Allow me to say in my personal capacity that the
Tribunal, in serving international justice, has allowed
States to prosecute those responsible for crimes
against humanity, crimes of genocide and war crimes.
It has contributed to the development of international
law and has pioneered certain areas of international
humanitarian law. It has defined the concept of armed
conflict and contributed to a more precise definition
of the crime of genocide. It has developed important
jurisprudence regarding sexual crimes and crimes
against cultural patrimony. It has contributed to the
elaboration of a concept of command responsibility by
stating clearly that justice applies to everyone, whether
they be Head of State or Government or other highranking official. It has contributed in that manner to
the establishment of historical truth.
I also call on the Security Council, and especially
States, to continue to work with the Residual
Mechanism, since, as indicated at the Security Council
debate that took place on 6 December (see S/PV.8120),
the prosecution of all perpetrators of serious violations
of international humanitarian law committed in the
territory of the former Yugoslavia is not over. Many
victims still await justice.

17-4275511/13

S/PV.8127

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

08/12/2017

Finally, I thank the Office of Legal Affairs and the
Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat for
their valuable support over the past two years of our
chairmanship of the two subsidiary bodies of which I
have spoken. I wish every success to those who will
succeed me in this task: the Permanent Representative
of Equatorial Guinea, Ambassador Anatolio Ndong
Mba, who will chairing the Guinea-Bissau committee,
and the Permanent Representative of Peru, Ambassador
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, who will chair the Informal
Working Group on the International Tribunals.

We first tackled the issue of improving transitional
arrangements for newly elected members. After intensive
discussion, the note by the President S/2016/619 was
adopted in July last year. The note outlined measures to
facilitate the preparedness of newly elected members
by inviting them to observe the work of the Council
for an expanded period of three months. The note also
set out a more defined and advanced timeline with an
emphasis on inclusiveness in the selection of the Chairs
of subsidiary bodies in response to the strong call of
many outgoing Chairs of subsidiary bodies.

The President: I thank Ambassador Rosselli Frieri
for his briefing.

Facilitation for the selection of the Chairs was
carried out both in 2016 and in 2017, in accordance with
the new note, with Japan and one permanent member
serving as co-facilitators in both years. We are now in
the process of conducting the handover to the incoming
Chairs, also in accordance with the note.

I shall now make a statement as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1636
(2005), the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014) and the the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
I would like to share some of my thoughts and
observations on the activities I have conducted during
these two years as Chair of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council.
First, the 2140 Committee met four times in
informal consultations this year. The Yemen sanctions
regime can assist in arriving at a political solution to the
conflict. While Yemen’s political situation is extremely
fragile, I believe that it is all the more important for
Council members to discuss how the Committee can
contribute to the political process. The Panel of Experts
has been very active and achieved meaningful work.
For example, it has presented helpful case studies, in
addition to its mandated reporting. The Chair has made
efforts to ensure the independence of the Panel and to
support its activities. Unfortunately, I have not been
able to travel to Yemen during my tenure. I believe that
it will be useful for the next Chair and the Committee
members to undertake a visit to the region so as to
acquire first-hand information from the ground.
Allow me now to say a few words in my capacity as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. Japan assumed the
chairmanship of the Informal Working Group for the
third time. This time, we decided to make a focused
effort on two things: first, improving the transitional
arrangements for newly elected Council members; and
secondly, revising the note by the President in document
S/2010/507. In so doing, we desired to make an impact
both through codification and actual practice.
12/13

The Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Matters went on to explore some
useful ideas and proposals that emerged from our open
debate (see S/PV.7740) during our last presidency
in July 2016 for revising note 507. There were rich
discussions on lessons learned and challenges relating
to past practices. During the course of that process,
I updated members of the Council on the work, and
also exchanged views with interested non-Council
members. Thanks to the contributions of members
of the Council, as well as those of the wider United
Nations membership, I believe that the revised version
of presidential note 507 (S/2017/507) represents a
comprehensive and balanced text. It is indeed a truly
collective achievement.
We must stress that improving the working
methods of the Council does not end with the adoption
of the revised version of note 507. It is an open-ended,
ongoing process of collective endeavours, and what
is most important is the implementation and actual
practice of the Security Council. During the presidency
this month, I will try my best to implement some useful
measures contained within the note, such as suggesting
a few areas for Council members to focus upon, at least
one day prior to informal consultations and attending
press stakeouts following every session of informal
consultations. We recently issued the 2017 edition
of what is known as the Green Book on the working
methods of the Council. I have brought 100 copies with
me here today, and they have been placed in the quiet
room for anyone interested in taking one.
17-42755

08/12/2017

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

In conclusion, I express my gratitude to the members
of the Security Council and the wider membership,
as well as the Secretariat, for their cooperation over
the past two years. I am confident that the incoming
Chairs will bring their enthusiasm and ideas to further
the work. I convey my best wishes to them, and assure
them of my full cooperation from outside the Council.

S/PV. 8127

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
On behalf of the Security Council, I take this
opportunity to express appreciation to the outgoing
Chairs for the manner in which they have discharged
their important responsibilities on behalf of the Council.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

17-4275513/13
