UNITED NATIONS I NATIONS UNffiS

'SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
FOURTH YEAR....

No. 31

435th MEETING: 8 AUGUST 1949
W-43-5em-eS-13AN-CE-:8-A-OU-T1 - 9 4 9 - - - - -

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
QUATRIEME ANNEE

LAKE SUCCESS. NEW YORK

UNITE.

TABLE '·OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Four hundred and drlrty-:fifth meeting

Quatre cent ~ente-cinquiemc seance

Pagl

1.
2.
3.
4.

Provisional agenda ......•..••...•...
Statement by the representative of Egypt
Adoption of the agenda
.
The Palestine question (continued)
.

PaglS

1 1. Ordre <iu jour provisQire ... , .••.•...
1 2. Declaration du representant de l'Egypte
1 3, Adoption de l'ordre du jour ., ..••....
2 4. La .question palestinienne (suite) •.....

1
1
1
2

FOUR
Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the texts of the meetings of the
Security Council are published in monthly supplements to the Official' Records.

Held at
on Monday:

All United Nations documents are designated by symbols, i.e., capital letters
combined with figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.

Presi
(Union 0

Les documents pertinents qui ne sontpas reprOd"i.lits in e~tenso dansle .tex.te
.des ·seances du Conseil.de securite sr.nt publies dans .des supplements mensuels .aux
Proces-verbaux officiels,

Present: Th
countries: Ar
Egypt, France,
ist Republic,
United Kingdo
Ireland, Unite

Les documents des Nations Uniesportent tous une cote, qui se compose de
leUres majuscules et ·o;e chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un texte signifie
q'lt'il s'agit d'.m doc'ltment des Nation,1; Unies.

1. Provisio
1. Adoption 0
2. The Palest
(a) Letter
United
Palesti
mitting
the an
in Pal(

2. Stateme
Mahmoud
Security Coun
matter which
should like to
with the disast
which is with
-Ecuador. It
I feel that I a
of my delegat
sense of the
sympathy to
sion.

3. A
The agenda

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

FOURTH YEAR

No. 37 QUATRIEME ~"NEE

No 37

FOUR HUNDRED AND TIDRTY.FIFTH QUATRE CENT TRENTE~CINQUIEME
SEANCE
MEETING
Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Monday, 8 August 1949, at '10.30 a.m.

Tentte d Lake .Success, Ne'w-York,
le lundi 8 aofU 1949, d 10 h. 30.

President: Mr. S. TSAR.-,\PKIN
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

President: M. S. TSARAPKINE
(Union des Republiques sociaiistes sovietiques).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet SDcialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte, France,
N orvege,
Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et
d'Irlande du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

1. Provisional agenda (S/ Agenda 435)

1. Ordre dn jow' provisoire
(S/ Agenda 4315)

1. Adoption of the agenda

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. The Palestine question:

2. La question palestinienne:

(a) Letter dated 21 July 1949 from the

a) Lettre adressee le 21 juillet 1949 au Secre-

United Nations Acting Mediator on
Palestine to the Secretary-General transmitting a report on the. present status of
the armistice negotiations and the Truce
in Palestine. (Sj1357).

taire general par le Mediateur par interim
des Nations Unies pour la Palestine pour
luL transmettre un rO\"portsurl'etat actuel
des negociations d'armistice et de la treve
en Palestine (S/1357).

2. Statement by the representative of
Egypt

2. Declaration dn representant del'Egypte. fo

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): Before the
Security Council begins the consideration of the
matter ~hich appears on its agenda today, I
should like to· say a few words in connexion
wit!t e di~aster that has taken place in a country
whIch IS WIth us a Member in the United Nations
-Ecuador. It is a most regrettable disaster, and
I feel that I am expressing not only the thought
of my delegation and my country, but also the
sense of the Security Council in extending deep
srtUpathy to Ecuador u!Jon this regrettable occaSIon.

MahmoudFAwZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de
l'anglais): Avant que le Conseil n.'aborde.
l'examen de la question inscrite a son ordre du
jour, je voudrais dire quelques mots a propos de.
la catastrophe survenue dans un pays qui est;avec nous, Membre de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies, l'Equateur. C'est un evenement des plus;
desastreux et je suis· convaincu d'exprimer non
seulement le se"J.timent de ma delegation et de
man pays, mais egalement celui du Conseil de
securite, p.n adressant. a l'Equateur l'expression
d'une profonde sympathie en cette triste occasion.

3.· Adoption of the agenda

3. Adoption de l'ordredu jour

tI:

The agenda was adopted.

L'o,1'dre du jour est adopte.

4. The Palestine question (continued)

4. La question palestinienne (suite)

At the invitation of tht President, Mr. Bttnche,
Acting Mediator on Palestine, Mr. Eban, representative of Isr(l;el, and Mr. Rafik AshaJ representative of Syria, took seats at the Council
table.

Sur l'invitation dll Pre,liident, M. B~tnche, Mediate~tr par interim pO~tr la Pa.lestine, M. Eban,
represl..ntant d'Israel, et M. Rafik Asha., representant de la Syrie, prennent place a la table duo
Conseil.

The P:msIDENT (translated from Russian):
I have three speakers on my list. The first
speaker is the representative of Canada.

Le PRESIDENT (tradit'it dtt russe) : I1 y a trois
orateurs inserits. La parole est at! representant du
Canada, dont le nom figure en tete de liste.

General McNAUGHTON (Canada): Members
of the Security Council will recall that at our
last meeting, on Thursday, we discussed a draft
resolution which I had put before the Council as
document 5/1365, acting under the provisions of
rule 38 of our rules of procedure. This resolution
;:' mpl',sed the suggestions made by the Acting
,Jediator, Dr. Bunt'he, in his report [S/1357],
with one small change which we discussed in the
Council. The Council also had before it proposed
amemdments submitted by the representative of
France [S/1364} to Dr. Bunche's draft resolution. In the course of the discussion, it se\emed to
some of us that the suggestions advanced by Mr.
Chauvel on behalf of France were very valuable
indeed and ought to be incorporated into the
resolution.

Le general McNAUGH1'ON (Canada) (trad~tit
de l'anglais) : Les membres du COllseil de securite
se souviendront que jeudi, cl notre dernii~re
seance, nous avons examine un projet de resolution [5/1365] dont j'avais saisi le Conseil en
vertu des dispositions de l'article 38 du reglement
interieur. Cette resolution contient les suggestions
faites dans son rapport [.5}1357] par le Mediateur par interim, M. Bunche, cl une Iegere modification pres, que le Conseil a examinee. Le ConseiI
etait egalement sais,i d'une serie d'amendements
[5/1364] au projet de res:olution de M. Bunche,
presentes par le representant de la France. Au
cours du debat, certains d'entre nous ont pense
que les suggestions presentees !lar M. Chauvel au
nom de la France etaient extremement inb~res­
santes et devraient etre incorporees dans k projet
de resolution.

Afin de hater les travaux du Conseil, M.
In or.der to save the SecuT1\ty Council's time,
Mr. Chauvel and I, together with Dr. Btll'lche, Chauve1 et moi.,meme nous sommes reunis avec
met on Friday afternoon; we went over the two M. Bunchc, vendredi apres-midi; nous avons
sets of proposals very carefully and· put them etudie tres soigneusement les diverses propositogether in a new document. I therefore ask the tions et les<avons fondues en un nouveau docupermission of the President to withdraw docu- ment. J e demande done au President la permisment 5/1365, which is presently before the . sion de retirer le document 5/1365, que le ConCouncil, and to submit a revised draft. resolution seil a sous les yeux, et de presenter an nom des
in the name of the Canadian and French delega- delegations canadienne et fran<;aise un projet de
tions. ,Tl).is draft resolution [S/1367] has been resolution revise. Ce projet .de resolution
handed to the Secretariat and is in process of [5/1367] a ete remis au Secretariat, qui est en
l>eing reproduced now. With the permission of train de le faire reproduire. Si le President me le
the President, I shall read to the Council the permet, je vais donner lecture au Conseil du
revised text of this draft. It reads as follows: texte revise de ce projet de resolution qui se lit
comme suit;

"The Security Council,

"Le Conseil de securite~

"Reaffi'"1ns
the order co
1948 to the
cerned, purst
the United
cease-fire an
Armistice
against any
Parties and
the Parties t
ensure the c
of these Agr
"Decides
United Nati
been dischar
of any fur
Council reso
"Notes th
that the exe
supervised
whose Chair
Nations Chi
Organizatio
personnel of
following c
Agreements;
"Reauests
the continue
the present
may be req
the cease-fir
ing the Par
the supervisi
of the term
lar regard t
pressed in
ments;
"Requests
above to re
observance
accordance
to keep the
informed of
work under
11 Decembe

etAyant pris acte avec satisfaction des differents
"Having noted with· satisfaction the several
Armistice Agreements' concluded by means of accords d'annistice que les parties impliquees
negotiations between the Parties involved in the , dans le copflit de Palestine ont conclus par voie
conflict in Palestine in pursuance of its resolu- de negocbtions, conformement cl sa resolution du
tion of 16 November 1948 (5/1080);
16 novemQre 1948 (5/1080) ;

That is tl
the Council
France and
document 5

etEx.prime l' espoir que les gouvernements et
"Expresses the hope that the Governments and
authorities . concerned, having,. undertaken by autorites interesses, s'etant engages, au cours des
means of the negotiations now being conducted . negociations que conduit actuellement la Commisby the' Palestine Conciliation Commission, to ful- sion de conciliation, cl donner. suite cl la delllande
:01 the. request of the General Assembly in its exprimee par l'Assemblee generale dans sa. resoresolution of 11 December 1948 to extend the lution du 11 decembre 1948 ~ les invitant a
scope of the armistice negotiations and to seek' etendre le domaine des negociations relatives a
agreement by negotiations concluded either with l'armistice et cl rechercher un accord par voie de
the Conciliation Commission or directly, will at negociations, ,soit .directes, soit, avec la Commis,:,
an early date achieve agreement on the ,final sion de conciliation - parviendront rapidement
settlement of all questions outstanding between a un reglement definitif de toutes les questio~s
them;
,
~ur lesquelles ilsne Se sont pas eMore mts
d'accord;

Mr. CH
French): I
tingttished c
, and to add
amendments
French del
pleasure' th
Coul1cil. It
possible th
general disc

"Constate que les accords d'armistice con~ti­
"Finds that the Armistice Agreements constitute an important step toward the establishment tuent une etape importante vers l'insta.ura~lOn
'of permanent peace in Palestine and considers d'une paix pennanente en Palestine et estlme
that these Agreements supersede the truce pro- qu'ils se substituent cl la treve desormais caduqut)
vided for in the resolutions of the Security 'etabIie par les resolutions du Conseil de securite
du 29 mai et du 5 juillet 1948;
Council of 29 May and 15 July 1948;

Mr. LUN
attentively
place durin
on beh~1f 0
that we are
drawn by
that our dis
the Securit
. its approval

ttConfirme, jusqu'au d:glement pacifique definiuReaffi11ns, pending the final peace settlement,
the order contained in its resolution of 15 July : tit, l'ordre donne, en "ertu de l'Artic1e 40 de la
1948 to the Governments and authorities con- Charte des Nations Unies, par la resolution dtt
cerned pursuant to Article 40 of the Chartcr of 15 juillet 1948 aux gouvernements et autorites
the U~ited Nations, to observe an unconditional interesses d'observer une suspension d'armes incease-fire and, bearing in mind that the several conditionnelle, et. conservant present a i'esprit
Armistice Agreements include firm pledges le fait que les, divers accords d'armistice contienagainst any further acts of hostility between the nent de fermes engagements d'eviter tous actes
Parties and also provide for their supervision by ulterieurs d'hostilite entre les pardes et prevoient
the Parties themselves, relies upon the Parties to aussi le controle de ces conventions par les. parties
ensure the continued application and observance elles-memes, fait confiance aces dernieres pour
continuer ales appliquer et a les respecter j
of these Agreements;
"Decides that all function~ assigned to the
United Nations Mediator on Palestine having
been discharged, the Acting Mediator is relieved
of any further responsibility under 'Security
,
Council resolutions j

"Decide que tcutes les missions confiees au
Mediateur des Nations Unies en Palestine ayant
ete accomplies, le Mediateur par interim est
degage de toute responsabilite ulterieure au re:gard .des resolutions du Conseil de securite j

"Notes that the Armistice agreements provide
that the execution of those Agreer.lents shall be
supervised by Mixed Armistice Commissions
whose Chairmail in each case shall be the United
Nations Chief of Staff of the Truce Supervision
Organization or a senior office" from the observer
personnel of tbat organization designated by him
following consultation with the Farties to the
Agreements;

"Note que les accords d'arnlistice prevaient que
leur application sera controlee par des commissions d'armistice mixtes dont le President, dans
chaque cas, est le chef d'etat-major de l'Organisme des Nations Unies charge de la surveillance
de la treve, ou un fonctionnaire superieur faisant
partie des 0 bservateurs de cet organisme designe
par lui apres consultation des parties en, cause j

"Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for
the continued service of such of the personnel of
the present Truce Supervision Organization as
may be required in observing and maintaining
the cease-fire, and as may be n<:' "ssary 1n assisting the Parties to the Armistice' Agreements in
the supervision of the application and observance
of the terms of those Agreements, with particu:lar regard to the desires of the Parties as expressed in the r~levant articles of the Agreements;

"Demande au Secretaire general de prendre
toutes mesures utiles pour assurer la continuite
du service de tel personnel du present Organisme
de surveillance de la treve qui serait necessaire
pour controler et maintenir la suspension d'armes,
de meme que pour assister les parties aux accords
d'armistice dans le controle de l'execution et de
l'observance des termes de ces conventions, conformement au.x dispositions des articles correspondants des conventions d'armistice j

"Requests the Chief of Staff mentioned
above to report to the Security Council on the
observance of the cease-fire in, Palestine in
accordam;e with the terms of this resolution j and
to keep the Palestine Conciliation Commiss-lon
informed of matters affecting the Commiss1.on's
work under the General Assembly resolution of
11 December 1948."

"Demande au chef d'etat-rnajor mentionne cidessus de faire rapport au Conseil de securite au
sujet de l'observance de la suspension d'armes
en Palestine, conformement aux dispositions de
la presente resolution, et de tenir la' Commission
de conciliation pour la Palestine informee des
questions ayant trait aux travaux 'de cette Commission en application de la resolution de l'Assemblee generale du 11 decembre 1948:'
Tel est le texte de la resolution que les repl'esentants de la France et du Canada presentent en
commUh au Conseil en remplacement du document 5/1365.
.

That is the resolution which is submitted to
the Council jointly by the representative of
France and my delegation as a sUbstivlte for
document S/1365.

ttngttlshed colleague from Canada has just said,
. and to add that I am authorized to withdraw the
amendments which I presented on behalf of the
French delegation [5/1364]. I approve with
pleasu:e the draft resolution now before the
CotID,-ctl. It seems to embody as accurately' as
pOSSIble the various points raised during the
general discussion the other day.

M. CHAUVEL (France) : Je tiens simplementa
conf1.nner ce que vient de' dire mon eminent collegue du Canada et a ajouter que je suisautorise
a retirer les amendements que j'avais presentes au
nom de la delegationfranc;aise [5/1364]. J'approuve tres volontiers leprojet de resolution dont
le Conseil vient d'etre saisi; I1 me parait tcnir
compte aussi exactement que possible des. differentes observations echangees au. cours de la discussion generale de l'autre jour.

Mr.. LUNDE '(Norway): Having listened very
attentIvely to. the discussion which has taken
place during our last two meetings, and today,
on beh~1f o~ my .delegation, I should like to., say
that We are 111 full agreement with the conclusions
drawn by Mr. Bunche in his report. We think
that our ~iscussion has reached the point where
. !he Secunty Council will soon· be able to •give
app;oval to the report, as it is before us.

M. LUNDE (Norvege) (traduit de l'anglais):
Apres avoir suivi tres attentivement lesdebats
du Conseil au cours des deux dernieres seanceS
et aujourd'hui meme, ie voudrais declarcarau nom
de ma delegation que npus approuvons entierenient les conclusions du rapport de M. Bunche.
Nous pensons que le debat a evolue de telle fat;on
cqu'il sera ,bientot possible au Conseild'approuver
le" rapport tel qu'il lui a ete sotunis.

Mr. CHAUVEL

(France)

(translated from

F.ren~h): I only wish to confirm what my dis-

IIIIIb

The repm:t,we feel, is a very important document-especially in two respects: first, it announces the conclusion of the phase of military
operations in the Palestinian conflict. It S11mmarizes the patient and devoted work of the
Acting Media~or and his staff, which has led to
this major victory for the United Nations;
secondly, the report sets an ~ample for the
future handling of similar conflicts, particularly
stressing the importance of getting the interested
parties together directly and basing solutions on
voluntary agreements between them.

Nous estimons que ce rapport est un document
tres important, pour deux raisons. Tout d'abord,
it annonce la fin de la. phase des operations militaires dans le conflit de Palestine j il donne un
aper<;u de l'reuvre patiente et devouee du Mediateur par, interim et de son personnel, qt1i a amene
cette victoire importante des Nations Unies. En
second,lieu, le rapport fournit un exemple de la
maniere dont des conflits analogues pourraient
etre traites a ITavenir, et souligne en particulier
combien il importe de mettre les parties inte-'
ressees en contact direct et d'etayer la solution
du problcme sur des accords volontairement conclus par les parties.
As I have said, my delegation is'in agreement
Ainsi que je l'ai deja dit, ma delegation
with the conclusions of the report and will vote approuve les conclusions du rapport et votera en
in favour of the draft resolution submitted by the faveur du projet de resolution presente par le
representative of Canada and accepted by the representant du Canada et accepte par le reprerepresentative of France.
sentant de la France.
Je voudrais m'associer aux autres membres du
I shOUld also like to join my voice '\\"'ith those
other members of the Security Council, and the Conseil de securite, ainsi qu'aux representants
representatives of Israel and Syria., who have d'Israel et de la Sytie,qui ont rendu hommage et
paid their tributes of gratitude and homage to adresse un message o.e gratitude a M. Bunche,
Mr. Bunche for the outstanding work he has pour l'reuvre admirable qu'il a accomplieen
accomplished as Acting Mediator on Palestine, qualite de Mediateur par interim pour la Palesand to his able and devoted collaborators. The tine, et a ses competents et devoues collaboradifficult, complex and far-reaching problem with teurs. Le probleme difficile, complexe et gros de
which the United Nations was confronted when consequences, auquell'Organisation des Nations
armed conflict broke out in Palestine has now Unies s'est heurtee lorsque le conflit arme s'est
peen virtually solved., It is without doubt the dec1enche en Palestine, est pour ainsi dire resolu.
general opinion of the different Member Govern- Pour les differents Gouvernements des Etats
ments of our Organization;' as well as of the Membres de notre Organisation" ainsi que pour
public at large, that this unique accomplishment l'opinion publique, it ne fait aucun doute que ce
is mainly due to the ceaseless efforts, the states~ resultat t,thique "1. ete atteint gr2~ce surtout aux
manlike approach and the extraordinary skm in efforts iricessants, aux qualites d'homme d'etat et
the difficult negotiations which have been shown, a l'extreme habilete dont ont fait montre, en
first, by the Mediator, the late Count Folke . premier lieu, le Mediateur, feu le comte Folke
Bernadotte and then by Mr. Bunche as his suc- Bernadotte et, en second lieu, son 3uccesseur,
M. Bunche.
'cessor.
.
It was only natural that the work of the
It est naturel que l'activite du Mediateur ait ete
Mediator should have been followed especially suivie avec une attention toute speciale par le
closely by the public in Count Bernadotte's native public du pays nataldu comte Bernadotte, la
country, Sweden, which he always represented Suede, qu'it a toujour,,; representee si dignement.
in such a dignified manner. His important work Son' travail si important a ete suivi d.vec non
was followed with no less interest in Denmark moins d'interet au Danemark et dans mon propre
and in my own country.. Count Folke Bernadotte pays. Le comte Folke Bernadotte venait de mener
had recently brought to a successful conclusion a bonne fin l'irnmense tache qui consistait a
the great task of rescuing thousands of Danish sauver des milliers de prisonruers politiques
and Norwegian political prisoners from concen- danois et norvegiens des camps de concentration
tration camps in Germany. For this reason, his d'Allemagne. C'est pour cette mison que toute la
venture into a new and important field of humani- Scandinavie a suivi avec un interet particuliere-:
tarian endep.vour was followed with special and ment intense l'entreprise du comte Bemadbtte
intense interest throughout Scandinavia. The dans undomaine nouveau et important de l'acoutstanding position he occupied makes it the tivite humanitaire. La position exceptionnelle
more di~cult t~ r~concile ourselves to the. fact, qu'il occupait nous rend encore' plus difficile d'acthat the mvestIgatlOn of the murder o,f Count' cepter le fait que l'enqllete sur le meurtre du
Folke Bernadotte and Colonel Andre Serot who comte Folke Bernadotte et du colonel Andre
died at his side, has not yet been brought to a Serot,' tomb~ ases cotes, n'ait pas encore donn~
satisfactory condusion.
' de resultat satisfaisant.
When Mr. Bunche took over the burden of
Lorsque M. Bunche assuma la lourde tache de
leading the work of the Mediator and when it continuer l'reuvre entreprise par le Medi?teur et
soon became clear that he was the right man in lorqu'il se manifesta rapidement qu'iletait
t.qe right place to continue and fulfil what CQunt l'homme qu'il fallait pour poursuivre et mener a
Folke Bernadotte had started, public opinion in bien ce que le comte Bernadotte avait comthe three Scandinavian countries followed his mence, l'opinion publique des trois pays ,scandi-'
work with the greatest 'interest and with ever- naves a suivi ses tr.lvaux avec le plus grand
increasing admiration. I think that in j()ining 'in interet et· une -admiration toujours croissante. Je
the thanks and tributes which are now being paid crois exprimer l'opinion de milieux tres etendl1s
to Mr. Bunche and to his able assistants of, the de mon pays ainsi que des autres pays scandiUnited Nations Mission to Palestine for the work naves, en m'associant aux remerciements adresses
they have performed I am expressing the opinion et aux: hommages rend1,1s a M. Bunche et a ses
of very wide circles in my own country, as well competents collaborateurs de. la Mission des

I

MW

51

lIbllfg I

UlIiI!l,

ijllrr.fil'nllllll!lIiUi!liIl!i!ltlllU_IIII~.!lJll.&UIUI8id: I

_..r_itiklIQ

211_.'._

kM!

All

Nations Unies en Palestine pour l'ceuvre qu'ils
ont accomplie. Cet hommage devrait etre exprime
officiellement dans une resolution du Conseil de
securite; je considere comme un honneur 'Pour
ma delegation de presenter, en commun avec la
delegation du Canada, le projet de resolution
figurant au document S/1362.
M. TSARAPKlNE (Union des Republiques sociatiques) (traduit d~~ rztsse) : Je n'ai plus d'orateurs .
inscrits sur ma liste. J e voudrai,s a present dire
quelques mots en ma qualite de representant de
I'UNION DES REPUBLIQUES SOCIALISTES SOVTETIQUES.
Comme nous le savons, les hostiiites ont pris
, As we an know, hostilities in Pal~stine have
ceased and armed conflict is at an ~n4.~That fact, fin en Palestine et la lutte a main armee a cesse.
moreover, is explicitly stated in the report sub- Le Mediateur par interim le declare expressement; lui aussi, dans le rapport qu'il nous a premitted to us by the Acting Mediator.
sente.
Des conventions d'armisticeont ete conclues
Armistice agreements nave been concluded py
mutual and voluntary agreement between all the volontairement, a la suite d'un accord mutuel inStates engaged in hoctilities in Palestine. Such tervenu entre tous les Etats ayant pris part au
agreements have been concluded b,etwe,en the conflit de Palestine. Ces cnnventions ont ete coriState of Israel, on the one hand, and Egypt, clues entre Israel, d'une part, l'Egypte, le Liban,
Lebanon, Syria, and the Hashell1ite Kingdom la Syrie et le Royaume hachemite de Jordanie,
of Jordan on the other.
cl'autre part.
Tous les Etats qui ont He entraines dans le
All but one of the States involved ID the conflict in Palestine are Members of the United conflit palestinien, a l'exception d'uu seul,sont
Nations, and now that armistice a...>~ements have Membres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies" et,
been voluntarily concluded, the next question in a l'heure actuelle, puisque des armistices sont inso' far as Palestine is concerned is to draw up : tervenus a la suite d'accords volontaires, la tache
definitive agreements, in other words, to provide suivante en Palestine consiste a elaborer. un
for a final and permanent peace settlement for accord defit!itif, c'est-a.-dire a. obtenir, par des
Palestine.
m6yens pacifiques, un reglement permanent de la
question palestinienne.
A ce sujet nous constatons que tout le mande
Various approaches to this question may be
observed. Some think that the final peace settle- n'abDrd~ pas le probleme de la meme maniere.
ment should be left to the Conciliation Commis~ D'aucunsconsiderent que le reglement pacifique
sion and that such a, settlement call be reached de la question ne peut etre realise qu'avec· le
only through that Commission. There are, how- concours de la Commission de conciliation et que,
ever, very strong indications that this final peace par consequent, i1 faut la charger de cette tache.
settlement for Palestine can be reached-and in Cependant il y a de tres serieuses raisons de
our view must be reached-by direct negotiation croire que le reglement p:icifique et definitif de
between the parties without outside influence or la questio:I palestinienne peut etre obtenu - et,
outside pressure.
a notre avis, doit etre obtenu - par voie de negociations directes entre les parties, sans intervention et sans pression externes.
The following reasons have led us to this
Les considerations qui suivent nousont amenes
conclusion. The Acting Mediator, Mr. Bunche a. cette conclusion: le Mediateur par interim,
writes in his report that the conclusion of Armi~ ,M. Bunche, ecrit dans son rapport. que la constice Agreements in Palestine has shown that all clusion des conventions d'armistice en Palestine_
the parties concerned have given clear evidence a montre que toutes les parties interessees ont fait
of a spirit of conciliation and have voluntarily preuve d'un esprit d'entente et ont assume de leur
assumed specific ulldertakings. These under- propre gre des obligations bien definies. La nature takings give us grounds to hope that the next de ces obligations nous donne le droit d'espere:..
stage will be a final peace settlement and that que le reglement pacifique et definitif· de la questhe States which voluntarily particirated in and tion constituera l'etape suivante et .que .ces
concluded armistice agreements among them- memes Etats, qui ont negocie et conclu de plein
selve~. will be able, by direct negotiation, to reach gre des conventions d'armistice, pourront a:boutir
a final peace settlement.
a un regleemnt pacifique et definitif· de la question par voie de negociationsdirectes.
It should therefore be possible to dispense comPar consequent, on peut fort bien· se passeI' de
pletely with the services of the Conciliation Com- la Commission de conciliation, qui ne semble plus
mission, for which there appears to be no avoir de raison d'etre.
further need.
.
. Furthermore, it should be noted that the States
I1 faut remarquer, en outre, que les Etats qui
Involved in the Palestine conflict have evidenced ont pris part au conflit de Palestine ont donne
t~eirmaturity. and have shown that they recog- des preuves de leur maturite et de la conscience
ntze their responsibilities.
des responsabilites qui leur.incombent.
At the Sec~rity Council's 433rd meeting the
Le Mediateur par interim nous a· declare, lors
Acting Mediator, Mr. Bunche, informed us'that de la 433eme seance du Conseil de securite;· qu'il
as in t.qe other Scandinavian countries. This
tribute should be given an official expression by a
Security Council resolution, and it is an bonour
~ c?-sponso~ with the
for my delegation to
delegation of Canada tu tne tutroduchon of the
draft resolution which is li!>ted as document
5/1362.
The PRESIDENT (translated frdm Russia,n):
There are no more speakers on my list. I should
like noW to say a few words as representative of
the UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REpUBLICS.

pe

.........

-

6

a

a

he had nothing to handt:lver to the Conciliation
Commission.. This is a very weighty argument
which, in the light of past e.."Cperience in Pales~
tine, leaves nO doubt that it would be mor~ useful, from the point of view of achieving a final
peace settlentent, to allow the parties concerned
to settle the issues outstanding between them by
direct negotiation, without interference on. the
part of the Conciliat.1tltt Commission. "Ve have
no reason to doubt that the parties concerned will
be able to de~J. with this problem too.
.

n'a rien transmettre la Commission de conciliation. C'est la un argument fort judicieux qui
ptollve clairement; etant donne l'exp~ \"nce
acquise en Palestine, qu'il vaut m:eux, POUt.,Jvu~
tir a. une solution pacifique et definitive, laisder
aux parties interessees le soin de regler par voie
de negociations directes les questi01~ ... en suspens,
sans faire intervenir la Commission de conciliation. Notts n'avons aucune rahicnde .douter que
les parties interessees puissent egalement resoudre
cc probleme.

There is a second question which arises in
conne."Cion with the Acting Mediator»s report. It
is now clear to us all that the stage of armed
conflict in Palestine is ended. Armistice agreements have been voluntarily concluded, and
fighting has ended altogether. In the drcumstances,there is no need to· maintain United
Nations observers in Palestine; indeed, in the
opinion ()£ the USSR delegation" they should be
.rcnlled and the staff whicl1 has been established
there should be disbanded.

Il y a une seconde question que souleve la dis~
cussion du rapport presente par le Mediateur par
interim. 11 est dair. pour ~ous tous, a l'heure
actuelle, qu'en Palestine la phase de la lutte armee
a ete depassee. Des conventions d'armistice ont
ete concIues volontairement, et les operations de
guerre ont pris fin une fois pour toutes. Daus
cesconditions, iln'est nul besoin de maintenir en
Palestine des observateurs des Nations Unies; la
detegatin.. de rUl,<SS est d'avis qu'ils doivent
ctre rappeIes et que toute l'organisation qui ya
ete etabUe doit etre dissoute.
Toutes les taches qui, dans une certaine mesure.
incombaient au Mediateur et a la Commission de
conciliation peuvent maintenant etre confiees,
entierement et en toute tranquillite, aux parties
interessees. Dans son 1"apport, et notamment clans
ses conclusions, le Mediateur par interim nous
informe qu'iln'assume PlUS aucune responsabilire
en ce qui concerne le reglement de la question
palestinieune, et que, par un accord mutuel, cette
responsabilite incomhe maintenant aux parties
eUes-memes. Puisque les parties se considerent
responsables, par consentement mutuel, de la
situation en Palestine et du ~eglement ulterieur
de cette question, ce fait represente un argument
de grand poids en faveur de la solution qui consiste a confier directement aux parties elles-mem~,
sans l'intervention de la Commission· de concilia":
tion ou d'observateurs quels qu'ils soient, le regIel11ent ulterieur et definitif de la question palestinienne et de toutes les questions qui se posenl
encore pour les diverses parties interessees.
Etant donne ces considerations, la delegation de
l'Union sovietique. estime necessaire d'apporter
certains amendements au projet de resolution du
Canada [8/13651. 11 est v:rai que ce projet a
deja subi quelques transformations, puisqu'on a
incorpor~ les amendements de la France au projet
de resolution annexe au rapport· du Mediate~r
par· interim et qu'il comprend d'autres dispOSitions; mais je pense qu'apres avoir etudie le projet de resolution commun du Canada et. de la
France (S/13671, it sera possible d'adopter les
amendements de l'URSS. Si cette methode ne
reussissait pas; nous serions obliges d'aborder la
question d'uneautre maniere.
Les amendements qui suiventet que soumet la
delegation de l'URSS [5/1368] se referent au.
projet de resolution initi~l presente par le Canada

All those questions which were in any way'
within the jurisdiction of the Acting Mediator
and the Conciliation Commission. may now quite
confidently be handed over, lock, stock and
huTel, to the parties concerned. The Acting
Mediator infoIttls us in his repot:t and in his
oonclu~i?ns that he is no l<?nger responsible for
sUperv1Sl11g the settlement of the Palestine questio~ as that responsibility has been assumed, bv
mutul'l1 agreement., by the parties themselves. Th~
fact th~t the parties concerned have undertaken,
by mutual agreement~ to be responsible for the
situation in Palestine and -tor the further settlement of that question~ is a very considerable
argument in favour of leaving. the further and
final settlement of the Palestine question and of
other questions outstanding between them directly
to the Part!es themselves, without any interference from the Conciliation Commission or the
observers.
In the light of these considerations, the delegation of the Soviet Union deems it necessary to
:make some amendraents to the Canadian draft
resolution [S/13651" It is tine that the text of
that draft h~ been altered as the amendments
?f.the French de}~tion have been incorporated
m. the ~ res~ution annexed to the report of
the Acting Mediator, and other provisions have
been. ~'-awn up-but I.think that after examining
the Joint draft resolution of Canada and Fr-ance
[S/1367], it will be possible to adopt the USSR
delegation's amendments. Should this beimpos:siDle., we shall have to approach this question
tr<Om a different angle.
.
.

The .following amendments submitted by the
delegation o! .the Soviet ynion {Sj1368] apply
to the original Canadian draft resolution

fS/1365J.

. . I propOse that the second paragraph of that
;kaft resolution should be r~1?laced by the foliow1JlIg':

,~=,c=Mapres.sf$

the lwjJe that the Governmenn;
~ned w~.Dy means of direet negotiations,
adiieYe .agTeemertt .at an early date ··00 the final
. ~. of all questions outstanding between
~#

[S/1365] :

Je propose de remplacer par le texte sui~t
le deuxiemeparagraphe du projet de resolutlon
du Canada:

uE%prime I'espoir que les gouvernemenf.;S in-

teressesparviendront rapidement,par VOle .4~
negociations directes, a un reglement definitif
.de toutes les questions sur lesqueUes ils ne se
sont pas encore mis d'accord."

At the end of the third paragraph, the following j)hrase should be added:
11. • • and in this connexion decides to recall
the United Nations observers from Palestine and
to release them from their duties, and to disband
the staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization".

a

La phrase suivante devrait etre ajoutee
la
fin dUo troisieme paragraphe:
It • • • et decide en l'occurrence de rappeler de
Palestine les observateurs de I'Organisation des
Nations Unies, de les degager de toutes leurs
fonctions et de dissoudre l'Organisme des
Nations Unies charge de la surveillance de la
treve".
Le cinquieme paragraphe devrait etre redige
de la maniere suiva:lte:

The fifth paragraph should he worded as
follows:
ItSupprime le poste de Mediateur des Nations
ttTerminates the office of the United NatlcHls
Unies pour la Palestine."
Mediator on Palestine./I
Le sixielile paragraphe devrait etre supprhne.
The sixth paragraph should ,be deleted.
D'autre part, la delegation de !'URSS est
At the same ti1?'.e, the USSR delegation supports the additional paragraph contained in docu- favorable au paragraphe supplementaire qui a e~e
ment S/1364, which lists the French amendments propose clans les amendements initiaux de la
to the draft resolution annexed to the report of France [3/1364} et aux termes duquella ques~
the Acting Mediator, prop?sing that !he Paleet~e tion palestinienne serait maintenue a l'ordre du
question ,should be retamed on tne Security jour du ConseR de securite.
Council's agenda.
Those are the amendments '\I\>"hich the delegaTels sont ll~s amecdements que la dcHeganonde
tion of the Soviet Union wishes to' make to I'Union sovietigl1e desire apporler aux proposithe proposals of the Acting Mediator, Mr. I tions faites par le Mediateur par interim, M
Bunche-proposals which were almost literally Bunche,propositions qui sont presque litteralereproduced in the Canadian delegation's original ment reproduites d~:ns le projet de resolution
draft resolution.
initial.
I ask the Secretariat to be good enough to
Je prierai le Secreta..iat de bien vouloir .faire
I distdbuer les amendements de I'GRSS.
drculate the USSR amendments.
C01;1:i11!lant .maint~nant ~n q~a1ite 'd; PRESISpeaking now again in my capacitY' of .PRESIDENT, I have no more speakers on my Itst and
DENT, J a71se leConsetl que Je n'at plus d orateuI'S
it appears that no one else wishes to speak.
inscrits sur ma liste. It semble que personne ne
desire plus prendre la parole.
Le .Consell a maintenant le.s trois documents
The Council now has the £ol1owb.g three docu··
ments to consider: the joint draft resolution of suiv<'l.nts a examiner : le projet de resolution comCanada and Norway [Sj1362]; the joint draft mt.<n du Canada et de la Norvege [Sj1362], le
. res.olution submitted today by Canada and France proj::t de resblutionc.:>mmttn presente' aujourd'hui
lS/1367]; and the amendments submitted at par le Canada et par la France [Sj1367], et les
this meeting by the delegation of the Soviet amendements presentes en cours de se.ancepar la
delegation de rUnion sovietique [Sj1368].
.
Union [S/1368] .
Since there are no more speakers, and since
Etant donne que personne ne demande a interthe members of the Council apparently wish to venir et que les membres du Conseil desirent sans
acquaint themselves in greater detail with the donte prendre plus ample connaissance du projet
joint draft resolution submitted today by Canad(i de resolution cornmun duCanada et de la France
and France and also with the amendments sub- presente aujourd'hui ainsi' que des amendements
mitted by the USSR delegation, I suggest that soumis par la delegation de l'URSS, je voudrais
the morning "11eeting should be adjourned'at this proposer de lever maintenant la sean<~e de ce
point and th~,t the next meeting for the resump- matin et de fixer a jeudi, Ha-out, a 10, h. :'0 la
tion of the r!:iscussionof the Palestine question suite de la discus~ion de la question palestinienne
and the draft resolutions should be held on et des projets de resolution pres~ntes.
Thursday,· 11 August, at 10.30 a.m.
,General McNAUGHTON (Canada): I have not
seen the proposed text of the amendments which
the delegation of the Soviet Union has presented
in writing, but I very clearly heard the text as it
Was interpreted into El1glish.
There is one matter, in particular, which gives
me great concern and on which I think it would
be well for this Council. to hear from the
Acting. Mediator what the result .would be, I
am referring to the proposal for the elimination
of the whole obsenTer organization in Palestine.
From what the Acting Mediator said on the last
occasion the Council discussed the matter, I
fear that this would indeed have very' serious
consequences in relation to the Armistice. Agree1llents. I think we should hear what the Acting
..' Mediator has .to say on that point in particular.

1IIIIIa,· ••• •. •

.I!· tlk.l!ti5WO&i"! .Mlr

Le general McNAUGHTON (Canada) (traattit
de l'anglais) , Je n'ai pas encore vu le texte ecrit
desamendements proposes par la delegation de
l'Union sovietique, mas j'ai entendu tres clairement l'interpretation anglaise qui nous en. aete
donnee.
.
It ya une question notamment qui m'inquiete
fortement et sur laquelle je pensequ.'il serait utile
que le Conseil entende l'opinion du Mediateur par
interim quant aux consequences possihles. Il
s'agit de la proposition tendant a la dissolution
de l'ensemble de l'organisme des observateurs en
Palestine. D'apres ce que le Mediateur par interim
a declare lors des derniers debats du Conseil a ce
sujet, je aains que cette mesure n'ait vraiment
des . consequences tres seneuses sur l'execution
des conventions d'armistice. J'estimequenous
devrions en,tendre l'avis du Mediateurpar interim
sur cette question particuHere.

Mr. BUNCUE . (Acting Mediator on Palestine) :
M. BUNCUE (Mediateur par interim pour ia
I have not seen the proposed amendment of the Palestine) (traduit de l'anglais) : Je n'ai pa& vu
representative of the Soviet Union in writing, le texte ecrit de l'amendement propose par le
but I understand that the substance of it is to representant de l'Union sovietique, mais je crois
provide for the recall of all tfnited Nations comprendre qu'il s'agit en substance du rappel de
observer personnel now employed in Palestine. If tous les cbservateurs des Nations Unies employes
that were to be done, there can be no question a l'heure actudle en Palestine. Si cette mesure de~
that it would have very serious effects upon the vait etre prise, i1 n'y a aucun doute qu'eIle aurait
existing Armistice Agreements. It would indeed des consequences tres graves sur l'executioll des
lead to a complete nullification of certain import- conventions d'armistice en vigueur. EIle irait
ant provision:; in those Agr':'~,lnents.
meme jusqu'a rendre inoperantes certaines dis~
positions importantes de ces conventions.
Au plus fort des operations de surveillance de
At the height of the truce super;rision operation
over SOO military observers were employed in la treve, plus de cinq cents observateurs militaires
Palestine and the Arab States. As I indicated ont ete employes en Palestine et dans les Etats
in a statement tht'. other day [433rd meeting], arabes. Ainsi que j(~ l'ai deja declare l'autre jour
that number has now been reduced to seventy- [433eme seance], ce nombre a maintenant ete
nine and is being still further reduced, and the reduit a soixante-dix-neuf et doit encore etre
,intent was to reduce it to a figure somewhere diminue davantage, afin d'atteindre l'effectif
between thirty and forty. The reason for main- envisage de trente a quarante observateurs. Les
taining this final nucleus of thirty to forty mili- raisons qui imposent le maintien d'un noyau de
tary observers is related, specifically and indis- trente a quarante observateurs 'militaires, decoul!ensably, to the' Armistice Agreements, in three lent expressement et de trois fac;ons different~s
des conventions d'armistice.
·'Yays.
.
En premier lieu, les quatre conventions d'ar,. First of all, as in article 7 of t..'le Israeli-Syrian
,Armistice Agreement, each of those four Agree- mistice prevoient, ainsi qu'il est enonce par
ments provides that the fifth member of the exemple a l'article 7 de la co:nvention d'armistice
Commission shall be the United Nations Chief entre Israel et la Syrie, que le cinquieme membre
'of Staff of the Truce Supervision Orgaxlization de la Commission sera le chef d'etat-major de
or an officer from the personnel of that organi- l'Organisme des .Nations Unies charge de la sur~
zation des;gnated by him. In other words, the veillance de la treve, ou un fonctionnaire faisant
Mixed Armistice Commissions themselves could partie des observateurs de cet organisme designe
110t operate without some personnel of this kind par lui. .En d'autres termes, les commissions
being' out there, for the simple reason that they mixtes d'armistice elles-memes ne pourront fonctionner si un certain personnel de cette categorie
provide the fifth man in the Commisaions.
n'est pas sur place, pour la simple raison que c'est
lui qui doit fournir le dnquieme membre des
commissions.
En deuxieme lieu, chacune des conventions
Secondly, each of the Agreements also provides
that the Commission shall call upon, for super- stipule egalement que la commission devra faire
vising the implementation of the Agreement, appel, pour le contrOle. de l'execution de la conobservers from their own ranks-Arab or Jewish vention, a des observateurs fournis par les deux
-or from the ranks of the United Nations parties -arabes ou juifs- ou a des observateurs
observers, and that when these United Nations des Nations Unies, ceux-ci restant sous le comobservers are called upon, they remain under mandement du chef d'etat-major dans le cas OU
the command of the Chief of Staff. This was it est fait appel a eux. Cette clause a ete introduite
written into the Agreement because both sides dans les conventions parce que les deuX! parties
recognized the fact that in certain types of ont reconnu qu'il serait preferable, pour certaines
missions in connexion with the supervision of the missions particulieres concemant le contro1e de
Armistice Agreements, it would be preferable to l'execution des conventions d'armistice. d'avoir
have neutral personnel rather than the personnel recours a un personnel neutre plutot qu'a un perbelonging to one side or the other, particularly sonne! appal'tenant a l'une ou l'autre des parties,
when some question of crossing a border was en particulier lorqu'il y a lieu de traverser la
involved.
frontiere.
Enfin, en troisieme lieu, chacune de ces convenThen. thirdly, there are specific provisions in
each of these Agreements dealing with special tions contient des dispositions particulieres ayant
situations. In the Egyptian-Israeli Agreement, trait a des situations speciales. Par exemple, dans
for example, there is a neutral zone, the Elauja la convention entre Israel et l'Egypte,il est prevu la
Zone, which calls for United Nations personnel constitution de la zone neutre d'Elauja ou doivent
to be there until the final disposition of the area etre places des observateurs des Nations Vnies
involved is made, and not having military ob- jusqu'au moment ou il sera decide definitivement
se~;.-ers for placement there would be to nullify
du sort de cette zone. Ne pas disposer d'observathat provisiOn of the Agreement. The Elau.ia teurs militaires pour cette mission equivaudrait
provision of the Agreement was· the last .. pro- a rendre inoperante la clause de la convention
vision agreed upon and the most difficult one qui concerne la zone d'Elauja, clause qui a ete la
arrived at at the Egyptian-Israeli negotiations. In derniere sur laquelle l'accord ait ete realise, et
the Israeli-!0rdanian Agreement, there is the celle sur laquelle les negociations entre l'Egypte
provision for the demilitarized zones at Mt. et Israel ont abouti avec le plus de difficultes.
Scopus and Government House, which, until the D'autre part, la convention ent:-e Israel et le
representatives of Israel and the Hashemite Royaume hachemite de Jordanie contient une disKingdom of Jordan reach further agreement, position prevoyant la demilitarisation de.la zone

.....;;~~~~:~:::;:_~::~~~:~~~~~~=~~~=~;~~=~:~~~l!~;~l~~

observer personne! in cont:ol. If we did not have
that personnel, thIS very vItal part of the Agr~e­
ment would be wiped out, and that would mevitably lead to. trouble, because t.hese are t~e
most vital zones In Jerusalem. And In the IsraehS rian Agreement, which has just been concluded, the most difficult subject on whic~1 ~g~ee­
ment was finally reached after long negott~tlOn.
was a demilitarized zone between the Israeh and
Syrian forces, which involved the employment
of United Nations observers.

Therefore, in each of these three Agreements,
in addition to the ordin~:y functi?n of assist~ng
tpe Parties and superv:smg the ImplementatlOn
of the Agreements, there is a special provision
calling for the employment of United Nations
ob~erver personnel. Thus, while the principle of
withdrawal of trUce supervision personnel is
entirely sound-and, in general, withdrawal has
~ready taken place--a nucleus ?f s,uch observers
must be kept 011 the spot untIl the final peace
settlements are made or until the Parties themselves agree to changes in the Armistice Agreements which would no longer make necessary the
employment or the presence of such United
Nations staff.

.

:. Thus, I would particularly call this to the
attention of the representative of the Soviet
Union, in terms of the effect that this would
inevitably have upon the Armistice Agreement.s.
Mr. MANUILSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian) : The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR supports the President's proposal to adjourn because, before stating
its position it would like to study both the proposals which he submitted as respresentative of,
the Soviet Union, and the proposals submitted
jointly by the Canadian and French delegations.

vernement; ces zones resteront demilitarisees et
sous la surveillance d'observateurs des Nations
Unies jusqu'a. ce que les representants d'Israel .
et du Royaume hachemite de J ordanie aient conclu un autre accord. Si nous ne disposions pas
d'observateur~, cette partie essentielle de la convention serait reduite a. neant et cette situation
amenerait inevitablement des difficultes, car ces
zones sont les plus importantes de Jerusalem.
Enfin, dans la convention entre Israel et la
Syrie, qui vient d'etrc conc1ue, la question qui a
ete la plus difficite a resoudre et qui a demande
de longues negociations est celle d'une zone demilitarisee entre les forces israeliennes et syriennes, pour laquelle le recours au."Il: observateurs
des Nations Unies a ete prevu.
Par consequent, dans chacune de ces trois conventions. outre les fonctions ordinaires d'assis~
tance aux parties et de controle de l' execution des
conventions, figure une disposition speciale imposant l'emploi d'observateurs des Nations Unies.
Dans ces conditions,. bien que le principe du retrait du personnel de surveillance de la treve soit
entierem.ent fonde - et, en general, ce retrait a
deja. ete effectue - il faut qu'un noyau d'obser..,
vateurs soit maintenu sur place jusqu'au moment
ou des traites de paix d6finitifs seront signes, ou
jusqu'au moment ou les parties elles-memes conviendront de modifier les conventions d'armistice
de fa<;on telle que l'utilisation ou la presence
d'observateurs des Nations Unies ne soit plus
necessaire.
J e tiens done a attirer particulierement l'attention du representant de I'Union sovietique sur ce
qui precede, etant donne les consequences que son
amendement entramerait inevitablement en ce qui
concerne les conventions d'armistice.
M. MANOUILSKY~ (Rel'ublique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine) "(traduit du russe) : La delegation de la RSS d'Ukraine appuie la proposition
d'ajourncment du President, car, avant de definir
son attitude, cUe voudrait etudier la proposition
qu'it a faite en tant que representant de l'Union
sovietique, ainsi que le projet de resolution commun presente par les delegations du Canada et de
la France.

The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR, howToutefois, la deIegation de la RSS d'Ukraine
ever, wishes to make one observation.
voudrait faire une remarque.
A summary perusal of the draft resolution subIt a suffi a la delegation de la RSSd'Ukraine
mitted by Canada and France, and the remarks de parcourir le texte du projet de resolution comwe have heard from Mr. Bunche, have caused the mun du Canada et de la France et d'entendre les
delegation of the Ukrainian SSR to entertain observations faites par M. Bunche, pour eprouver
seriQus misgivings. I shall explain the nature of . des doutes fort serieux, dont je vais expliquer la
those misgivings.
nature.
Comme on le sait, les Etats interesses ont deja.
We all know that the States concerned have
.concluded a long-term armistice. Assurances conc1u un armis~ce de tongue duree. Nous avons
~ave been given to us here that this long-term
entendu id des declarations affirmant que cet
armistice has reaohed a stage at which the armistice est entre 4ans une phase telle, qu'en
services of a United Nations Mediator are in realite les services du Mediateurdes Nations
fact no longer necessary. All members of the Unies ne sont plus necessaires. It me semble que
Council appear to be agreed on that point. Why nous sommes tous d'accord sur ce point. On se
then should all possible future conflicts be re- demande alorspourquoi charger un seul pays, a
'ferred to one State--the United States-as savoir les Etats-Unis - en la personne du chef
represented by the United Nations Chief of d'etat-major des Nations Unies - du reglement
Staff? That is what we fail to understand.
de tous les differend~ qui pourraient surgir. ?,foila
ce que nous ne pouvons comprendre.
It me semble que ces fonctions incombent au
.. It seems to me that the Security Council exists
for that purpose. The Security Council has so Conseit de securite. Jusqu'a present c'est lui qui
. 'far dealt with these questions and, in its own s'est occupe de 'ces questions et, de son propre
opinion; has done so quite successfully, mainly avis, it s'en serait acquitte d'une maniere satis;.

I

.t

thanks to the efforts of Mr. Bund.e, The
Security Council haJ achieved some results.
Why now abandon this position and -change to a
totally new course by handlOg over all these
questions to a single State?
I feel that this is irrational. The Acting Mediator has referrt:d to the Agreements concluded
between Israel and Syria and between Egypt and
Israel. If those States can be trusted to implement the provisions of a prolonged armistice,
"'hen I should be ivc1ined to think that they could
also be trusted to deal with other matt1:lrs which
may arise through certain disagreements or in
conuexion with the settlement of various problems.
That is why I have some doubts about the
proposal made by Canac:'a and France and which
Mr. Bunche appears to favour.

Those are the ranarks I wished to make.

faisante, grace surtout aux services rendus par
M. Bunche. Le Conseil de securite a obten'\ cer.
tains resultats. Pourquoi donc changer maintf,....
nant la situation et adopter une methode tout cl.
fait nouvelle en transmettant toutes ces questions
a un seul Etat?
J'estime que cette solution n'est pas logique.
Le Mediateur par interim s'est rHere aux con.
ventions concIues entre Israel et la Syrie et entre
I'Egypce et Israel. Si nous faisons confiance a ces
Etats lorqu'it s'agit d'appliquel' les clauses d'un
armistice de longue dun~e, nous pouvons, me
semble-t-il, leur faire egalement confiance en ce
qui conceme le reglement des autres questions
qui pourraient surgir au cours de tel ou tel debat,
ou la solution de tel ou tel probU:me.
Void la raison pour laquelle j'ai des doutes au
sujet de la valeur de la proposition faite par les
delegations du Canada et de la France, et a.
laqueUe, apparemment, M. Bunche semble vouloir
se rallier.
Telles sont les remarques que je voulais faire.

I believe it might clarify our views on the
different proposals which are before us if we
could also hear the opinions of the Parties to those
Armistice Agreements with regard to this special
question. I should therefore like to suggest that
the President should invite the representatives of
Egypt, Syria and Israel to pronounce themselves
on this problem.

M. LUNDE (Norvege) (traduit de l' anglais) :
Le Conseil de securite vient d'entendre M. Bunche
expliquer pourquoi it estime necessaire de maintenir un certain nombre d'observateurs des Nations
Unies en Palestine. 11 a d'autre part expose le
rapport qui existe entre l'execution des conventions d'armistice et la presence d'observateurs des
Nations Unies.
Je pense que notre position sur les differentes
propositions dont nous sommes saisis pourrait se
preciser encore si nous pouvions entendre egatement 1'0pinion des parties aux conventions d'ar. mistice sur la question. Je me permets donc de
suggerer que le President invite les representants
de l'Egypte, de la Syrie et d'IsraeI a se prononcer
a cet egard.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian) ':
I presume that if the Argentine representative
does not object, it would be desirable to allow
the representatives of the States mentioned by
the Norwegian representative to state their views
at once.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe) : Je suppose
que, si le representant de l'Argentine n'a pas
d'objection a souIever, it serait souhaitable de
donner maintenant la parole aux representantf.
des Etats que le representant de la Norvege a
mentionnes dans sa declaration.

Mr. LUNDE. (Norway): The Security Council
has just heard the explanation given by Mr.
Bunche as to why he thinks it necessary to maintain a certain group of observers in Palestine,
and as to the relationship which this group has
with the Armistice Agreements.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): I willingly
accede to the request just submitted by the representative of l\orway. I shall not have to spea.k
at great length, especially in view of what Dr.
Bunche has told us in this connexion.
Dr. Bunche, we all realize, is quite familiar
with the situation and with the machinery of, the
Armistice Agreements, in the conclusion of which
he has contributed so much. I quite agree with
Dr. Bunche and with the President that the
principle of withdrawing all supervision is a very
sound one indeed. I unhesjtatingly subscribe to
it as a principle; it is in line with our own point
of view, both of Egypt as such and as a .Member
of the United Nations. No one wants outside
supervision if it can be helped. Such supervision
is being reduced or will be still further rtduced
to the absolute minimum,·· and it might be completely dispensed with in the near future. I hope
that the President, as representative of the Soviet
Union, will not stres6 his objection to the present
proposed supervision of the truce to the extent
stipulated in the Armistice Agreements. I trust
that he will take into serious· consideration the

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey. (Eg-ypte) (traduit de

l' anglais) : J'accede volontiers a la demande que

vient de presenter le representant de la Norvege.
Il ne me faudra pas pader tres longtemps etant
donne notamment ce que vient de nousdire
M. Bunche a ce sujet.
N ous comprenons tous que M. Bunche est tout
a fait au courant de la situation et du mecanisme
des conventions d'armistice a la conclusion desqueUes it a apporte une si grande contribution.
Je partage entierement l'opinion de M. Bunche
et du President suivant laqueIIe le principe du
retrait de tout controle est tout a fait fonde. Je
souscris a ce pnncipe sans hesitation; it correspond a notre propre point de vue, celui de
l'Egypte en tant qu'Etat comme en tant que ,
Membre des Nations Unies. Nul ne desire un
controle exterieur s'it peut etre evite. On procede
actuellement a la reduction· de ce controle etil
sera reduit encore dav,antage jusqu'au strict
minimum; it est possible que 1'0n puisse s'en passer
completement dans un· proche avenir: J'espere
que le President, en sa qualite de representant
deI'Union sovietique, n'insistera pas sur l'objection
qu'il a faite contre le controIe de la treve actueIle-

.............

1.1.

wisdom of not creating here anything that would
clash with those Agreements, which after all are
instruments not only of the Parties but also of
the United Nations.

ment propose, dans les limites stiputees aux conventions d'armistice. Je suis sur qu'i1 prendra
serieusement en consideration le fait qu'il serait
sage de ne rien formuler ici qui soit en contradiction avec ces conventions qui, apres tout, ne constituent pas seulement des instruments entre les
parties mais egalement des instruments des
Nations Unies.

Mr. EBAN (Israel): My Government stands
for the precise and meticulous observance of the
Armistice Agreements as they stand. We therefor favour only the retention of such United
Nations personnel as may be required by the
various texts and paragraphs of those Agreements voluntarily concluded between the Parties.

M. EBAN (Israel) (trad1,it de l'anglais):
La position prise par mon Gouvernement est celle
d'un respect strict et meticuleux des conventions
d'armistice telles qu'elles se presentent. C'est
pourquoi nous sommes partisans du maintien du
seul personnel des Nations Unies que peut exiger
l'aiJplication des divers textes et paragraphes de
ces conventions librement condues entre les
,parties.
Aux terme.. des conventions d'armistice. les
parties elles-memes ont institue des commissions
mixtes d'armistice et ont invite les Nations Unies
a foumir les presidents pour ces commissions.
Les parties ant egalemeut admis qu'il peut y avoir
des circonstances dans lesquelles des observateurs
peuvent exercer des fonctions utiles concernant
des questions particulieres soulevees par les conventions d'armistice. D'autre part, nous considerOllS que l'Organisme charge de la surveillance de
la treve doit etre dissous en tant que teI. A cet
egard, l'amendement presente au nom de l'Union
sovietique exprime effectivement un sentiment qui
rencontre l'appui des deux parties et de M.
Bunche lui-meme.
Je crois que le Conseil de securite resoudrait le
probleme s'il decidait le retrait de tout le personnel d'observation, a l'exception de celui
qu'exige l'application des dispositions des conventions d'armistice elles-memes. Si cette derniere
exception etait ajoutee a l'amendement de l'Union
sovietique, un resultat satisfaisant serait atteint.
C'est pourquoi' je suggere que le Conseil de securite decide la dissolution de l'organisme des
Nations Unies charge de la surveillance de la
treve, mais en meme temps prenne les mesures
necessaires pour le. maintien du personnel
qu'exige 1'application des divers articles des conventionsd'armistice. La situation d'ensemble,
telle qu.e nons la comprenons, est que la presence
de personnel des Nations Unies dcl.11s une partie .
quelconque de la region ne peut maintenant etre
lustjfiee que parJ'accord, le consentement oU l'invitation des parties, tels qu'ils sont exprimes dans
les conventions d'armistice.
Alors que l~s conventions d'armistice requierent effectivement la presenced'un certain personnel determine pour aider les parties dans l'aJ;>plication des conventions d'armistice, je voispar
contre tres peu de raisons justifiant la clause
figurant au septieme paragraphe du projetc(>Inmun de resolution du Canada et de-la France,
lequel prevoit le maintiend'un tel personnel pour
la surveillance et l'application de la suspension
d'armes. Ma delegation estime que la suspension
d'armes.. c~nstitue une obligation imperieuseque
les parties ant mutuellement et librement acceptee
et qu'i1 suffiraitque, dans ce paragraphe, le Conseil de securite prie le Secretaire general de prendre les dispositions necessaires pour maintenir le
service du personnel qui pourra etre necessaire
pour aider les parties aux conventions d'armistice
dans la surveillance de l'application et du respect
de!i dispositions de ces conventions, tout en omettant de declarer qu'il serait necessaire de mainte-

U~der the Armistice Agreements the Parties
themselves have established Mixed Armistice
Commissions, and have invited the United
Nations to provide chairmen for those Commissions. The Parties have also agreed that there
may be circumstances in which observers may
exercise useful functions in speci,fic questions
arising from the Armistice Agreements. On the
other hand, it is our understanding that the
Truce Supervision Organization proper is to be
dissolved. In this respect the amendment submitted on behalf of the Soviet Union does express
a sentiment whix:h has the support of both
Parties and of Dr. Bunche himself.

I believe that the Security Council would meet
the situation if it did call for the withdrawal of
all. observer personnel except those specified as
being required by the texts of the Armistice
Agreements themselves. If this latter exception
were added to the Soviet Union amendment, a
satishctory result would be achieved. What I
suggest, 'therefore, is that the Security Council
might call for the disbandment of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization, but
simultaneously make provision for retaining such
personnel as are required by the various articles
of the Armistice Agreements. The general position as we understand it is that the sole authority
for the presence of United Nations personnel in
any part of this area is now the agreement, the
consent or the invitation of the Parties as expressed in the Armistice Agreements.
While the Armistice Agreements do require
the presence of certain specified. personnel to
assist the Parties in maintaining the Armistice
Agreements, I see little substance for the clause
occurring in the seventh paragraph of the
joint Canadian-French draft resolution, which
arranges for the maintenance of such personnel
for observing and maintaining the cease-fire. It
seems to my delegation that the cease"fiTe is a
mandatory obligation which the Parties. have
mutually and voluntarily acceptt"-l, and that it
would be sufficient if in that paragraph the
Security Council were· to request the SecretaryGent>ral to arrange· for. the continued service of
such personnel as may be necessary in assisting
the Parties to the Armi8tice Agreements in the
supervision of the application and observance
:of the terms of those Agreements, omitting the
reference to the continued necessity for such
.rnpersolinel to observe and 1T\aintain the cease-fire,

the principle being that the maintenance and
observance of the cease-fire--as the representative of Egypt has already pointed out-is not a
matter of dottbt but is a voluntarily accepted
commitment of the two Parties. While advocating
the retention of such chairmen of Mixed Armistice Commissions and observers as the Parties
have agreed to maintain under the texts of the
Armistice Agreements, my delegation would echo
the possibility expressed by the representative of
Egypt that when these Armistice Agreements
become more stable and more secure it might
be possible to secure further reductions and withdrawals.

nir du personnel pour la surveillance et l'applica~
tion de la suspension d'armes, le principe etant
que, comme le representant de l'Egypte l'a deja
souligne, l'application et le respect de la suspen
sion d'armes ne font pas de doute, mais constituent un engagement auquel les deux parties ant
librement souscrit. Tout en se prononc;ant pour le
maintien des presidents des commissions mi:xtes
d'armistice et des observateurs que les parties ont
accepte de maintenir aux termes des dispos~tions
des conventions d'armistice, ma delegation partage 1'0pinion exprimee par le representant de
l'Egypte quant cl la possibilite d'effectuer de nouvelles reductions et de nouveaux retraits lorsque
I'application de ces conventions d'armistice deviendra plus stable et plus sure.

My final word refers to the United Nations
Chief of Staff of the Truce Supervision Organi~ation. The reSiponsibilities exercised by him
derive from the Armistice Agreements themselves. He appears to us as a representative not
of any particular country but of the Security
Council itself, and presumably the Security,
Council is qualified to appoint anyone it sees fit
to assume those functions.

J'aborde enfin la question du chef d'etat-major
de l'Organisme des Nations Unies charge de la
surveillance de la treve. Les responsabilites qu'il
assume decoulent des conventions d'armistice
elles-memes. I1 nous appalait non comme un representant d'un certain pays, mais comme un
representant du Conseil de securite lui-meme et
il semble que celui-ci est qualifie pour confier ces
fonctions a. quiconque lui parait .indique.

. It seems to me that no real trouble exists here
except- perhaps a certain contradiction in the
name; or with the adoption of the CanadianFrench draft resolution, whether ,amended or
not, there will be no truce and no Truce Supervision Organization, yet the officer charged with
assisting the Parties to observe the Armistice
Agreements is called by the now obsolete name
of Chief of Staff of the Truce Supervision
Organization. This anomaly derives .from the
fact that the Armistice Agreements were drafted
while the truce supervision was still in existence
and when that title still had force.

I1 me semble qu'il n'y a, en l'occurrence, aUCtlne
difficuJ.te, si ce n'est peut-etre une certaine contradiction "da:J.s le titre; en efIet, a. la suite de l'adoption du projet de resolution du Canada et de la
Franc~, que ce projet soit ou non amende, i1 n'y
aura pas de treve et pas d'organisme charge de
la surveillance de la treve; malgre cela, l'officier
charged'aider les parties a. surveiller I'application des conventions d'armistice porte le titre,
desormais perime, de chef d'etat-major de l'Organisme charge de la surveillance de la treve.
Cette anomalie decoule du fait que les conventions
d'armistice furent redigees alors que la surveillance de la treve etait encore en vigueur et que
ce titre avait encore une signification.
Toutefois, si le Conseil de securite et toutes les
parties comprennent pleinement que le maintien
de ce titre ne prolonge pas pour autant les fonctions et pouvoirs particuliers de la surveillance
de la treve, je crois: que cette inexactitude peut
tres bien subsister sans inconvenient et peut etre
consideree en tenant compte des circonstances
purement historiques.
Nous considerons que les fonctions et pouvoirs
de cet officier sont exclusivement ceux qui decoulent des dispositions des conventions d'armistice et du projet de resolution en discussion, s'il
est adopte.

However, if the Security Council and all tlle
parties fully understand that this survival of
name does not prolong the particular functions
and authorities of truce supervision, then I think
that the inaccuracy can well survive without
harm and be recognized in its purely historical
context.
Our interpretation is that the functions and
authorities of this officer are those derivt:.d
exclusively from the terms of the Armistice
Agreements. and from the current draft resolution, if it is adopted.
Mr. Rafik ASHA (Syria) : I fully support the
views presented by the representative of Egypt.
In reading the Armistice Agreement recently
signed between SyrIa and Israel, we find artide
VII, paragraph 1 which reads as follows:
"The execution of the provisions of this Agreement shall be supervised by a Mixed Armistice
Commission composed of five members, of whom
each Party to this Agreement shall designate
two, and whose Chainilanshall be the United
Nations Chief of Staff of the Truce Supervision
Organiz<ltion or a senior officer from the Observer personnel . . . ".
My delegation is in favour-in complete favour
-of the withdrawal of all personnel, provided

Q

M. Rafik ASHA (Syrie) (traduit de l'ang1ais) :

Je partage entierement l'opinion exprimee par le

representant de I'Egypte. Dans la convention
d'armistice recemment signe entre la Syrie et
Israel, Sf: trouve l'article VII, dont le paragraphe 1 est ainsi redige:
"L'execution des dispositions de la presente
convention sera controlee par une commission
mixte d'armistice, composee de cinq membres,
chaque partiea. la presente convention designant
deux representants et la presidence etant assuree
par le chef ,d'etat-major de l'Organisation du
contrale de la treve des Nations Unies ou par tt11
officier superieur qu'il de.signera parmi les
observateurs ..."
Ma delegation est en faveur - entier~ment ~
faveur - du retrait de' tout personnel, a coud

A

that the terms of the Armistice Agreement are
fully complied with. Therefo~, I say that we
are in favour of retaining only the necessary
number of personnel referred to in the various
Armistice Agreements.

tion que les dispositions de la convention d'armis~
tice soient pleinement respectees. C'est !,ourquoi
je declare que nous desirons ne voir mantenir
que le personnel necessaire dont il est question
dans les diverses conventions d'armistice.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Russicm):
I should like to ask the Argentine representative
whether his speech will be brief or whether he
will require more than ten minutes? In the latter
case, perhaps he wi.n agree to postpone his speech
till our next meetmg.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe) : J e voudrais
demtnc1er au representant de l'Argentine si son
intervention sera courte ou s'il aura besoin de
plus de dix minutes. Dans ce demier cas, le representant de l'Argentine consentira peut-etre a remettre son intervention a la seance suivante.

Mr. ARCE (Argentina) (translated from
Spanish): I just wanted to say a few words
on a question of procedure, without intervening
on a subject which could not be clearer than it
is already. I wish we could finish once and for
all with' the Palestine question, as the parties
..:oncerned have already finished with it.
I have read in the newspapers-which is the
only way we know when the Security Council
is meeting-that the President plans a meeting
for this afternoon to discuss the Security
Council's report to the Assembly.. I have not
finished sttldying that report; I have alterations
and additions to propose and I am not ready to
discuss that subject this afternoon. I would prefer that the President should fix a definite day,
for that discussion so that all the members of
the Council might know where they stand. Then
I would like to propose that, when this meeting
is adjourned, we should go on discussing the
same subject this afternoon and see if we cannot
conclude our disctJ.ssion today. If that is not
possible, we could continue the discussion this
afternoon and finish it as soon as possible.
What I wish to propose formally is that we
should not discuss the Security Council's report
this afternoon, and in that connexion I would
ask the President to fix either Thursday 0'Friday of this week, or one day next week, for
that discussion in order to give the members of
the Council time to study the report and to propose any alterations they may consider necessary.
The· PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
I should like to make the following explanations
in connexion with the Argentine representative's
proposal. I must draw his attention to the fact
that the Security Council's agenda, which includes the consideration of the Security Council's
report to the General Assembly, was circulated
as early as 4 August as document SjAgenda/436.
Mor~over, the draft of the Secur
Council's
report to the General Assembly was cliculated to
members of the Council at the end of last month.
The Secretariat informs me that that report was
distributed to members of the Council on 27 July.
Thus the consideration of the Security Council's
report has long been on the Council's agenda for
its meeting of 8 August, at 3 p.m.
In regard to the Argentine representative's
proposal that this afternoon's meeting which will
open at 3 o'clock should be devoted to the further
consideration of the Palestine question.. I think
. that it would put a number of delegations in a
y difficu:"t position. The representative of the

III't,ver

M. ARCE (Argentine) (traduit de l'espagnol):

Je voudrais dire quelques mots apropos d'une

question de procedure, sans me meler d'un sujet
deja si c1airqu'il ne saurait l'etre davantage. Je
suis, en efIet, desireux de voir le Conseil en terminer une bonne fois avec la question palestinienne, puisque les interesses, eux, en ont deja
termine.
J'ai appris par les jourmiux, c;;.r c'est la le seul
moyen de savoir quand se reunit le Conseil de
securite, que le President se proposait de convoquer le Conseil pour cet apres-midi, afin d'aborder l'examen du rapport du Conseil de securite a
l'AssembIee. Or, je n'ai pas termine 1'etude de
ce rapport; j'ai des modifications et des additions
a proposer et je ne suis pas pret a participer cet
apres-midi a un debat sur cette question. Je prefererais qu~ le President fixe pour. cette discussion un jour determine, afin que tous les membres du Conseil sachent a quoi s'en tenir. D'autre
part, si le President estime devoir lever la seance,
je propose que nous poursuiviorrs cet apres-midi
l'examen de la question qui nous occupe actuellement pour essayer d'en terminer dans la journee.
Si toutefois ce n'etait pas possible, noUs pourrions
poursuivre le debat cet apres-midi pour en finir
des que possible.
Ce que je propose formellement, c'est que nous
ne nous occupioas pas cet apres-midi du rapport
du Conseil de securite; a ce sujet, je voudrais demander au President de fixer, pour l'examell de
ce rapport, soit jeudi ou vendrediqe .sette se.,.
maine, soit un jour de la semaine prochaine, afin
de donner aux membres du Conseil le temps de
l'etudier et de proposer les modificationsqu'ils
jugeront utiles.
Le PRESIDENT (traclltit d1to russe) : J e voudrais
donner les que1ques eclaircissements suivants au
sujetde la proposition que le representant de
l'Argentine vient de presenter. Je dois attirer
l'attentlDn de ce representant sur le fait que
l'ordre du jour du Conseil, qui prevoyait l'examen
du rapport du Conseil de securite a l'Assemblee
generale, a ete distribue des le 4 aout [S/ Agendaj
436]. De plus, le projet de rapport du Conseil
de securite a l'Assemblee generale a ete distribue
aux membres du Conseil a la fin du mois demier.
Le Secretariat m'informe que ce rapport a ete
distribue le 27 juillet. Il s'ensuit que la discussiotj
du rapport du .Conseil de securite est inscrite
depuis longtemps a l'ordre du jour de la seance
que le Conseil de securite doit tenir le. 8 aout, a
15 heures.
En ce qui conceme la proposition dl1 representant de l'Argentine, tendant a consacrer a
l' examen de la question palestinienne la seance qui
doit s'ouvrir aujourd'hui a 15 heures, je pense
qu'elle mettra bien des delegations dans une situation ·difficile. Le representant de laRSS d'Ukraine

nous a deja dit qu'i! voudrait retarder de plu~
sieurs jours la prochaine seance du Conseil de
securite consacree a, la question palestinienne.
D'autres delegations, et parmi eUes celle de
l'URSS, se trouvent probablement dans la merl1e
situation; e1les desirent etudier le projet commun
du Can<lda et de la France et les amendements de
I'Umon sovietique qui ont ete distribuees aujourd'hui en cours de seance. Nous avons entendu
les representants de l'Egypte, d'Israel et de la
Syrie et nous avons ainsi deja. quelques elements
additionnels que tous les .membres du Conseil de
secudte voudront etudier. Nous ne pouvons done
pas continuer la discussion de la question palestimenne aujottrd'hui a 1S heures..
I think, therefore, that in accordance with the
Je pense, par consequent, qu'en conformite de
agenda, which was prepared as early as 4 August,' 1'0rdre du jour etabli des le 4 aout, nous devrions
we should meet at 3 p,m. today to discuss the nous reunir aujourd'huia 15 lleures pour
Security, Council's report. I expect that we shall examiner le rapport du Conseil de securite.,je
hold one more meeting on that question. Thus, if suppose que notts devrons consacrer encore une
there are any amendments which members are autre seance a cette question. Ceux qui desirent
unable to submit today, they will be able to do so apporter des amendements, et qui ne sont pas en
at the following meeting.
mesure de les presenter aujourd'hui, pourraient
, ainsi lespresenter a la seancesuivante.
As to the meeting on the Palestine question,
En ce qui concerne la seance qui doit etre
it will take place on Thursday, 11 August, at consacree a la discussion de la question pales10.30 a.m..
tinienne, nous la fixerons au jeudi 11 aout, a
10 h. 30.
M. ARCE (Argentine) (traduit de l'espagnol) :
Mr. ARCE (Argentina) (translated' from
Spanish): In view of the reasons 'given by the Etant donne les raisons invoquees par le PresiPresident I will certainly nbt insist that we dent, je ne vois pas d'inconvenient a. renoncer a
should continue discussing the Palestine question ce que' nous poursuivions cet apres-midi l' examen
this afternoon. I do not wish in any way to . de la q-ilestion palestinienne. J e ne veux susciter
place other delegations in a difficult position, but de difficultes a aucune delegation; mais, pour
for the same reason I ask that the Argentine cette meme raison, je demande que 1'0n ne mette
delegation should not be placed in a difficult pas la delegation de l'Argentine dans une situaposition by discussion of the rc::port this aftr::f"-' tion difficilea propos de I'examen du rapport du
noon. I most earnestly request that the meeting Conseil a l'Assemblee generale. C'est pourquoi
. should not be held today and that a new date je demande formellement que la seal).ce prevue
should be fixed.
n'ait· pas lieu et qu'une nouvelle date soit fixee a
cet efIet.
.
Le President a declare que notification de la
The President stated that notification of the
meeting was sent on 4 August. So many docu- seance de cet apres-midi avait ete faite des le
ments are sent to the delegations . that many of 4 aout. Or, les delegations re<;oivent tant ae
them think they are sent to be put in the. waste papiers que beaucoup d'entre elles en arrivent a
paper basket. In any case, I would like to point supposer qu'on les leur envoie pour les mettre au
out that if the document arrived on 4 August, panier. De toutefa<;on, je tiens a faire remarquer
the delegation could only consider it on 5 August, que, si I'avis est date du 4, la delegation n'a pu
Which was very close to the weekend of 6 and 7_ commencer a en prendre' connaissance que le 5,
August. Today is 8 August so that we have veille du week-end des 6et 7 aout. Nous sommes
certainly not had time either to consider the aujou.rd'hui le 8, de sorte quenous n'avons nullenotification about the meeting or to' read the ment eu le temps non seulement de prendre conreport, which is extremely large and cumbersome naissance de la convocation, mais encore de lire
and requires careful study-if we are. to avoid le rapport, tres long et tres complexe, qu'il faut
the un!ilateral statements which appear fairly etudieravec le plus gr~nd soin pour eviter les
frequently in such reports.
.
declarations unilaterales qui paraissent assez frequentes dans des documents de ce genre.
I therefore do not insist .that- the Palestine
. En consequence, je renonce a. ce que la quesquestion should be discussed this afternoon, but I tion palestinienne soit reprise cet apres-midi, mais
request the. Council to decide not to start the' dis- je demande au Conseil de decider.de ne pas comcussion of the. Security Council's report for ,at mencer .a etudier son rapport avant trois ou
least three or four days, so that I might· finish quatre jours; dans l'intervalle, je pourrai en
reading it and prepa.re the alterations and correc- achever la lecture et mettre att point les modifications which I wish to make.
tions et les corrections que je desire y apporter.
Ukrainian SSR has already stated that hEl would
prefer the Security Council's next meeting on the
Palestine question to be postponed for a few
days. I think that other delegations, including
that of the USSR, are in the same position and
would wish to study the joint draft submitted
by Canada attd France as well as the amendments
of the Soviet Union, which were circulated at
today's meeting. We have heard the representatives of Egypt, Israel and Syria and thus have
some additional material which all the members
of the Security Council will have to study. We
cannot, therefore, continue the consideration of
the Palestine question at 3 p.m. today.

The PRESIDENT (translated' from Russicm.):
If the Argentine representative is not ready to
discuss the report, J certainly have no intentioll
of placing him in an awkward position. When
does he think he will be prepared to begin·the.
consideration of the report?· .

Le PRESIDENT (traduit dUHtsse) : Je n'ai evidemment pas l'intention de placer le representant
de l'Argentine dans une situation difficile s'il n'est
pas preta prendre part a. la discussion du. rapport. J e voudrais savoir, cependant, quand il se
sentira preta. commencer la discussion de ce
rapport.·
........-i

Mr. ARCE (Argentina): On Wednesday.
Mr. AUSTIN (United States of Ameri~a): I
want first to thank the President for h15 considerate attention to the convenience of representatives which has been shown here two or
three times, particularly in connexion with my
own convenience on a former occasion. I myself
was about to suggest Wednesday when the representative of Argentina suggested it. I therefore
endorse his suggestion that we meet ol:}. Wednesday for the purpose of taking up the Security
Council's report to the General Assembly.

M. ARCE (Argentine) (tradu.it de l'anglais):
Mercredi.
M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (trad1+it
de l'ang1ais): Je desire d'abord remercier le
President pour l'attention avec laquelle i1 a veille
a tenir compte des convenances des representants
et dont i1 a fait preuve a deux ou trois reprises,
particulierement en ce qui me concerne moi-meme,
en une precedente occasion. J'allais moi-meme
suggerer la date de mercredi lorsque le representant de I'Argentine l'a proposee. J'appuie donc
sa proposition tendant a ce que nons nous reunissions mercredi pour l'examen du rapport du
Conseil de stkurite a l'Assemblee generale.

Le general McNAUGHTON (Canada) (traduit
General McNAUGHTON (Canada): Because or.
long-standing engagements Thursday is a difficult de l'anglais): En raison de dispositions prises
day. for me to p~rticipa'i:e. in further consid~ra­ depuis longtemps, il me serait difficile de partion of the Palestme questlOn. I am wondermg ticiper jeudi a la suite de l'examen de la question
therefore, whether it would meet the convenience palestinienne. C' est pourquoi je me demande s'il
of the President and of other representatives if. ne conviendrait pas au President et aux autres
we were to deal with the Palestine question on representants que nous traitions mercredi de la
Wednesday and with the report on Thursday. question palestinienne et jeudi du rapport.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe) : Les difficulThe PRESIDENT (translated from RussWn):
tes
s'amoncellent. Je suppose que l'on pourrait
New difficulties seem to be piling' up. I think
we might act in the following way. A meeting proceder comme suit: fixer a mercredi 10 aout
for the consideration of the report of the Security la seance qui devra etre consacree a la discusCouncil could be called for Wednesday, 10 Aug..: sion du rapport du Conseil de securite. Si le
ust. If the Canadian representative is unable to representant du Canada ne peut pas assister
attend the Security Council's meeting on Thurs- jeudi a la seance du Conseil de securite pour
day, 11 August, to discuss the Palestine question, prendre part a la discussion de la question paleswe could call a meeting for Friday morning, tinienne, nous reporterons cette seance a vendredi
12 August. Since, as I suppose, some delegations matin 12 aout. Etant dQnne que certaines delegac(lnsider that they should inform their Govern- tions desirent sans doute informer leur Gouvemements of the joint proposals of Canada and ment du projet de resolution commun presente
France and of the proposals of the Soviet Union, pa:: le Canada et la France ainsi que des proposia meeting on Wednesday, 10 August, would not tions de l'Union sovietique, nous ne disposerions
give them sufficient time to do so. They would pas d'assez de temps pour lenr permettre dej le
be unable, in one day, to communicate with their faire, si nous fixions a jeudi la seance du Conseil
Governments and receive their instructions. In de securite qui doit etre consacree a la discussion
this case too we should avoid placing members .de la question palestmienne. En un jour ces deleof the Security Council in an awkward position. gations n'auraient pas le temps de communiquer
If the Canadian representative is unable to attend avec leur Gouvernement et de recevoir les insthe Security Council's meeting on Thursday, tructions necessaires. Dans ce cas non plus, nons
11 August, we are ready to compromise by post- ne devons pas mettre les representants du Conseil
poning the meeting till Friday, 12 August. I de securite dans une situation difficile. Si le reprethink that Wednesday would be too earlyt one sentant du Canada ne petit pas etre present jeudi
day will obviously not be enough before the con- 11 aout a la seance du Conseil, peut-etre pourtinuation of the discussion of the Palestine rions nous tenir compte de son desir en reportant
question.
le seance a vendredi 12 aoUt. J e considere que
mercredi serait trop tot; it est evident ql.1l il ne
suffira pas d'un jour pour continuer la discussion
de la question palestinienne.
Mr. MANUILSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from French): Since the
~resident has decided to postpone the next meet~ng of i:?e <:ouncil, I wish ~o ask those delegations wh1ch mtend to s~lbmitamendmen:ts to the
dr~f~ report,. to be good enough to do so in
wntmg, so as to facilitate the work of the Security
Council during the discussion of that draft
report.

M. MANOUILSKY (Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine) : Puisque le President a decide
derenvoyer a plus tard la seance, j'exprime le
desir que les delegations .qui ont l'intention de
presenter des amendements au projet de rapport
veuillent bien le. faire par ecrit; afin de faciliter
les travaux du Conseil de securite au cours. du
debat sur ledit projet de rapport.

Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America): I
do not want to make it difficult for the President.
I kn- w how difficult it is to gl::t eleven men to
a.gree .on· a date,especially when many of them
are accepting invitations to speak elsewhere.

M. AUSTIN (Etats..U nis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglais) : Je ne desire pas rendre difficile la
tache duPresident. J e sais combien il est difficile
d'arriver a mettre onze personnes d'accord· sur
une datel particulierement lorsque beaucoup d'entre e1les acceptent des invitations a prendre la
parole ailleurs.
le me demande s'it serallt possible quenous
examinions la question palestinienne jeudi niatin

. I wonder whether it would be possible for us
IlirDnsider th.e.Pale.st.ine. qu..es.. tion on Th.ursday
ri

..

'~".".'

morning, and to begin the study of the report
on Thursday afternoon. I have an obligation to
address the Tanglewood School on Friday. If
the Council decided to meet on Friday, it would
require my cancelling that appointment which I
would, of course do, if necessary.

et que nous entamions l'etude du rapport jeudi
apres-midi. J e dois prendre la parole vendredi a.
Tanglewood School. Si le Conseil decidait de
se reunir vendredi, je devrais me liberer dd cet
engagement, ce que le ferai, bien entendu, si
necessaire.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
I am now in a very difficult position. We shall
have to meet either on Wednesday, 10 August, at
3 p.m., to discuss the Security Council's report,
and continue the consideration of the Palestine
question on Thursday morning, 11 August, or
we shall have to postpone the discussion of the
Palestine question until next week. But I presume that if the Canadian representative is unable to be prest'lnt himself on Thursday, 11 August, he will probably be able to delegate his alternate to take his place. I think that it would be
more expedient for us to· meet on Thursday,
11 August, at 10.30 a.m., and I appeal to the
Canadian representative to help us in this matter.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit dt~ r'usse): Je me
trouve it present dans une situation tres difficile.
Ou bien il faudra que nous siegions mercredi,
10 aout it 15 heures, pour examiner le rapport
du Conseil de securite, et continuer jeudi matin
11 aout la discussion de la question palestinienne,
ou bien it faudra que nous reportions la discus~
sion de la question palestinienne it la semaine prochaine. Je suppose, neanmoins, que si le representant du Canada ne peut pas assisterf en perscnne it la seance de jeudi, it sera peut-etre en
mesure d'y deleguer son adjoint. Il me semble
que, malgre tout, la solution la plus logique est
de nous reunir jeudi 11 aout it 10 h. 30; je
voudrais demander au representant du Canada de .
nous aider it ·trancher cette question.

Le general McNAUGHTON (Canada) (traduif
General McNAUGRTON (Canada): I am in'
your hands.. The Canadian delegation will fall in de l'anglais): Je suis it votre disposition. La
line with anything the President wishes to decide. delegation du Canada se rangera it toute decision
que desirera prendre le President.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe) : Dans ce cas,
je remercie le representant du Canada.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
That being the case, I thank the Canadian representative.
The Council will hold a closed meeting on
Wednesday, 10 August, at 3 p.m. to discuss the
Security Council's draft report to the General
Assembly; it will also hold a meeting at 10.30 a.m.
on Thursday, 11 August, to continue the consideration of the Palestine question.

Le mercredi 10 aout, it 15 heures, le Conseil
de securite tiendra une seance it huis-clos, consa~
cree cl. l'exarnen du projet de rapport a l'Assemblee generale; le jeudi 11 aout, it 10 h. 30, le. .
Conseil poursuivra la discussion de la question
pale.stinienne.

The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

La seance est levee a 13 h. 30.

·l

DEPOS'TAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNJ:
ARGliNTINA-ARGENYlNE
Editorial Sudam6ricana S.A.
Msina 500
BUENOS AmEs
AUsTRAUA-AU~TRAUE

H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George -Street
'SYDNEY, N. S. W.

BELGIUM-BELGIQUE
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A.
14·22 rue du Persil
BRUXELLES

BOLlVIA-BOLlVIE
Libreria Cientifica y Literana
Avenida 16 de JOOo, 216
Casilla 972
LAP.iz

CANADA
The Ryersoll Press
299 -Queen Street ;West
TORONTO
.~

CHILE---CHILI
Edmundo pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO

CHINA-CHINE
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI

COLOMBIA-CClOMBIE
Libreria Latina Ltda.
A.parbdo Aereo 4011
BOGOTA

COSTA RICA-CO.jTA·RICA
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JosE

CUBA
La Casa BeIga
Rene de Smedt
O'ReiUy 455
LA HABANA

CZECHOSLOVAKIATCHECOSLOVAQUIE
F. TQpic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1

DENMARK- ~DANEMARI<
Einar Munksgaard
NySrregade 6
K$6BENHAVN

DOMiNICAN REPUBLlCREPYBLlQUEDOMINICAINE
Librerfa Dominicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Apartado656
CnmAD TnuJILI.o

ECUADOR-EQUATEUR
Mufioz Hermanos y Cia.
Nueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10·24
GUAYAQUIL

EGYPT-EGYPTE
Librairie "La Renaissance d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
CMnO

ETHIOPiA-ETHIOPIE
Agence ethiopienne de publicite
P.O.Box8
ADDIS-ABEBA
Printed in the U.S.A.

FINLAND-FiNLANDE
AkateeJilineIl Kirjakauppn
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI

FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13, 'rue Soufllot
PARIS, ye

GREECE---GRECE
"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie internationale
Place de la ConstitutioE
ATHENES

GUATEMALA
Jose Goubaud
Goubaud & Cia. Ltda.
SuC<ls"~

5a Av. ~ur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUA'fEMALA
HAITI
Max Bouchereau
Lihrairie "A<~ll Caravelle"
Boite postale l11-B
PORT-AU-PRINCE

ICELAND-ISLANDE
Bokaverzlun Sigfusar Eymundsonnar
Austurstreti 18
REUJAVIK

INDIA-INDE

Oxford Book & Stationery Company
Seinma House
NEW DELHI

IRAN
Borigahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN

IRAQ-IRAK
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
,'
BAGHDAD

LEBANON-LlBAN
Lihrairie universelle
BEYROTITH

LUXEMBOURG
Lihrairie J. Schummer
Place Guillaume
LUXEMBOURG

NETHERLAND5-PAYSaBAS
N; Y. Martinus NiJhoff
Lange VOOI'hout .;
'S-GRAVENHAGE

NEW ZEALANDNOUVELLE.ZELANDE
Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Waring Taylor Street
WELLJ;NGTON
United Nations Association of
New Zealand
P. O. 1011, G.P.O.
WELLINGTON -

NICARAGUA

Ramiro Ramir,sz -v.
Agencia 'de Publicaciones
MANAGUA, D. N.

NORWAY--NORVEGE
Johan Grundt Tanum Forlag
Kr. Augustgt. 7A
OSLO
Price in ·the United States: 15 cents

PERU-PEROU
Lihreria internacional del
S.A.
Casilla 1417
LIMA

PHILIPPINES
D. P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN, RIZAL

POLAND-POLOGNE
Spotdzielna Wydawnicza
"Czytelnik"
38 Poznanska
WARSZAWA

SWEDEN-SUEDE

A~B.C.E.FriuesKun~

Hofbokhandel
Fredsgatan 2
S'l'OCKHOLM

sWITZERLAND-SUISSE
Librairie Payot S. A.
LAUSANNE, GENEVE, YEV
MONTREUX, NEUCHATEt,
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I

SYRIA-SYRIE
Librairie universelle
DAMAS
-

JURKEY-TURQUIE
Lihrairie Hachette
469 Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU·IsuNBUL

UNiON OF SOUTH AFRIC~;
UNION SUD·AFRICAINE '
Central News Agency
Commissioner & Rissik Sts. '.
JOHANNESBURG and at CAPrrD
and DulmAN

UNITED KINGDOMROYAUME·UNI
H. M. Stationery Office
P. O. :Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at RM.S.O. Shops ID
.LONDON, EDINBURGH, -MANe,
,- CAIDlIFF,BELFAST, BmMINGH!:and BRISTOL

UNITEIl STATES OF -AMERIC~
ETATS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE

International Documents Setii~
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK. 27, N. Y.

URUGUAY
Oficina de :Representacion de
Editoriales
Av. 18 de Julio 1333 Esc. 1
MONTEVIDEO

VENEZUELA
Escritorfa Perez Machado
Conde a Piiiango 11
CARACAS
c

YUGOSLAVIA-YOUGOSLAVI,
Drzavno Preduzece
Jugoslovenska Knjiga
.Moskovska Ul. 36
BEOGflA])

49-26119 September 194

-
