S/2006/516

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 July 2006
English
Original: French

Letter dated 12 July 2006 addressed to the President of the
Security Council by the Secretary-General
I have the honour to transmit to you the communiqué issued at the conclusion
of the high-level meeting that I convened at Yamoussoukro on 5 July 2006 (see
annex). This meeting on the situation in Côte d’Ivoire and the implementation of the
road map for peace in that country followed consultations conducted with various
African Heads of State in the margins of the African Union summit at Banjul on
1 and 2 July 2006.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter and its annex to the attention
of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-42826 (E) 140706 140706

*0642826*

S/2006/516

Annex to the letter dated 12 July 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Chairman’s Statement
Yamoussoukro High-level Meeting on Côte d’Ivoire convened
by the United Nations Secretary-General
A meeting was convened by the United Nations Secretary-General in
Yamoussoukro on 5 July to discuss the implementation of the peace process in Côte
d’Ivoire. Attending the meeting were:
– H.E. Olusegun Obasanjo, President of Nigeria
– H.E. Thabo Mbeki, President of South Africa
– H.E. Rodolphe Adada, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Congo, representing the
President of the African Union, H.E.M. Sassou Nguesso, President of Congo
– The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Ghana and Burkina Faso, representing
Presidents John Kufuor and Blaise Compaore, respectively
– The Representatives of Presidents Mamadou Tandja of Niger (President of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)) and Amadou
Toumani Touré of Mali
– Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Under-Secretary-General,
Peacekeeping Operations of the United Nations

Department

of

– Mr. Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for West Africa
– The co-Chairs of the International Working Group
– The Day-to-Day Mediation Group members, including the representatives of
the African Union and ECOWAS, the Special Envoy of the African Union
Mediator, and the High Representative for the elections in Côte d’Ivoire.
On the Ivorian side the following were in attendance:
– President Laurent Gbagbo
– Prime Minister Charles Konan Banny
– Mr. Guillaume Soro, Secretary General of the Forces Nouvelles
– Mr. Alassane Outtara, President of the Rassemblement des Républicains
– Mr. Djédjé Mady, Secretary-General of the Parti Démocratique de Côte
d’Ivoire, representing President Bedie.
1.
The participants reaffirmed their commitment to the Ivorian peace process and
the need to continue to make all efforts to implement Security Council resolution
1633 (2005). They also reaffirmed the key commitments made at Yamoussoukro on
28 February 2006, in particular:

2

06-42826

S/2006/516

(i) that the media, and particularly the written press, is called upon to
embrace the peace process and to refrain from printing articles that could
jeopardize that process;
(ii) that political leaders should prevail on journalists who are close to them
to join the peace process; and
(iii) that political leaders should create a conducive environment for the
conduct of political activities, in keeping with the values of brotherhood and
democracy.
2.
Recognizing the improved political environment, and recognizing that
important first steps had already been made towards a comprehensive disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) and identification process, the Ivorian
parties recommitted themselves to do everything possible to accelerate the DDR
process as well as the identification and electoral processes. In this context, the
dismantling of militias, the redeployment of state administration, the nationwide
launch of the audiences foraines, and the deployment of the Independent Electoral
Commission regional and local commissions are of the utmost urgency.
3.
The participants stressed the important role that the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI), the impartial forces, the High Representative for the
elections in Côte d’Ivoire as well as other United Nations agencies have to play to
support the implementation, transparency and credibility of the process. In this
context, they affirmed that freedom of movement and the involvement of impartial
forces in the military dialogue are crucial to the credibility and transparency of the
process. The impartial forces, as mandated under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter, should be granted access to all aspects of the DDR process, and in
particular the pre-cantonment sites, as it is their mandatory duty to carry out the
verification and listing of soldiers and weaponry. To this end, the participants
decided to create a Monitoring Committee for DDR which would include, among
others, representatives of the Impartial Forces, the Chiefs of Staff of the Forces
armées nationales de Côte d’Ivoire and the Forces armées des forces nouvelles and
the Prime Minister’s office.
4.
The participants strongly warned that those inciting violence and hatred would
be liable for the imposition of targeted sanctions by the Security Council. The
participants also urged all those concerned to fully adhere to the new spirit of
dialogue and cooperation enshrined in the Yamoussoukro declaration of 28 February
2006, as well as to the spirit of Security Council resolution 1633. The participants
decided that a compulsory code of conduct should be established for members of the
media that explicitly forbids inflammatory, extremist, and threatening messages.
5.
The participants urged the political actors in Côte d’Ivoire to develop
confidence and dialogue among themselves and to foster unity and national
reconciliation beyond the elections. The participants further urged political actors to
refrain from carrying out any actions or making any statements that impede the
Government from working in a climate that allows him to implement the road map.
The parties reaffirmed that the road map, as well as earlier agreements signed by the
main Ivorian political actors including Pretoria, must be implemented as such
without delay and without reopening or re-interpreting them.

06-42826

3

S/2006/516

6.
The participants welcomed the Secretary-General’s intention to call a meeting
in mid-September in the margins of the General Assembly to take stock of the
situation and to make any further determinations as may be needed.
7.

The Ivorian parties agreed to take action on the decisions herewith attached.

Decisions taken by the Yamoussoukro High-level Meeting on
Côte d’Ivoire convened by the United Nations Secretary-General
(5 July 2006)
Timetable
The participants reaffirmed the importance of making every effort to respect a
comprehensive time frame and relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
Elections:
– Deployment of at least 50 mobile courts by 15 July.
– Issuance of a Presidential decree by 15 July to allow the Independent Electoral
Commission (IEC) to make any technical adjustments to the electoral code for
the transitional elections.
– Reaffirmation of the validity of the Pretoria Declaration of 29 July 2005,
including its paragraph 6.
– Deployment of the Independent Electoral Commission’s countrywide structure
by 31 July.
– Convening of a donor conference to fill the gap in the budget of the electoral
process, as soon as enough progress has been achieved in the implementation
of the electoral process.
DDR:
– Meeting of the Chiefs of Staff of Forces armées nationales de Côte d’Ivoire
and Forces armées des forces nouvelles, in the presence of representatives of
the impartial forces, to establish by 15 July a monitoring group on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. The monitoring group would
include the Chiefs of Staff of Forces armées nationales de Côte d’Ivoire and
Forces armées des forces nouvelles, the Prime Minister’s office and
representatives of the impartial forces.
– Immediate resumption of quadripartite control of the pre-cantonment process
in order to complete that process by 31 July on the basis of the 9 July 2005
agreement and reconfirmed by the International Working Group at its eighth
Ministerial meeting, held in Abidjan on 23 June 2006.
– Dismantling and disarmament of the militias by 31 July on the basis of the
timetable adopted on 9 July 2005 and paragraph 4 of the Pretoria Agreement of
6 April 2005.

4

06-42826

S/2006/516

Media:
– Respect of the Pretoria and Yamoussoukro agreements on the media, which
call for responsible behaviour by journalists particularly during the election
period.

06-42826

5
