General Auembly-Thirtieth Se11ion

24

Having examined the comprehensive study of the
question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in all its aspects 36
carried out under the auspices of the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament by the Ad Hoe Group of
Qualified Governmental Experts for the Study of the
Question of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones in pursuance
of--General Assembly resolution 3261.F (XXIX) of
9 December 1974,
Having also examined the comments made by States
members of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament regarding that study, 37 the text of which is
annexed to the special report in which the Conference
transmitted the study to the General Assembly, 35
Bearing in mind that, without prejudice to the results
that may be obtained through any further examination
of this matter, from the analysis of the contents of the
special report it is already possible at this time to draw
certain incontrovertible conclusions,
Noting that from among those conclusions it would
seem advisable to stress the necessity that the General
Assembly define the concept of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone and the scope of the principal obligations of the
nuclear-weapon States towards such zones and towards
the States included therein,
Convinced that in so doing it will strengthen the
new efforts recently undertaken and the realizations
already achieved for the establishment of nuclearweapon-free zones,
Solemnly adopts the following declaration:
I.

Definition of the concept of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone

1. A "nuclear-weapon-free zone" shall, as a
general rule, be deemed to be any zone, recognized
as such by the General Assembly of the United
Nations, which any group of States, in the free exercise of their sovereignty, has established by virtue
of a treaty or convention whereby:
(a) The statute of total absence of nuclear weapons to which the zone shall be subject, including the
procedure for the delimitation of the zone, is defined;
( b) An international system of verification and
control is established to guarantee compliance with
the obligations deriving from that statute.

Definition of the principal obligations of the
nuclear-weapon States towards nuclear-weaponfree zones and towards the States included
therein
2. In every case of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
that has been recognized as such by the General
Assembly, all nuclear-weapon States shall undertake
or reaffirm, in a solemn international instrument having full legally binding force, such as a treaty, a
convention or a protocol, the following obligations:
(a) To respect in all its parts the statute of total
absence of nuclear weapons defined in the treaty or
convention which serves as the constitutive instrument of the zone;
( b) To refrain from contributing in any way to
the performance in the territories forming part of
the zone of acts which involve a violation of the aforesaid treaty or convention;
(c) To refrain from using or threatening to use
nuclear weapons against the States included in the
II.

zone.

III. Scope of the definitions
3. The above definitions in no way impair the
resolutions which the General Assembly has adopted
or may adopt with regard to specific cases of nuclearweapon-free zones nor the rights emanating for the
Member States from such resolutions.
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3473 (XXX). Implementation of General Assem~ly resolution 3262 (XXIX) concerning the
8lgnature and ratification of Additional Protocol I of the Treaty for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty
of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967 and 3262 (~XIX) of 9 December 1974 concerning the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) 38 and its
Additional Protocol I,
. T~king into account that certain territories lying
w1thm the zone of application of that Treaty which are
not sovereign political entities are nevertheless in a
position ~o recei~«:: the benefits deriving from the Treaty
through its Add1t10nal Protocol I to which the States
that de jure ?r 1e facto are internationally responsible
for those tetntones may become parties,
Recalling with satisfaction that the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Kingdom of the Netherlands became parties to Additional
Protocol I in 1969 and 1971, respectively,
1. Again urges France and the United States of
America to sign and ratify Additional Protocol I of
the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
~atin ~merica (Treaty of Tlatelolco) as soon as possible, m order that the peoples of the territories in
question may receive the benefits which derive from the
Treaty and which consist mainly in removing the danger of nuclear attack and sparing the squandering of
resources on the production of nuclear weapons;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the two States to which the above
appeal is addressed and to inform the General Assembly at its thirty-second session of any measure adopted
by those States;
. 3.. Decides to inc_lude in. the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session an item entitled "Implementation of General Assembly resolution 3473 (XXX) concerning the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol I of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) ".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3474 (XXX). Establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the region of the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3263 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, in which it overwhelmingly commended the
idea of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the region of the Middle East,
38 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068, p. 326.
