United Nations

A/ES-10/PV.19

General Assembly

Official Records

Emergency Special Session

19

th meeting
Monday, 5 August 2002, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Han Seung-soo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Republic of Korea)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Ouch
(Cambodia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Illegal Israeli actions in Occupied East Jerusalem
and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory
Report of the Secretary-General (A/ES-10/186)
Draft resolution (A/ES-10/L.10)
Mr. Goussous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to thank the President for his cooperation
with respect to this emergency special session of the
General Assembly, which has been convened to
consider the report of the Secretary-General prepared
in pursuance of General Assembly resolution ES10/10, concerning events in the Jenin camp and in
other Palestinian towns.
I would also like to express my appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his efforts in preparing this
report, particularly bearing in mind that he prepared it
under difficult circumstances, following the Israeli
Government’s refusal to receive the fact-finding
mission established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1405 (2002), thus preventing us from
knowing what really happened in Jenin and other
Palestinian cities.

After thoroughly examining the SecretaryGeneral’s report, the Jordanian Government would like
to offer the following remarks. This report was not
prepared on site because of Israel’s arrogant refusal to
permit the international community, represented by the
United Nations, to ascertain the truth concerning
Israel’s reoccupation of Palestinian territory and its
impact on the Palestinian people. In that context, we
endorse the Secretary-General’s expressed conviction
that Israel had rejected Security Council resolution
1405 (2002) and had refused to provide the SecretaryGeneral with the information needed to prepare the
report, thus preventing the preparation of a full and
complete report on the occupation of Jenin and other
Palestinian cities.
We also wish to confirm another element in the
Secretary-General’s report: the Palestinian territories
are occupied territories to which the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, applies.
Israel must meet its obligations under that Convention
and must treat residents as protected civilians who
should not be deliberately killed, tortured, taken
hostage or subjected to any form of humiliating
treatment. The Secretary-General’s report affirms that
Israel has obligations not to engage in collective
punishment or to appropriate or destroy Palestinian
property in the occupied territories.
In the course of its military occupation during the
period covered by the report, Israel committed grave
violations of international humanitarian law, including

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

02-50747 (E)

*0250747*

A/ES-10/PV.19

violations of the Fourth Geneva Convention and of the
Hague Convention of 1907. Among those violations
was the massacre of protected persons under the Fourth
Geneva Convention through the massacre of 497
Palestinians between 1 March and 7 May 2002, the
majority being defenceless civilians. The Israeli
Government has engaged in collective punishment
against persons protected by the Convention through
arbitrary arrests, the closure of Palestinian towns and
villages and the imposition of curfews in those areas,
as well as through cutting off water, electricity and
telephone communication and the destruction of
Palestinian infrastructure and the Palestinian economy.
Such treatment of protected persons and the
destruction of historical and religious sites were not a
military necessity. They constituted collective
punishment, reflected in Israel’s unjustified use of
force in the occupied Palestinian territories, which led
to the massacre of protected persons and to the
destruction of their property and of civilian facilities.
Following the destruction of their homes in Jenin and
other camps, Palestinian refugees no longer have refuge.
We wish to reaffirm the Secretary-General’s
statement to the Security Council that responding to
terrorism does not give Israel a blank cheque to violate
international humanitarian law and human rights or to
create a humanitarian crisis in the occupied Palestinian
territories. In that context, the Jordanian Government
wishes clearly to state its position with regard to acts of
terrorism and the massacre of civilians, regardless of
the party committing such acts.
The report shows that Israel’s violation of
international law, human rights and its commitments
under the Fourth Geneva Convention, through military
operations during the period covered by the report,
have occurred so repeatedly that they cannot be
considered isolated events, as they have been and are
committed by the Israeli military in occupied
Palestinian territory. Be it the invasion of towns or the
massacre of Palestinian civilians, those acts reflect an
Israeli Government policy that seriously violates
relevant international law.
Given these facts, my delegation wishes to state,
first, that it is necessary for the international
community, through the United Nations, to protect the
Palestinian people from Israeli military aggression.
That people is entitled to such protection under
international humanitarian law and the Fourth Geneva

2

Convention. Several months ago the Secretary-General
called for a multinational force to be sent to the
occupied Palestinian territory, pursuant to Chapter VII
of the Charter. That would enable the international
community to assume its responsibilities to protect the
Palestinian people.
Secondly, the High Contracting Parties of the
Fourth Geneva Convention must assume their
responsibilities under the Convention, must take
practical measures to put an end to the grave Israeli
violations of that Convention and must punish those
responsible for those violations.
Finally, my delegation reiterates the call made in
the Secretary-General’s report to the international
community to assume its urgent responsibilities and to
make every effort to achieve a lasting and peaceful
solution to the Palestinian conflict, because this is a
principal factor in the search for a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution in the Middle East, in accordance
with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), and with a view to implementing Security
Council resolution 1397 (2001), in order to establish
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
the region within secure and recognized borders.
Mr. Djumala (Indonesia): Allow me to begin by
expressing my delegation’s appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his report (A/ES-10/186)
prepared pursuant to General Assembly resolution ES10/10 of 7 May 2002. However, it is regrettable to note
that, because of Israel’s refusal to cooperate with the
efforts of the Secretary-General, the report before us is
not based on a field visit to Jenin, as had been
previously anticipated. We therefore continue to
denounce Israel’s refusal to offer the required
cooperation in this investigation and its failure to
respond to requests for information.
It is astonishing, but not really surprising, that,
according to this report, only 52 Palestinians were
killed during Israel’s blatant demonstration of
aggression in Jenin and other Palestinian cities and its
senseless and indiscriminate rampage through the
homes of already-deprived and suffering Palestinians.
That is not surprising, because no authoritative
determination of the facts has really taken place. As a
result of that situation, it is inconceivable that this
report can be considered the end of the investigation.
The full facts are still not known, but they must
be determined. In view of these circumstances,

A/ES-10/PV.19

therefore, and in the interests of truth and justice, we
demand that pressure be maintained on Israel to grant
access to a United Nations fact-finding mission so that
we can get the full story of what really happened in
Jenin. Peace is not possible without justice, and justice
is not possible without the truth. Only a uniform
standard of objectivity and full accountability with
regard to every issue on the United Nations agenda will
be good enough.
In this regard, my delegation would like to
reiterate its belief that the Palestinian people are
entitled to be free of the brutal occupation by Israel and
have the right to a viable independent State. It is
important to stress that the occupying Power should not
be permitted to continue to enjoy the luxury of
ignoring the fundamental rights of the Palestinian
people and the resolutions of the Security Council and
the General Assembly. The repeated forays of killing
and destruction in recent months are an affront not only
to the Palestinians but also to the international
community; this systematic violence must end.
Finally, while reiterating its dissatisfaction with
the report, my delegation wishes to see true peace
between Palestine and Israel take root. To that end, we
reiterate our support for the Palestinian cause. Indeed,
every peace effort should be conducted within the
framework of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973) and in accordance with the principle of
land for peace.
Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): My delegation would
like to express its appreciation to the President of the
General Assembly for having reconvened the tenth
emergency special session at the request of the
Chairman of the Arab Group, with the support of the
Non-Aligned Movement, to consider the grave
situation in Palestine, particularly in the light of the
report of the Secretary-General (A/ES-10/186) prepared
pursuant to General Assembly resolution ES-10/10.
We would like first of all to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report and for the efforts taken to
produce it, given the limitations that prevailed as a
result of the lack of cooperation from the Israeli side.
We deeply regret that the report, which should have
been produced by a fact-finding team dispatched to
Jenin to develop accurate information by means of a
thorough investigative inquiry on the ground, was
obstructed by the Israeli Government, despite its claims
that it had nothing to hide regarding any aspect of the

Jenin operation. Israel’s absolute refusal to cooperate
with the investigation of the facts regarding the events
in Jenin was obviously intended to conceal the truth
and the real gravity of its actions, which amounted to
war crimes against the Palestinian population. We
believe that the findings of the report before us would
have been different if the fact-finding team had been
able to visit the area. As the Secretary-General
admitted in paragraph 82 of his report, a full and
comprehensive assessment of the events in Jenin could
not be made without the full cooperation of both sides
and visits to the area.
Although the report clearly falls short of a
comprehensive inquiry, it paints a picture of the
severity of the suffering of the Palestinian people in
Jenin and throughout the occupied Palestinian territory,
as well as of the atrocities against them at the hands of
the occupying Power. We are deeply dismayed at, and
strongly condemn, the illegal conduct of the Israeli
Defence Forces during the incursions, including
unlawful killings, the use of human shields,
disproportionate use of force, the indiscriminate
destruction of private and public property, arbitrary
arrests and torture, the denial of medical treatment and
the obstruction of humanitarian operations. The
disproportionate use of force by the Israeli Defence
Forces is apparent throughout the report. The death toll
since September 2000, during which time the number
of Palestinians killed has been four times greater than
the number of Israelis, further confirms this. The
atrocities carried out against the Palestinian people
must not be allowed to go unpunished. The perpetrators
of war crimes must be brought to justice.
The clear disregard of the Israeli Defence Forces
for the sanctity of human life — as is evident from its
resort to unlawful killings, the cowardly use of
innocents as shields, its actions in preventing medical
access to sick and wounded civilians among the
Palestinian population, the attacks on ambulances and
medical personnel, the obstruction of food deliveries
and the overall hampering of humanitarian operations
— is completely unacceptable. As the report indicated,
the deaths of some Palestinian civilians were attributed
to the unnecessary Israeli attacks on ambulances and
the denial of access to humanitarian assistance. This
behaviour simply does not befit a so-called humane
Israeli Government which regrets the deaths of any
civilians and abhors the fact that it has had to use
violence.

3

A/ES-10/PV.19

We are gravely concerned about the continued
curfews and other severe restrictions on the movement
of persons and goods, as well as the heartbreaking
deterioration of living conditions and the economic
situation which has resulted in the dire humanitarian
crisis facing the Palestinian people. We firmly believe
that immediate measures must be taken to alleviate the
situation in the Palestinian territories through the
provision of urgently needed assistance and services to
address the humanitarian needs, as well as to rebuild
the Palestinian economy.
As we speak, the Palestinian population remains
at risk and continues to suffer further human rights
violations. It is apparent that Israeli actions have
brought all aspects of the life of Palestinians to a
standstill and that the Israeli Defence Forces have
widely flouted international humanitarian principles
and human rights standards. In this regard, Israel must
be made to bow to the demands and well-established
principles of international law, including international
humanitarian law, and undertake its obligations as a
democratic and civilized member of the international
community.
Malaysia does not condone violence, particularly
against innocent civilians, and is gravely concerned
about the escalation of such violence and the rising
death toll among civilians on both sides of this bitter
conflict. Israel had been warned time and again that its
violent actions and use of military force in pursuit of
the elusive goal of ensuring its total security would
lead to further violence and would not enhance the
security of the people of Israel. It is obvious that the
Hebrew University bombing and the subsequent attacks
were a consequence of Israel’s brutal missile attack in
Gaza City, which provoked violent retaliation from
Palestinian militant groups. We dread to think what
else might be in store. Israel must realize that the root
cause of the Palestinian militancy and anger towards
Israel, which are beyond the control of the Palestinian
Authority, is its occupation of Palestinian territories, its
expansion of illegal settlements in the territories and its
continued denial of an independent and sovereign State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Israel’s lack of restraint and its retaliatory actions
over the past few days in Nablus, Hebron, Tulkarm and
other Palestinian cities will further exacerbate the tense
situation and lock both sides into a continuing cycle of
violence. This in turn will prevent further efforts towards
a negotiated peaceful solution — the only viable solution

4

to the conflict. Israel must come to its senses and fully
implement Security Council resolutions 1402 (2002) and
1403 (2002), and withdraw from occupied Palestinian
territory to the positions held prior to September 2000,
if there is to be movement towards peace.
What is immediately necessary, pending a
resumption of the peace process, is to prevent the
worsening situation on the ground from leading to a
further conflagration of violence to the point where a
return to negotiation would not be possible. In this
regard, the dispatch of a United Nations or
international peacekeeping or monitoring force to the
occupied Palestinian territories will be crucial to
prevent and contain further violence, given the deep
hostility between the parties.
Malaysia continues to encourage and to support
every international effort aimed at achieving a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the conflict,
based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). We believe that the solution lies in the
realization of the vision set out in Security Council
resolution 1397 (2002), in which two States, Israel and
Palestine, live side by side within secure and
recognized borders. Indeed, we share the SecretaryGeneral’s view that the international community has a
compelling responsibility to intensify its efforts to find
a peaceful and durable solution to the conflict. In that
regard, Malaysia reaffirms its support for the important
efforts of the “quartet”, as well as those of other interested
parties, and looks forward to the implementation of
initiatives aimed at resuming the peace process.
Mr. Motomura (Japan): We are grateful to the
President for reconvening the tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly, on this important
issue.
The Government of Japan deplores the recent
surge in the vicious circle of violence between the
Israelis and the Palestinians. I refer in particular to the
air strikes carried out by the Israeli forces on Gaza City
and to the recent series of terrorist acts by Palestinian
extremists at Hebrew University and near Safed and
Eli, which resulted in many civilian casualties. We
express our deep condolences to all the bereaved
families and our heartfelt sympathy to those who have
been injured.
It is particularly regrettable that those events took
place at a time when the international community was
making concerted efforts to bring peace to the region,

A/ES-10/PV.19

and when the prospect of resumed dialogue between
the two parties was emerging. The Government of Japan
once again urges both the Israelis and the Palestinians to
break this cycle of violence. In particular, we urge Israel
to exert maximum self-restraint in its use of force, and
we urge the Palestinian Authority to make the utmost
effort to suppress the acts of extremists.
The Government of Japan appreciates the work
that Secretary-General Kofi Annan put into the report
(A/ES-10/186) issued last week on the recent events
that took place in Jenin and in other Palestinian cities.
It is the product of a great effort on the part of the
Secretariat and the international community, while
thoroughgoing information-gathering activities —
including a visit by a fact-finding team — were not
possible. We consider it critical that both parties and
the international community make the utmost effort to
stop the violence on the ground in order to put an end
to the humanitarian crisis described in the report.
The Japanese Government has been engaged in
strenuous efforts to improve the situation. In June,
Foreign Minister Yoriko Kawaguchi visited Israel and
the Palestinian territories, and had meetings with
leaders of both parties to discuss ways to achieve
peace. The Japanese Government has also appointed a
special envoy for Middle East issues, Ambassador
Tatsuo Arima. He is now visiting Egypt and Jordan to
consult on steps to be taken by the international
community to improve the situation.
In order to realize the vision of two States living
side by side in peace and security, affirmed by Security
Council resolution 1397 (2002), all three aspects —
restoring security, providing economic and humanitarian
assistance and resuming the political process — should be
pursued simultaneously. As part of those endeavours, one
of the important tasks before the international community
is to extend firm support for the reform of the Palestinian
Authority. As an active member of the new international
Task Force on Palestinian Reform, the Government of
Japan will continue to contribute in that area.
The Task Force is now focused on seven fields of
reform, with a working group formed to take charge of
each field. Japan is the coordinator of a working group
in the field of local government and a member of the
working groups in the fields of judiciary, the rule of
law and elections. Also, we will send a Government
mission to the Palestinian territories next week to
assess the need for reform and to further develop

Japanese assistance programmes for the Palestinians
that will promote Palestinian Authority reform.
The Government of Israel, for its part, should
help to create an environment that facilitates reform of
the Palestinian Authority. In that context, we call upon
Israel to take the following steps in particular:
completely withdraw its Defence Forces to the 28
September 2000 line; transfer tax revenues to the
Palestinian Authority; end the closure of the
Palestinian territories, which has been hindering
Palestinian economic activities and the movement of
humanitarian goods and services; and, finally, cease the
destruction of infrastructure and social service facilities
built with the assistance of donors.
The Japanese Government completely shares the
belief, expressed by the Secretary-General in his
report, that the international community has a
responsibility to intensify its efforts to find a solution
to this conflict. But at the same time, it is essential that
the two parties themselves make every possible effort
to achieve peace. In that connection, I would like to
renew our call on the leaders of the Government of
Israel and of the Palestinian Authority to take the
political decisions necessary to achieve that goal.
Mr. Kim Chang Guk (Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea): It is more than three months since
the tenth emergency special session was last adjourned,
but no substantial progress has been made in the
Middle East situation. Thus, it continues to be a source
of increasing concern on the part of the international
community.
The Israeli occupying forces very recently
reoccupied Palestinian cities and other population
centres, and they continue to carry out high-handed
military attacks on the Palestinian National Authority,
the legitimate representative of the Palestinians. As has
already been reported, Israel is proceeding with plans
to deport from the West Bank to the Gaza Strip
relatives of Palestinians alleged to be responsible for
attacks against Israel. That brutal act is a grave
challenge to the peace and security of the world and a
wanton violation of international law.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea expresses grave concern at the
worsening situation in Palestine, and it strongly
condemns the atrocities committed by the Israeli
occupying forces against Palestinian civilians in Jenin
and other Palestinian cities.

5

A/ES-10/PV.19

The cause of restoring the human rights of the
Palestinian people and other Arab peoples, including
the right to self-determination, is justifiable. However,
the path ahead of them is still beset with obstacles.
Israel is using armed force ever more openly, and that
is related to the protection and encouragement of a
certain country. Therefore, the United Nations should
continue to focus its efforts on the peaceful resolution
of regional disputes and on the elimination of all
interference in internal affairs and of unjust pressure.
It is the view of the delegation of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea that the current session
should consider ways to stop the Israeli oppression and
take practical measures to defend the legitimate national
rights of the Palestinian people and other Arab peoples.
Israel should immediately end its barbaric military acts of
aggression that destroy peace and stability in the region
and violate international humanitarian law, including acts
of terror against civilians; it should withdraw its
occupying forces from all occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem, and from the other Arab territories
occupied since 1967; and it should immediately return
to peace negotiations with the Palestinian side.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea would like to take this opportunity
to express its full support for and solidarity with the
Palestinian people’s just cause of defending their
legitimate national rights and the struggle of other Arab
peoples for a fair solution of the Middle East conflict.
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): As we meet at this
resumed emergency special session, we note with deep
regret the continued terrorist activities in recent days,
both the act at Hebrew University in Jerusalem last
Wednesday and the bombings and shootings over the
weekend, which have resulted in more deaths. Those
illegal and immoral acts have once again claimed the
lives of innocent civilians. Singapore continues to deplore
in the strongest terms all such acts of terror and violence
and the deliberate targeting of civilians. We call for an
immediate cessation of such acts by both sides.
Israel has the right to exist within secure borders.
The corollary is that it also has the right, and in fact the
responsibility, to protect its civilians from terrorist
attacks. We urge the Palestinian Authority to continue
its efforts to work with Palestinian groups to halt all
acts of terror against the Israeli population.
The Palestinian people, in turn, have an
inalienable right to a homeland of their own. Israel

6

must recognize this and must comply with Security
Council resolutions on withdrawal from occupied
territories. We also appeal to the Israeli authorities to
exercise maximum restraint in their actions. In particular,
the economic and humanitarian situation of the
Palestinians must be fully and immediately addressed.
We regret that the Israeli Government did not
allow the Secretary-General’s fact-finding team to visit
Jenin. It also ignored every opportunity to contribute
information for the report (A/ES-10/186). We
supported the sending of the fact-finding team, in
whose impartiality and competence we had full
confidence. In view of the many claims and counterclaims that were, and are, being made about the events
at Jenin, it would have been to the Israeli
Government’s advantage to have the fact-finding team
resolve the matter in a conclusive way. Due to its
refusal to allow the team access, the report of the
Secretary-General mandated by General Assembly
resolution ES-10/10 has had to be compiled from
secondary sources rather than from first-hand
observation and investigation.
We nevertheless welcome the publication of the
report, and we accept it as a balanced and
conscientious attempt to clarify the events that took
place. We appreciate the fact that the SecretaryGeneral, in preparing the report, did not seek to draw
conclusions beyond what the information available
justified. Singapore fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s admonition that
“self-defence was not a blank cheque, and that
responding to terrorism did not in any way free
Israel from its obligations under international
law”. (A/ES-10/186, para. 16)
We are shocked at the extent of the damage that
was done in March and April. According to paragraph 41
of the report, the World Bank estimates that
reconstructing the Palestinian Authority’s civilian
infrastructure will cost about $361 million. However, we
also share the Secretary-General’s view contained in
paragraph 42 of the report that the terrorist attacks have
caused enormous suffering to the people and economy
of Israel, as well as his statement in paragraph 16 that
the Palestinian Authority’s failure to act against
terrorism will not assist it in achieving its aims. We
hope that the clarifications provided by the report will
help the parties move forward in their efforts to find a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

A/ES-10/PV.19

The escalation of violence on both sides is
counterproductive to the ongoing international effort to
establish a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
The only way to achieve that end is through the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions and
through a negotiated settlement based on two States,
Israel and Palestine, existing side by side, each within
secure and recognized borders, as called for in Security
Council resolution 1397 (2002) of 12 March 2002. We
fully support the Secretary-General’s recommendation
in the last paragraph of his report that
“the international community has a compelling
responsibility to intensify its efforts to find a
peaceful and durable solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict”. (para. 83)
Accordingly, Singapore continues to support the
proposals for the early convening of an international
peace conference. The conference should build on
existing peace agreements and the discussions among
the parties, including the negotiations held at Camp
David in 2000 and the subsequent discussions at Taba.
It is also vital that the Secretary-General and the other
members of the “quartet” remain actively engaged in
this issue. Their role has been, and remains, essential to
help revive what has become a stagnant peace process.
Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow me
at the outset to express my appreciation to the
President for having resumed the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly. I should also
like to express my appreciation for the efforts of the
Secretary-General over the past months aimed at
assuaging the plight of the Palestinian people.
As this is the first time that I address the General
Assembly in my new capacity as the Permanent
Representative of Iran to the United Nations, I wish to
assure my colleagues here of the full cooperation that I
intend to extend to all delegations.
Despite its serious shortcomings, the report of the
Secretary-General (A/ES-10/186) on recent events in
Jenin reveals, to some extent, the crimes perpetrated by
the Israeli military during its invasion of the Jenin
refugee camp and other Palestinian areas in April. It
does so in spite of the fact that the Israeli regime
adopted an obstructionist policy from the beginning
and did its utmost to block every effort by the
international community
to develop accurate
information about what went on in the refugee camp
between 3 and 18 April 2002.

The report echoes the assertion by independent
human rights groups and eyewitnesses of the use by
Israeli troops of civilians as human shields. It reports
the effective levelling of the central Hawashin district
in Jenin and much physical damage to other districts.
Wider bombardment with tanks and missiles after 9
April and the use of armoured vehicles, supported by
tanks, to demolish portions of the camp by the Israeli
troops are also reflected in the report.
The report is also explicit in describing the acts
amounting to war crimes committed by the Israelis,
such as denying the dying wounded access to medical
care, and civilians to basic humanitarian necessities.
The report asserts that ambulances and medical
personnel were prevented by the Israeli Defence Forces
(IDF) from reaching the wounded within the camp. It
adds that, on 4 April, the IDF ordered the Palestinian
Red Crescent Society to stop its operations and sealed
off a hospital. The report goes on to say that in addition
of the denial of aid, in some instances the IDF targeted
medical personnel. The report highlights the humanitarian
crisis in the camp, which was, as it emphasizes,
exacerbated by Israeli troops preventing the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East from delivering food and
medical supplies and by cutting off their electricity.
The report does in fact list many acts and
instances that constitute war crimes by any definition.
However, it falls short of calling them what they
actually are within the parameters of international law.
Undoubtedly, this and some other shortcomings of the
report are attributable, more than anything else, to the
Israeli policy of deceit and obstruction on the
diplomatic front, which has further exacerbated Israel’s
bloody military campaign against innocent Palestinian
civilians on the military front.
The Israelis, aware of the extent of the crimes
their armed forces committed in Jenin, first tried to buy
time by deceiving the United Nations into believing
that they would permit an international fact-finding
team to visit the area. It allowed them to arrange the
scene, eliminate evidence and prepare for the next stage.
As the Secretary-General clearly described in his letter
(S/2002/504) to the President of the Security Council,
dated 1 May 2002, the Israelis reneged on their initial
formal announcement of their readiness to accept the
United Nations fact-finding team, and later they flouted
outright Security Council resolution 1405 (2002),

7

A/ES-10/PV.19

which provided for developing accurate information
about recent events in Jenin.
Against that backdrop, the refusal by the Israelis
to cooperate with the authors of the present report
came as no surprise. The report at hand details, among
other things, the Israeli pattern of non-cooperation and
obstruction in the course of the report’s preparation —
a pattern that culminated in leaving unanswered the
communications of the Under-Secretary-General. As a
result, the report was written without a visit to Jenin or
to the other Palestinian cities in question.
The Israeli regime should not be allowed to
commit war crimes, to hold the entire United Nations
system in contempt, to evade accountability or, finally,
to walk away with impunity. That would undoubtedly
nurture a culture of impunity and damage the
international system as a whole. Moreover, while we
perfectly understand the malicious reasons behind the
refusal of the Israeli regime to cooperate with the factfinding efforts of the United Nations, we do not
understand why the authors of the report found
themselves obliged to intersperse it with so many
quotations from official Israeli propaganda.
Nor do we understand the distinction the report
tried to make between the so-called militant and nonmilitant residents of the Jenin camp. As a matter of law
and fact, when it comes to resistance to invasion and
occupation, such a distinction is totally unwarranted, as
everybody is entitled to the inherent right to selfdefence. In fact, at a time when some invoke the right
to self-defence to strike at villages halfway around the
globe, how could anybody cast doubt on that right of
the residents of Jenin and other Palestinian towns when
an occupying army armed to the teeth invades and
plunders their homes, towns and villages?
My delegation is concerned at the consequences
of the process we have gone through over the past few
months and hopes that the international community,
represented by the United Nations, will find an
effective way to rectify the situation.
Palestinian residents of the occupied territories
are protected persons under the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which declares that they may not be
wilfully killed, tortured, taken as hostages or made to
suffer humiliating or degrading treatment. Acts of
collective punishment, reprisals and the destruction of
the property of protected persons by the occupying
Power constitute criminal offences under the terms of

8

the Convention. For the sake of its own credibility, the
United Nations should focus its attention and efforts on
putting an end to such barbaric practices and on
bringing the perpetrators to justice.
Mr. Atta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at
the outset to convey to the President my delegation’s
greetings and appreciation for reconvening the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly to
consider the illegal Israeli practices in occupied East
Jerusalem and other occupied Palestinian territories.
Today, we meet again amid the tragic circumstances
in the Middle East, where the suffering of the Palestinian
people is augmented by occupation and its effects. The
growing cycle of violence will dash all hope of
achieving a just and lasting peace for all parties; it
reflects the arrogance of power and a disregard for the
bases of international law and human rights.
The Secretary-General’s report (A/ES-10/186) on
the Jenin massacre and other Israeli aggression against
Palestinian cities last April very clearly reflects the
bitter humanitarian and economic conditions suffered
by the unarmed Palestinian people under siege by the
Israeli Defence Forces, which daily implement a policy
of humiliation and starvation against unarmed civilians
whose only crime is their aspiration to their legitimate
right to end the occupation and to live in dignity and
independence within secure borders.
As we discuss the Secretary-General’s report on
the grave aggression of last April, we are still
witnessing new waves of Israeli aggression against the
Palestinian people. Yesterday, we witnessed a cycle of
violence and counter-violence that will not end as long
as the unlawful occupation and Israel’s disregard for all
international resolutions continue. We hope that today
— not tomorrow — the world will force Israel to
choose the path of peace for all.
My delegation appreciates the efforts of the
Secretary-General in the face of all Israeli obstacles.
We would like to reaffirm the following. Israel’s failure
to allow the international fact-finding team to carry out
its task in accordance with Security Council resolution
1405 (2002) is a flagrant violation of international law
and reflects serious disregard of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and of the bases of international
humanitarian and human rights law. Israel’s attempts to
conceal the war crimes committed by its armed forces
against the Palestinian people, as reported by
humanitarian and emergency workers and by other

A/ES-10/PV.19

eyewitnesses in Jenin, are thoroughly regrettable. The
policy of collective punishment used by Israel against
the Palestinian civilians recalls a lesson that the world
has already learned. Those actions cannot be justified
and cannot be accepted by the international community
under any circumstances. Those practices and the
arrogant use of power will only deepen hatred and
bitterness not only among the Palestinians but also
among the peoples of the region and indeed of the
entire civilized world. They will create more obstacles
for the efforts to achieve peace.
Despite the descriptive nature of the report, due
to Israel’s attempts to create obstacles, Israel cannot
hide the criminal and barbaric actions it committed
against unarmed civilians. Egypt calls upon the
international community — and the entire world — to
shoulder its responsibility to address the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. It should make every effort to stop the
Israeli aggression against unarmed Palestinians.
Finally, every effort should be made by all peaceloving nations towards the creation of two nations: a
viable, independent State of Palestine living side by
side with Israel. That is the only way to ensure peace
and security for all peoples of the region. The violence
must stop, and the parties must return to the
negotiating table. All efforts towards achieving that
objective are to be admired and appreciated.
We should call a spade a spade. We should call
the aggressor unjust. We should look for the root
causes of the continued conflict. We should not turn
away from reality. The actions committed by Israel
since September 2000, including killing and collective
punishment, should be halted immediately.
Negotiations should continue in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and with international legitimacy, in order to
bring about lasting peace and security for all the
peoples of the region.
Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): We are
gathered here today to consider the recent report of the
Secretary-General and to discuss the current situation
in the Middle East. My delegation believes that the
report would have been more comprehensive had the
Secretary-General’s fact-finding team been dispatched,
an initiative that was welcomed in Security Council
resolution 1405 (2002). We have taken note of the
report, which, in accordance with the resolution

adopted by the General Assembly on 7 May 2002,
gives an account of the situation.
As we discuss the situation in the Middle East,
the outlook in the region remains of grave concern to
the international community. Military actions and
terrorist attacks continue to cause severe casualties and
deep suffering among the civilian population, as
reflected in the event that took place over the weekend
in Nablus, Safad and East Jerusalem. Needless to say,
the humanitarian situation in the Palestinian territories
has seriously deteriorated due to the continuing violence.
With respect to the recent tragedies on the
ground, the Republic of Korea deplores the loss of
innocent civilian lives resulting from the Israeli air
attack on Gaza City on 23 July 2002. There is an urgent
need for such disproportionate use of force to cease. In
the same vein, the terrorist bombing targeted
indiscriminately at students of Hebrew University last
week is yet another source of profound concern. My
Government is particularly distressed by the fact that
some Korean nationals studying at that institution of
higher learning were seriously injured, along with
many others. We condemn terrorist acts against
innocent and defenceless civilians.
These instances of violence illustrate the grave
state of affairs in the Middle East, especially the toll
that it has taken in terms of civilian life. The
Government of the Republic of Korea firmly opposes
any form of violence in the tackling of outstanding and
divisive issues. In particular, there can be no
justification for perpetrating acts of violence against
the civilian population under any circumstances. We
urge both sides to exercise the utmost restraint and to
abide by international humanitarian law to ensure the
full protection of civilians.
The use of violence cannot be a solution to
addressing this situation. Rather, it diminishes the
prospects for a stable and durable peace in the region.
My delegation joins the international community in
urging both parties to cease all acts of violence and to
make every effort to resolve their differences through
political dialogue.
My delegation believes that the peace process
between the two sides should recommence in an
earnest and sincere manner, based on Security Council
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002), which lay
out a comprehensive road map for realizing the vision
of a lasting resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict

9

A/ES-10/PV.19

and the steps necessary to move beyond the current
crisis.
At this crucial juncture, we commend the efforts
of the “quartet” to achieve peace in the Middle East.
My delegation fully supports its plan of action, as
contained in its joint statement of 16 July 2002,
including, inter alia, the efforts to realize the goals of
reform, security and peace, as well as the need to
achieve progress in the political, security, economic,
humanitarian and institution-building spheres in a
comprehensive manner. The humanitarian aspects of
the conflict, particularly those having an impact on the
Palestinian people, have to be urgently tackled. Thus,
the assistance of the international community should be
sustained to alleviate the plight of Palestinian refugees.
Finally, my delegation joins others in reaffirming
that the path to a just and lasting settlement must be
based on the full implementation of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002). It
is only in this way that all peoples of the region, and
future generations to come, can live side by side in
peace, security and harmony within the framework of
the two States.
Mr. Fall (Senegal) Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People (spoke in French): The publication
of the report that the Assembly had, in resolution ES10/10 of 7 May 2002, requested the Secretary-General
to prepare is the reason for the resumption of the tenth
emergency special session to consider the report and
follow up on its relevant conclusions.
But the holding of this session is due also to the
recent tragic events in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including Jerusalem, which are a painful
reflection of the Council’s apparent inability to ensure
that its own decisions are implemented and fully to
discharge the responsibilities entrusted to it by the
Charter of the United Nations.
I should therefore like, in my capacity as Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, to address these two
burning issues, in the hope that the General Assembly
will act in such a way as to discharge its lofty mission.
With respect to the aforementioned report, it must
be acknowledged that, following Israel’s incomprehensible
refusal to cooperate with the fact-finding team which the
Secretary-General then had to disband last April, the

10

United Nations was not able to gather extensive
information in the field. As a result, the SecretaryGeneral had no alternative but to rely on secondhand
information. Regrettably, Tel Aviv did not present its
version of the facts in writing, although it was invited
to do so — thereby demonstrating once again the
minimal importance it attaches to the requests of the
international community.
Despite these constraints, the report of the
Secretary-General contains ample evidence of the fact
that the occupying Power, reacting to terrorist attacks,
launched its “Defensive Shield” operation, thereby
deliberately contravening its obligations under the
Fourth Geneva Convention and the principal norms of
international humanitarian law.
The Israeli forces have reduced innocent
Palestinian civilians to the status of human shields, all
the while engaging in massive arbitrary arrests,
destroying buildings in Jenin and Nablus, blocking
access to medical services and even attacking, with
unrelenting fury, ambulances and emergency vehicles
dispatched to the field.
The list of atrocities committed against the people
and the scope of damage to the infrastructure of the
Palestinian Authority, not to mention the attempts to
eliminate President Arafat and his aides, are so
overwhelming that one could even speak of war crimes.
The competent authorities, primarily the High
Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention
and the Security Council, must seriously consider the
possibility of defining appropriate measures, with a
view to bringing to justice the perpetrators or sponsors
of these acts so that such tragedies can never recur.
Seen in this light and given the estimated number
of recorded deaths — an estimate which entailed an
enlightening battle of statistics because of the absence
of any inquiry on the ground — I wish solemnly to
recall a distressing and poignant fact: any Palestinian,
Israeli or other national who is the victim of blind or
targeted violence is and will always be one victim too
many, a martyr who lies on the path towards peace and
embodies an unexpected alibi, or a calculated stroke of
luck, for the hardliners on both sides, who are violently
opposed to any political concessions with a view to a
political settlement in the Middle East.
Turning now to the second subject of my
statement, I must deplore the fact that illegal Israeli

A/ES-10/PV.19

practices are pursued inexorably in occupied Palestine,
increasing suffering and sowing death and despair. On
22 July, another Israeli missile attack on Gaza,
supposedly directed at a Palestinian leader, caused the
death of 14 other people, most of whom were innocent
children. In response, and once again last weekend,
other attacks in Israel, for which extremist Palestinians
claimed responsibility, claimed the lives of some 18
persons and caused many injuries. Given such serious
acts, which we vigorously condemn, the competent
international authorities must intervene as a matter of
urgency.
We must recall that our Committee has always
condemned the deliberate or indiscriminate assassination
of leaders or other militants, as well as selective or
collateral murder, be they of Palestinians or Israelis,
regardless of the victim, the circumstances or the
reasons. Moreover, we vigorously denounce these
criminal acts and deplore the fact that collective
international inaction has made it possible for those
violations of international humanitarian law to multiply
and to obstruct the resumption of substantive discussions
on a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the
Palestinian case, based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions and the principle of land for peace.
However, we all know that pursuit of the illegal
Israeli occupation and the series of related illegal acts
are at the core of the Palestinian tragedy. Ultimately,
the occupation dehumanizes two kindred peoples and
undermines the legitimacy of their common destiny,
including the stated objective of Israel’s security.
Indeed, the subjugation and the humiliation of the
Palestinian people, the destruction of institutions of the
Palestine Authority, the scorn displayed for Palestinian
sites, the confinement of Palestinians in unbearable
poverty, the suicidal radicalism of the settlers and the
reactions of vengeance and hopelessness to Israeli
repression can only result in widening the gap of hostility
— even hatred — between the two peoples and increase
resentment primarily through the perpetration of further
hateful acts by the most extremist elements.
We know that, left to themselves, Israelis and
Palestinians will never be able to extricate themselves
from the vicious circle of provocation, reprisal and
terror. That is why we call on the international
community to assume its responsibilities and to
intervene more decisively by establishing a solid
international presence in the region to ensure the
security of Israelis and Palestinian civilians.

The international community — I am thinking
particularly of the Security Council and the “quartet”
of mediators consisting of the Americans, the Russians,
the Europeans and the United Nations — must draw up
a bold plan to realize the vision of two States within
the 1967 borders and must speedily convene an
international conference that would lead to a specific
mechanism that would cover the political, economic
and security aspects with the objective of establishing a
sovereign Palestinian State within three years, as set
out by President Bush on 24 June 2002.
For their part, the Arab countries have already
accepted this framework for a lasting settlement, and
extended an olive branch to Israel following the
endorsement by the Beirut Summit last March of the
Saudi peace initiative based on the concept of
withdrawal for normality.
Today Israel must take up the challenge and move
forward resolutely towards peace. In this spirit, Tel
Aviv must, according to a specific and agreed
timetable, effect an immediate withdrawal of its troops
from the reoccupied territories, put an end to its
occupation of Palestinian territory and offer the
suffering population the opportunity to finally exercise
their inalienable and imprescriptible rights.
The overwhelming majority of the population,
Israeli and Palestinian, at the urging of humanity as a
whole, in whose name the San Francisco Charter was
adopted, expect the United Nations, particularly the
Security Council, to help the parties break the diabolical
cycle of violence, prevent further loss of innocent life
and definitively eliminate the apocalyptic spectre of a
generalized conflagration in the Middle East.
Because political dialogue with a tangible
objective is the sine qua non for any final settlement of
the conflict, we must, in order not to disappoint, act
together. We must start here and now by adopting, by a
clear and significant majority, the draft resolution
submitted for approval by the General Assembly.
In that context, it is a pleasure for me to reiterate
the special gratitude of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of Palestinian People, the United
Nations body on whose behalf I have just spoken.
Mr. Ahmad (Bangladesh): Bangladesh commends
the President for his decision to resume the tenth
emergency special session, on illegal Israeli actions in
occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied

11

A/ES-10/PV.19

Palestinian territory. It is indeed a timely response to
the deteriorating situation in the Middle East.

of collective punishment? How would we feel and react
if put in the same situation?

We have before us the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/ES-10/186) on recent Israeli atrocities in
Jenin and other Palestinian cities. As the SecretaryGeneral said, the report was prepared on the basis of
available information and resources, without visits
being made to the places involved. Therefore, it cannot
be construed as being a full and comprehensive account
of what happened in Jenin or other Palestinian cities.
He also reminded us of the history — of why the factfinding mission could not visit the affected areas. The
report mentions that there were at least 52 confirmed
Palestinian deaths in Jenin, a large proportion of which
were of women, children and other unarmed civilians.
This confirmed figure was based on the number of
bodies that were allowed to be taken out of the camp to
one of the nearby hospitals. One may never be able to
ascertain how many more remain buried under the rubble.

We know that one evil does not justify another.
When we are judging between sides, surely the
greater — the primary — responsibility to do the right
thing rests on those parties that enjoy a position of
comparative strength and advantage, rather than on the
other parties. We strongly condemn Israeli excesses in
the occupied territories. The disproportionate use of
Israeli force and collective punishment as a response to
individual Palestinian actions are unacceptable. These
must be stopped. Both the parties have obligations
under international humanitarian law to refrain from
violence against civilians. Perpetrating such acts have
neither ensured Israeli security nor promoted the
Palestinian cause of self-determination. They are
counterproductive to the peace process and detrimental
to mutual trust. One cannot but recall that recently
Israel committed extrajudicial killings when serious
efforts were being undertaken to curb violence and
when the various parties involved were on the brink of
an agreement to bring at least a temporary end to this
cycle of violence. That once again highlighted the
question marks over the motives of the present Israeli
leadership.

The situation in the Middle East continues
without direction through a hopeless cycle of
unprecedented cruelty and violence. During the past
few months in particular, Israeli actions in the
Palestinian-controlled areas have created an untenable
situation. According to the report, unprecedented
Israeli atrocities in the occupied territories have
resulted in the killing of hundreds and hundreds of
Palestinian civilians. Thousands of others have been
wounded. Prolonged curfews and closures imposed in
cities, the widespread destruction of Palestinian
property, including houses and essential infrastructure,
the denial of humanitarian access and attacks on
ambulances have resulted in immense suffering for
Palestinian civilians. Seven thousand Palestinians were
arrested, many of whom were held for long periods
with little or no outside contact. The Israeli actions
infuriated the Palestinians. Consequent acts of
retaliation by Palestinian groups invited renewed and
further severe Israeli actions. In the process, both
Israeli and Palestinian civilians continued to suffer.
Bangladesh condemns all forms of terrorism and
violence against civilians, whether Palestinian or
Israeli. However, such a position has value only for
people living in sane and civilized conditions. Let us
ask ourselves this: can we expect a responsible reaction
from a people subjected, not occasionally, but on a
daily and constant basis, to inhuman, demeaning and
cruel treatment through occupation and different forms

12

Now more than ever before, there is a broad
international consensus on the vision of a two-State
solution — of Israel and Palestine living side by side,
within secure and internationally recognized borders.
So we have the end in view. The big issue now is how
to proceed towards it. The root cause of the conflict is
Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories and the
unabated building of illegal settlements there. Israel
must stop all settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem. It
should also resume revenue transfers and lift the
curfews, internal closures and other restrictions on the
movement of Palestinians.
Bangladesh calls on both parties to end the cycle
of violence and retaliation. We urge them to fully respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
The international community must press for a final
settlement. We welcome the effort of the “quartet” to
help return the parties to the path of negotiation. The
United Nations should continue to advocate an end to
violence and to promote a meaningful resumption of
political dialogue between the parties leading to the
achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting
political settlement of the conflict. This should be

A/ES-10/PV.19

based on relevant United Nations resolutions, including
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
1397 (2002), and on the principle of land for peace.
Finally, we feel that once it has been put back on
track, the peace process and the work towards achieving a
final comprehensive settlement encompassing all
issues — political, social and economic, as well as
security — should continue without any let-up. We
should not allow violent incidents caused by
irresponsible quarters to distract us or to halt the
process. Every time we stop or hesitate, it is a small
victory for the forces that oppose peace. That is the
message we read in President Bush’s recent reaction to
the latest spate of violence in the Middle East; he said,
“There are a few killers who want to stop the peace
process that we have started. We must not let them.”
Mr. Kasemsarn (Thailand): I would like to join
other speakers in commending the President of the
General Assembly for having reconvened the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly at
such short notice, in view of the continuing crisis and
recent events in the Middle East.
We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts in preparing his report (A/ES10/186) of 30 July, in accordance with resolution ES10/10, adopted at the previous resumption of this
session, on 7 May.
What is disheartening is that the issuance of this
report took place against the backdrop of a new cycle
of violence and terror in the area. Indeed, since the last
meeting of the tenth emergency special session, less
than three months ago, the situation in the Middle East
has remained of great concern to the international
community. This reflects the fact that there has been
little, if any, improvement in the situation, particularly
the humanitarian situation.
Thailand deeply regrets the recent tragic events in
Gaza City, at Hebrew University and in other places
that have resulted in the deaths and injuries of many
innocent civilians on both sides as well as in the
destruction of property. Such events not only add to the
spiralling level of violence and terror, but also — and
most important — adversely affect the process of
achieving a peaceful settlement. We therefore appeal to
all parties concerned to exercise the utmost restraint
and to immediately cease the use of violence and terror,
which have brought such suffering and grief to
countless individual civilians and families. Thailand

will continue to condemn all acts of violence,
particularly those directed against civilians, including
women and children, and all acts of terror perpetrated
by any party.
The only viable and acceptable way forward is for
all parties concerned to work towards a comprehensive
and enduring political settlement through peaceful
negotiations. That is the only way to achieve a lasting,
comprehensive and just solution in the Middle East.
We support all relevant international efforts, including
the initiative of His Royal Highness Crown Prince
Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, endorsed at the Beirut Arab
Summit, to help bring about such a solution. We again
strongly urge all parties to fully implement all the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Bearing that in mind, we also support the ongoing
process of consultations within the framework of the
“quartet” and its initiatives. We welcome the recent
meeting of the “quartet” in New York on 16 July,
where senior representatives from the region were
involved in the discussion. It is our earnest hope that
those efforts, in close coordination with other
international efforts, will help restore peace to the
Middle East for all the peoples in the region.
Mr. Acuña (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we should like to express our appreciation for
the reconvening of this emergency special session of
the General Assembly, an appropriate forum for
sharing views that, while lacking the decisive force of
other bodies, permits us to address, in a cooperative
way, a conflict that concerns everyone.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
that will be made shortly by the representative of Costa
Rica on behalf of the Rio Group.
Our participation in today’s debate arises from
the need to express our sadness and unease as we
verify with concrete data the grave incidents of death
and destruction that occurred recently in Jenin and in
other Palestinian cities. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/ES-10/186) in that regard,
which provides a balanced picture of the irresponsibly
prolonged suffering of innocent civilian populations. In
that connection, we regret the lack of cooperation by
the Government of Israel in the efforts undertaken to
clarify a complex reality. Once again, my country calls
for the abandonment of rigid positions and for the
adoption of a constructive attitude that would
contribute to the attainment of peace.

13

A/ES-10/PV.19

The struggle to ensure that human dignity will
prevail over abuse and attacks is based on
unconditional respect for the basic principle of the
inviolability of life, on the acceptance of differing
opinions, on mutual respect and on the correct use of
words, which can either make peace grow or foment
violence and mistrust. For that reason, my country is
dismayed at news of the “major offensives” and
“exemplary punishments”, such as deportations and
house demolitions, with which the Palestinian people
are being threatened and humiliated. We are also
dismayed at news of acts of vengeance against Israel’s
civilian population.
The leaders of Israel and of the Palestinian people
have a responsibility to moderate their voices in order
to make peace and to eradicate the violence that
divides two peoples submerged in a conflict that has no
military solution. Reprisals have proved ineffective in
settling disputes. The only viable path is that of
dialogue and negotiation. Hatred does not put an end to
hatred.
We call on the Government of Israel to halt its
military operations in the Palestinian territories and to
fully withdraw its troops from all Palestinian cities and
other areas under the control of the Palestinian
Authority. The occupation must cease and give way to
the peaceful coexistence of two independent States,
living side by side within secure and internationally
recognized borders.
The international community’s efforts to bring
about the resumption of direct negotiations between the
parties must focus on restoring the minimum
conditions for mutual respect, which are necessary to
ensure that political and security negotiations can take
place under equitable conditions. Only clear political
prospects that provide the Palestinian people with
understandable and encouraging objectives, together
with the fostering of recognized democratic values,
such as the right to elect leaders freely and without
conditions, will guarantee that advances in the
negotiation process are authentic and lasting.
We appreciate and acknowledge the efforts
undertaken by the Secretary-General, the Security
Council and the “quartet”, as well as the participation
of Egypt, Jordan and Saudi Arabia in the negotiation
process. Statements by the “quartet” reflect our own
views and renew our hopes for a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East, based on the implementation of

14

Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002), the mandates of the Madrid
Conference and the principle of land for peace.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): It is my honour, on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, to express our
sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General for
providing us with a report (A/ES-10/186) on the Jenin
incident. Member States requested that report during
the last meeting of the tenth emergency special session
of the General Assembly. As a result, the SecretaryGeneral and his staff have produced a concise report
based on the information available to them. We are all
aware that the Israeli Government did everything
within its power to withhold information about what
happened during the invasion, and even prevented the
Secretary-General’s high-profile team from gaining
access to Jenin.
Inevitably, the Secretary-General’s report falls
short of a comprehensive inquiry, and is not definitive
about whether war crimes and crimes against humanity
were committed. Despite the obstructions placed in the
way of a proper investigation, it is worth recalling the
prophetic words of the Secretary-General, who
observed that the long shadow cast by events in the
Jenin refugee camp will remain in the absence of the
deployment of a fact-finding mission. The events of
Jenin, like those that took place in Sabra and Shatila,
will haunt Israel for many years to come.
Meanwhile, the senseless killing of innocent
Palestinian and Israeli civilians has not ended. At the
time Member States requested the report before us,
more than 400 Israelis and more than 1,500
Palestinians had died. During the time the report was
being prepared more civilians were killed and injured
on both sides. In one incident, when an F-16 fighter jet
dropped laser-guided bombs on a heavily populated
residential area in the Gaza Strip, inflicting massive
civilian casualties and injuries, Prime Minister Sharon
described the attack as “one of our most successful
military operations to date”. However, the deadly
retaliatory attacks against Israel demonstrate that so
long as “success” is measured in terms of the number
of people killed, the world will remain far from seeing
peace in the Middle East.
This debate on the Secretary-General’s report on
the Jenin incident is not merely an attempt to set the
historical record straight on the events surrounding the
attack on a densely populated refugee camp. The

A/ES-10/PV.19

suffering of the Palestinian civilian population
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory continues to
this very day. Israel’s military operations in Palestinian
towns and cities have generated a humanitarian and
human rights catastrophe throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem. The military
operations, the curfews and blockades, the destruction
of homes and the threatened expulsions continue in
violation of international humanitarian law, including
the Fourth Geneva Convention. We wish to draw the
Assembly’s attention specifically to the extreme
suffering caused to innocent civilians, particularly to
women, children and the elderly, by the wanton
destruction of private homes. We recently witnessed a
particularly shocking incident of this nature in Gaza.
The Secretary-General’s report contains highly
disturbing eyewitness accounts of Israel’s disproportionate
use of force, not only in Jenin but also in Nablus and
other cities throughout the West Bank. Indeed, we did
not realize the full extent of the tragedy that was
unfolding in Nablus when last we appeared before the
General Assembly. While the exact number of
casualties may never be known, the report shows that
approximately 50 Palestinian civilians were killed in
Nablus alone. The report also estimates that close to
500 Palestinians were killed during the period 1 March
through 7 May 2002.
The report points to Israel’s use of the most
advanced and lethal military equipment against densely
populated civilian areas, extrajudicial executions,
arbitrary arrests and mass detentions of civilian men,
the mistreatment of prisoners, and the use of civilians
as human shields. It also states that the extensive physical
damage to Palestinian civilian property “did not appear to
be related to military objectives.” (A/ES-10/186, para.
33). The targeting of individuals, especially in terms of
the Israeli policy of extrajudicial executions, is
objectionable in the extreme and constitutes an
important stumbling block on the road towards a
peaceful settlement of the conflict.
It is on the issue of the denial of humanitarian
access to the Palestinian people affected by the Israeli
operations, however, that this report is most
authoritative. The shocking accounts of prolonged
delays in medical attention due to Israeli military
operations, curfews and blockades, and of the attacks
on ambulances and humanitarian workers, come
directly from the impartial humanitarian personnel
themselves. As the report notes,

“There is a consensus among humanitarian
personnel who were present on the ground that
the delays endangered the lives of many wounded
and ill within. United Nations and other
humanitarian personnel offered to comply fully
with IDF (Israeli Defence Forces) security checks
on entering and leaving the camp, but were not
able to enter the camp on this basis.” (para. 67)
The report states clearly that Israeli military
incursions were often carried out against the
Palestinian Authority and its security installations. That
had the effect of severely weakening the Authority’s
capacity to take effective action against militant groups
that launched retaliatory attacks on Israelis.
Furthermore, the report noted particular concern in the
use by combatants on both sides of violence that placed
civilians in harm’s way.
Perhaps the way out of this tragic impasse is
indicated in the remark made by the Secretary-General
in the report that there is an urgent need for the parties
to resume a process that will lead back to the
negotiating table. That observation is in line with the
principled position of the Non-Aligned Movement,
which believes that there can be no military solution to
this conflict. The encouraging resurgence in the peace
movement, both in Israel and in Palestine, is the
clearest indication that, despite the terrible and
destructive violence being perpetrated against innocent
Israelis and Palestinians, there is still hope for the
resumption of negotiations. We believe that it is
incumbent upon the international community to
redouble its efforts towards the creation of a favourable
environment for restarting peace negotiations.
The Movement has always believed that a just
and durable solution to the Middle East crisis must be
premised upon an end to Israeli occupation of Arab land
and the establishment of an independent Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. Until the Palestinians
have a place they can call home, the people of the
Middle East are unlikely to know peace.
Mr. El Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the President for
responding favourably and promptly to the request of
the Arab Group for the resumption of the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly on
illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and
the rest of the occupied Palestinian territories.

15

A/ES-10/PV.19

There is no doubt that the resumption of this
session reflects the ongoing anxiety and concern of the
international community over recent events in the
occupied Palestinian territories due to Israel’s
escalation of its occupation of Palestinian towns and
cities, over the increase in illegal acts against the
legitimate Palestinian Authority and its institutions and
facilities and against areas inhabited by civilians, and
over the considerable resulting human and material
losses. The worsening of the situation has resulted in
the paralysis of all efforts for a comprehensive and just
peace in the region, including the latest Arab initiative
adopted by Arab kings and heads of State at the recent
Beirut summit. The situation has also paralyzed the
efforts of the “quartet”.
We are very concerned as we witness the Israeli
Government’s pursuit of its arbitrary policy against
Palestinian towns and villages, by which it has
occupied most towns previously governed by the
Palestinian Authority and has strengthened its military,
economic and social blockade on them. This prefigures
a humanitarian disaster of the kind that we are seeing
now in Nablus and elsewhere.
The resumption of this emergency special session
comes immediately after the publication of the report
of the Secretary-General on the painful and tragic
events that took place in the Jenin camp and in other
Palestinian cities. The report was prepared subsequent
to resolution ES-10/10, adopted by the General
Assembly at its meeting of 7 May 2002. The
Assembly’s resolution was met with great hesitation on
the part of the representative of the Government of
Israel, which had refused to accept Security Council
resolution 1405 (2002) calling for the dispatch of a
fact-finding mission to examine on the ground the
atrocities committed by Israeli occupying forces in the
occupied Palestinian territories.
Without doubt, the report does not fulfil all the
objective conditions necessary to shed light on the
facts, draw conclusions and assign responsibilities. If
the report had been the result of an on-site visit in
accordance with resolution 1405 (2002), we probably
would have had clear facts and evidence revealing to us
the gravity of the crimes committed by the Israeli
occupying forces against Palestinian civilians during
the so-called Operation Defensive Shield.
As Mr. Kofi Annan himself has declared, no
comprehensive and detailed report on the events in

16

Jenin could be prepared without a visit to the place
itself and without the cooperation of all parties
concerned. Therefore, the Israeli Government, by
refusing to provide the United Nations with
information on what happened, caused the report to be
prepared on the basis of documents provided by the
Palestinian Authority, Member States, international
bodies, non-governmental organizations, United
Nations staff and media organizations.
The report proves without a doubt that Israeli
forces committed many violations in the course of their
attack on Palestinian lands, which is described as the
most massive Israeli military action in a decade. By
conducting that military campaign, Israel has flouted
all international norms, in particular international
humanitarian law and the Fourth Geneva Convention.
The cycle of violence and reprisals is bound to
worsen the loss of human life and material damage. We
have seen very clearly that adopting a logic of security
concerns in isolation cannot end the cycle of violence.
That is the reason the international community, today
more than ever, must compel the Israeli Government to
comply with the provisions of international law, to put
an end to its occupation of Palestinian and Arab
territories, to resume negotiation without prior
conditions and to comply with the principles upon
which the peace process is based.
Morocco unreservedly condemns all kinds of
violence in the Middle East. We condemn the loss of
human life. On this occasion, we would like to recall
the words of His Majesty Mohammed VI in his throne
day speech of 30 July 2002, which stated Morocco’s
position on terrorism. He said,
“As terrorism has no religion nor nation, we
have to defend our countries from its causes and
perils. That is done through our effective
international contribution to the eradication of the
causes of terrorism in the global context.”
His Majesty King Mohammed VI, President of
the Al-Quds Committee, has always called on the
international community and the parties involved in the
peace process to avoid the catastrophe that we are
currently witnessing in the Palestinian territories. His
Majesty is continuing his efforts to calm the situation
and to create the conditions necessary for a resumption
of the peace process and for a return to negotiations
without prior conditions. As always, Morocco is ready
to contribute to all regional and international efforts to

A/ES-10/PV.19

contain the crisis and to encourage the parties
concerned to resume negotiations in order to reach a
just and comprehensive peace in the region.
The Kingdom of Morocco is firmly convinced
that peace is the only possible way to end the conflict in
the Middle East. However, peace-building requires the
withdrawal of Israeli forces from the occupied Palestinian
territories, the creation of a Palestinian State with AlQuds as its capital and the return of all occupied Arab
territories by virtue of legitimate international decisions.
Mrs. Chassoul (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
It is a pleasure for me to take the floor at this tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly on
behalf of the 19 countries that are members of the Rio
Group – Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela and my
own country, Costa Rica.
The Rio Group would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report, which was submitted in
accordance with General Assembly resolution ES10/10, despite the difficult circumstances surrounding
its preparation. We believe that this document reflects
the events that took place in Jenin and other Palestinian
cities, taking into account the obstacles that the
Secretariat faced in trying to gather information and
obtain access to sources.
The Rio Group reiterates its strong condemnation
of terrorism and violence in all of their forms and
manifestations. It deplores the loss of human life in the
region, which has included, recently, some nationals of
our own countries. We demand an immediate end to such
acts and full respect for international humanitarian law.
We call on States with influence on the parties to
step up their efforts to find, together with them, a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the conflict
on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002). We
urge the parties to explore all possible avenues for
dialogue and negotiation.
We deem it essential to ensure the security of the
civilian population and to permit access to humanitarian
assistance. In this context, we fully agree with the
strategy recently adopted by the “quartet” to accord the
highest priority to alleviating the suffering of the
affected and displaced civilian population.

Finally, the Rio Group wishes to reiterate its
desire to cooperate with the rest of the international
community in the quest for a lasting solution to the
conflict.
Mr. Bilman (Turkey): Turkey has aligned itself
with the statement delivered this morning by the
representative of Denmark on behalf of the European
Union, which reflects our main concerns. Allow me to
further elaborate on my delegation’s views on certain
points at today’s resumed tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly.
When my delegation addressed the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly on
7 May 2002, it expressed the hope that it would be
possible to talk of improved and concrete prospects for
peace when the time came for us to deliberate on this
issue again. Regrettably, we meet today once again in
the shadow of relentless and brutal violence, which
only yesterday claimed many lives in northern Galilee,
at the Damascus Gate in Jerusalem’s Old City and in
the Gaza Strip. We feel deep sorrow at those tragic
events and wish to express our most sincere
condolences to the bereaved families of the victims.
We once again condemn absolutely all acts of violence
and terror, including the morally repugnant suicide
bombings. We reiterate our clear-cut position that
terrorism is a crime against humanity and cannot be
justified under any pretext.
At the same time, we wholeheartedly share the
bitterness and pain of those Palestinians who lost
family members and relatives, most of whom were
children, in Israel’s aerial military attack on Gaza on
22 July. In this regard, we condemn any military action
directed indiscriminately
against
the
civilian
population and residential areas. While fully
recognizing the legitimate right of Israel to defend
itself and to take the necessary measures against the
perpetrators of heinous terrorist attacks, we wish to
remind the Israeli Government to respect the basic
principles of international law and to refrain from using
disproportionate military force, which certainly do not
contribute to resolving the current crisis. As has been
pointed out by the Secretary-General,
“we cannot achieve security by sacrificing human
rights. To try to do so would hand the terrorists a
victory beyond their dreams”.
Turkey appreciates the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and welcomes his report on the events that

17

A/ES-10/PV.19

took place in Jenin and in other Palestinian cities
earlier this year. As we stated at the previous gathering
of the tenth emergency special session, the attitude of
the Israeli Government on this purely humanitarian
issue has been regrettable. Like the rest of the
international community, we, too, would have preferred
that a fact-finding team be dispatched to the region in
order to obtain firsthand information. It is sad that
Israel did not officially respond to the request that it
submit information to the United Nations.
Nevertheless, we should not disregard the concluding
remarks of the Secretary-General, who believes that the
picture painted in the report is a fair representation of a
complex reality.

therefore the moral duty of the leadership of both
parties to their nations as well as to the international
community to take effective steps towards paving the
way to the negotiating table.

The events described in the report testify to the
grim situation in the Middle East, which is the result of
widespread violence. It is obvious that operation
“Defensive Shield”, conducted by the Israeli Defence
Forces in areas populated mostly by civilians, did not
bring about the expected outcome. What it brought
about was a high death toll and heavy destruction and
devastation in the Palestinian cities, and it aggravated
the already severe socio-economic conditions of the
Palestinian people.

Before concluding, let me also emphasize one
point. We sincerely hope that today’s deliberations in
this Hall will produce an outcome which reflects the
main thrust of the Secretary-General’s report, in all its
aspects and in a balanced manner. we are faced with on
the ground is indeed nothing less than a tragic
humanitarian situation. While we cannot accept the
conditions to which the Palestinians are subjected, we
cannot, at the same time, tolerate the continuous
targeting of Israeli people by terrorists.

Furthermore, the denial of access to medical and
humanitarian personnel — a finding included in the
report — is something that we cannot accept. It is
deeply regrettable that medical personnel were targeted
by Israeli military forces. We truly hope that, as
promised by Israel, the crucial importance of
humanitarian agencies will be recognized and their
work improved and facilitated.

Now more than ever it is incumbent upon the
entire international community, but first and foremost
upon the parties themselves, to do their utmost urgently
to break the vicious cycle of violence and lay the
foundations of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.

On the other hand, the Secretary-General’s report
also stresses the obligations of the Palestinian
Authority to fight terrorism and to protect Israeli
civilians from terrorist attacks. We note with deep
concern the finding in the report that in Jenin
Palestinian militants from radical groups adopted
measures that constitute a violation of international
law. It is unacceptable for certain Palestinian groups to
exploit civilians for their own purposes.
We fully agree with the Secretary-General, who
clearly demonstrates in his report the urgent need for
the parties to resume a process that would lead back to
the negotiating table. Let us be very clear. There is no
military solution to this historical conflict. The road to
peace in the Middle East passes only through political
will, which requires courage and statesmanship. It is

18

As set out in Security Council resolution 1397
(2002), the solution to the Middle East conflict should
involve two States, Palestine and Israel, living side by
side within secure and recognized borders. There seems
to be no alternative to this option.
Turkey, besides supporting various international
efforts and enjoying good relations with both parties,
stands ready to play a facilitating role in the peace
process as a reliable partner for Israel and Palestine.

Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): My delegation would
like to express its appreciation to the President for
convening the resumed tenth emergency special session
of the General Assembly to consider the grave situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory.
I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (A/ES-10/186), which was prepared on the basis
of General Assembly resolution ES-10/10. While we
note the findings contained in the report, my delegation
deeply regrets that not only did Israel refuse to allow
the fact-finding team into Jenin, it also refused to
cooperate with the Secretary-General in the preparation
of the report. In our view, this report should not have
contained media reports from the Israeli Government,
which were not directed to the United Nations. It
remains a bad precedent that Israel is allowed to
obstruct the decisions of the Security Council without
consequences.

A/ES-10/PV.19

My delegation is deeply distressed about the
extremely grave situation, which deteriorates day by
day. However, in our view, this tragedy should not
prevent the international community from continuing to
seek a negotiated settlement of the conflict and the
protection of the lives and the rights of the Palestinian
people. Every possible effort must be made to ensure
that the parties regain mutual confidence and return to
the negotiating table.
The Palestinian people have been living in
atrocious conditions for decades, and their situation
continues to deteriorate. They are the victims of Israeli
aggression. They continue to suffer severe hardship at
the hands of the Israeli Defence Forces. Israel seems
determined to destroy the Palestinian Authority and, in
the process, massive human rights violations as well as
grave breaches of international humanitarian law are
taking place. The report before us contains ample
information in that regard. It describes in shocking
terms how humanitarian agencies were prevented by
the Israeli Defence Forces from delivering medical
supplies and medical assistance to the needy, which
resulted in hundreds of civilian deaths. Furthermore,
even medical personnel were directly targeted.
The policy of extrajudicial executions by Israel is
being broadened. The recent attacks on Gaza and other
cities, which resulted in the deaths of many civilians,
including women and children, are deplorable. The
international community should ensure that Israel is
held accountable for such breaches of international
humanitarian law and war crimes. It is regrettable
indeed that the Security Council, the body responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
is paralysed and unwilling to do anything about the
tragic situation unfolding in the occupied Palestinian
territory. The authority of the Security Council is
further eroded through its failure to enforce its own
resolutions on the question of Palestine.
My delegation believes that the continued illegal
occupation of Palestine, the oppression, the settlement
activities and the collective punishment of the
Palestinian people by the occupying Power are the root
causes of violence and insecurity in the region. We also
believe that unless these root causes are removed the
situation will continue to deteriorate. Thus, the
fundamental issue is that occupation must stop, and it
must stop unconditionally. This will not only require
political will by Israel, but it will also require honest
and forward-looking mediators. In other words, those

who mediate between the two parties must do so in
good faith.
Attempts by some quarters to remove President
Arafat from office are not only undemocratic; they are
unacceptable. President Arafat is the legitimate and
democratically elected leader of the Palestinian people.
And nobody but the Palestinian people themselves has
the right to decide whom they want to be their leader,
through free, fair and democratic elections.
My delegation strongly supports all efforts
towards a just, lasting and comprehensive settlement
based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) and the principle of land for peace. In that
regard, we welcome efforts by the “quartet” and others
towards the establishment of two States living together
in peace, as envisioned in Security Council resolution
1397 (2002).
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to express its
strong and unqualified support for the draft resolution
before us.
Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): My delegation is
grateful to the President for convening this meeting,
which is very timely.
Mauritius welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/ES-10/186) on the events that took place in
Jenin and in other Palestinian cities, covering the
period March to May 2002. The report provides,
without exaggeration, insight into the magnitude of
destruction and suffering resulting from the Israeli
attacks on Jenin and other Palestinian cities. Needless
to say, we are appalled and deeply disturbed by the
widespread destruction caused by Operation Defensive
Shield.
Mauritius wishes to reiterate in the strongest
terms its condemnation of all instances where innocent
civilians, especially women and children, become
victims of insane and barbaric acts.
We deplore the deaths caused by yesterday’s
bomb attack on an Israeli commuter bus in the northern
Galilee, as well as the attack on the campus of Hebrew
University in Jerusalem. Innocent lives, irrespective of
nationality, deserve to be protected at all costs, and it is
a moral and legal responsibility under humanitarian
law for all the parties involved in a conflict to commit
themselves to these obligations.

19

A/ES-10/PV.19

Since September 2000 the spiral of violence has
continued unabated, despite international calls for
restraint. Each terrorist act has been followed by an
incursion by the Israeli Defence Forces into Palestinian
territory, and each incursion has been followed by a
further terrorist act. The precarious and unstable
situation in the Middle East must be brought to an end.
This will be possible only if both parties come to terms
and agree on a common platform for constructive talks
and negotiation.
My delegation fully supports the various
international initiatives aimed at a peaceful settlement
of the Middle East problem. The recent “quartet”
meeting confirmed that there must be a negotiated
permanent settlement based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and that there
can be no military solution to the conflict. We must
work on that premise, with a view to adopting a lasting
solution to the problem of the Middle East. Likewise,
we believe in a comprehensive approach that would
address the political, economic, social and
humanitarian conditions in the occupied territories. In
that regard, we call upon all donors to continue their
support for the development and rebuilding of the
Palestinian infrastructure, an imperative for furthering
the peace process. We firmly believe that the land-forpeace formula should be the basis for all future talks.
This would help to translate into reality the concept of
two States living side by side within internationally
recognized boundaries, as proposed by the “quartet”.
But peace will not be attainable in the absence of
genuine commitment from both sides. It is time for
reflection on what has gone wrong in all the efforts
carried out so far. If we continue to respond with words
only, and not take any concrete action, we risk ending
up with a further deterioration of the situation in the
Middle East. Time is of the essence. Two wrongs
cannot make a right. If a unilateral measure is taken by
one party against another, resulting in blatant abuses of
human rights and humanitarian law, it is not necessary
for the other party to act in the same way. Such an
attitude and such behaviour will only exacerbate the
situation and cause the parties to engage in incessant
retaliatory acts, thus having a negative impact on the
peace process.
We have repeatedly said that Israel should
comply with all relevant Security Council resolutions
and give the peace process a chance. We firmly believe
that there must be an immediate withdrawal by Israel

20

from the occupied territories. That is the most
important confidence-building measure that Israel
should undertake in order to instil the required
confidence. It is inconceivable that more than 700,000
Palestinian people should be kept under siege for so
long a period. It is also unacceptable that the
Palestinian leader, Yasser Arafat, should be isolated in
his headquarters in Ramallah for so many months.
Moreover, inflicting collective punishment, denying
innocent civilians the right to a free life and preventing
them from carrying out their routine economic and
social activities are totally unjustified. We deplore the
use by Israel of disproportionate military force and of
heavy weaponry, which has been the cause of massive
destruction and has been responsible for heavy human
casualties, including among women and children.
Finally, we again urge both parties to exercise the
utmost self-restraint and engage in meaningful
dialogue that will pave the way for peace and make a
definite contribution to the de-escalation of violence in
the Middle East region.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 477 (V) of 1 November
1950, I now call on the Observer of the League of Arab
States.
Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States)(spoke
in Arabic): First, I would like sincerely to thank the
President of the General Assembly for responding to
the request to resume the tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly to consider anew the
serious and deteriorating situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories in general, and the SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/ES-10/186) in particular.
That report acknowledges at the outset that visits
to Jenin and other Palestinian areas were not possible
because of Israel’s refusal. That made the report a mere
description of facts that could not be hidden. The report
did not take a clear position; it did not even place
blame on Israel for having refused to allow the factfinding team to perform its task. Israel has committed
many crimes and flouted the resolutions of the
international community, which has failed to take a
firm stand against Israel’s position, despite all of the
efforts made by the United Nations over the past two
decades.
Israel has completely disregarded international
legitimacy and has refused to implement Security
Council resolution 1405 (2002). It has carried out

A/ES-10/PV.19

massacres in Jenin and other areas. Israel’s violations
of international law and human rights have become a
daily occurrence. It has committed war crimes and has
flagrantly violated international law. The situation has
reached a point at which there can be no further
concessions. The report mentions the war crimes
committed by Israel, which violate international law
and the Fourth Geneva Convention. But it fell short of
using the proper word, “massacre”. Yes, it was a
massacre. Fifty-two people were killed in the Jenin
camp, all of them civilians. The report nevertheless did
not determine exactly how many people died in
addition to the 52 that were reported. Israel used its air
force and heavy artillery to bomb and raid Palestinian
civilian areas. Could the civilians in Jenin defend
themselves against such attacks?
It is very clear that war crimes and violations of
international law have been committed. How long can
this situation continue? The situation is deplorable and
it will only deteriorate further if such violations of
international law continue.
The crisis in the Middle East has deteriorated and
has become a real threat to international peace and
security, with no light at the end of the tunnel. The
conflict has caused a crisis in the international legal
system. United Nations resolutions have been violated,
and the Security Council has failed to shoulder its
responsibility.
Faced with such a situation, what can the General
Assembly do, having received the report before it?
Israel’s refusal to receive the fact-finding team is
deplorable, and the international community’s failure
to take a stand in the light of that refusal has only
encouraged Israel to carry out further attacks against
innocent civilians. The Assembly should end this crisis
by putting an end to Israeli practices that have been
deliberately escalated. It should adopt a resolution that
restores its credibility, upholds rights and proves the
effectiveness of the United Nations as the international
forum most directly concerned. A clear message should
be sent to Israel, the occupying Power, requesting it to
shoulder its responsibility to provide the necessary
protection to civilians, in conformity with the Fourth
Geneva Convention. The Assembly should put an end
to the fait accompli imposed by Israel in the occupied
territories. It should force Israel to respect the relevant
Security Council resolutions, and should demand that
Israel withdraw from the occupied territories. The
Assembly should regain its credibility by doing its

utmost to improve the situation and by enabling the
Palestinian institutions to be re-established.
Assistance by the international community has
become a matter of extreme urgency to help the
Palestinians rebuild their infrastructure. The Assembly
should also reaffirm its support for international
efforts — in particular those of the “quartet” and of
other peace-loving countries —to lend credence to
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
The Assembly’s adoption of the revised draft resolution
before it could represent a first step in the right
direction.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 3369 (XXX), of 10
October 1975, I now call on the Observer of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.
Mr. Husain (Organization of the Islamic
Conference): I am grateful for this opportunity to
address the General Assembly at its resumed tenth
emergency special session on behalf of the General
Secretariat of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, the intergovernmental organization of 57
sovereign States, all of which are also States Members
of the United Nations and are represented here today. I
speak on agenda item 5, “Illegal Israeli actions in
occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territory”.
We have read carefully and with grave concern
the report of the Secretary-General, contained in
document A/ES-10/186, on recent events that took
place in Jenin and in other Palestinian cities. Despite
the fact that the report was prepared without Israeli
cooperation and without even a visit to the area, what it
contains in paragraphs 48 through 69 about Israeli
military incursions into Jenin city and in paragraphs 71
through 81 about the same occupying Power’s military
incursions into the cities of Ramallah, Bethlehem and
Nablus is heart-rending. And the fact that the
Secretary-General, in his observations, concludes in
paragraph 82 — sharing the assessment of President
Ahtisaari and his fact-finding team — that a full and
comprehensive report could not be made because of
those two constraints, alludes to the fact that there will
be more horrible details to report concerning Israeli
aggressions against the Palestinian populations of those
cities.
When His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan proposed
the dispatch of a multinational force to the occupied

21

A/ES-10/PV.19

Palestinian territories following the recent grave
deterioration of conditions in that area, the SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
His Excellency Mr. Abdelouahed Belkeziz, addressed
an urgent communication to him fully supporting the
proposal. He further suggested the dispatch of an
international commission that would inquire into the
atrocities that had been, and were continuing to be,
committed by the Israeli occupation forces against
Palestinian civilians in the cities of Jenin and Nablus.
He drew attention to Israeli attempts to conceal those
atrocities by removing the bodies of hundreds of
Palestinians for burial in secret locations, in addition to
evicting and displacing thousands of Palestinians after
plundering and demolishing their homes. He
emphasized the need for the proposed commission of
inquiry to investigate the Israeli occupation forces’
invasion of Palestinian institutions, cultural centres and
banks, and the confiscation of documents, records and
computers belonging to various ministries of the
Palestinian Authority, which was paralysing their
regular operations.
In that communication, the United Nations was
assured of the fullest cooperation of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference in the fielding of the
proposed commission of inquiry. The thinking of the
Secretaries- General of our two organizations on that
approach was identical. It found expression in the
United Nations Secretary-General’s initiative to
develop accurate information on the events in the Jenin
refugee camp through a fact-finding team of
exceptionally competent and reputable persons. We
looked to the international community for support for
the initiative.
Regrettably, Israel’s non-cooperation and its
blatant sabotage of the initiative, an initiative which
had the Security Council’s endorsement and Israel’s
own prior agreement, made it impossible for the
Secretary-General to proceed with the fielding of the
mission. What has come instead is the report, pursuant
to General Assembly resolution ES-10/10 of 7 May
2002, which draws upon whatever information was
available short of the planned visit to Jenin, which, if
fielded, would have gathered and brought back more
credible details of what had transpired.
In this, the inference with regard to Israeli
intentions is obvious. The truth, once again, is being
concealed through Israel’s disregard of Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions. And on this

22

occasion, as on so many previous ones, the
international community’s appeasement of Israeli
intransigence is keeping the conflict entrenched rather
than moving towards a solution. That is particularly
disheartening, as it comes at a time when an
international consensus on the two-State solution,
providing for the establishment of an independent State
of Palestine, is clearly emerging. It remains incumbent
upon the international community to ensure that this
consensus proceeds to fruition, unimpeded by the
nefarious designs and actions of any adversaries.
Those now in power in Israel, by their deeds and
misdeeds past and present, have succeeded in
demonstrating their aversion to the peace process and
to the idea of the creation of the State of Palestine with
Jerusalem as its capital. The latest among their excuses
for not proceeding in this desirable direction, and for
scuttling whatever progress has been achieved through
the creation and functioning of the Palestinian
Authority, is the Palestinian resistance to the forces of
occupation, which Israel is calling terrorism. In fact, it
is Israel’s own acts of State terrorism against the
Palestinian people, perpetrated under its prolonged,
illegal and immoral occupation, that are inviting
resistance and retaliation. If the Government of Israel
truly desires peace and security, then its course of
action should be, not continued force and brutality, but
the withdrawal of all its occupation forces from the
occupied Palestinian territories and a return to the
negotiating table within the framework of the peace
process.
It is our sincere hope that the draft resolution
before the General Assembly will receive the
Assembly’s approval, thereby clearing the way for the
resumption of peace negotiations, advancing the
establishment of the independent sovereign State of
Palestine and contributing to peace and progress for all
countries and peoples of the region.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
At this point, I should like to inform members
that the Secretariat has received a revised version of
draft resolution A/ES-10/L.10, which the Secretariat is
processing for issuance. In that regard, I should also
like to inform members that I propose to suspend this
meeting now to provide time for the issuance of the
revised draft resolution. We shall then proceed to take
up the revised draft resolution.

A/ES-10/PV.19

The meeting was suspended at 5.45 p.m. and resumed
at 8.25 p.m.
The Acting President: In connection with the
item under consideration, the Assembly has before it a
new draft resolution under the symbol A/ES-10/L.11.
On account of the late hour and the lack of time
to process the new draft resolution into all languages,
and on the understanding that delegations are ready to
consider the draft resolution with only the English text
before them, we shall proceed to consider the draft
resolution.
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Africa to introduce draft resolution A/ES-10/L.11.
Mr. Cardy (South Africa): It is my honour this
evening to introduce the draft resolution which is
before the Assembly in document A/ES-10/L.11.
This draft resolution is the product of extensive
negotiations among all United Nations Member States.
We therefore believe that it enjoys the overwhelming
support of the Assembly. The draft resolution before
the Assembly has nine preambular paragraphs and
eight operative paragraphs. The preambular paragraphs
address the main issue before the meeting today, the
release of the Secretary-General’s report (A/ES10/186) on the incident in Jenin. We take note of that
report in this draft resolution. The draft resolution also
deplores Israel’s lack of cooperation in implementing
Security Council resolution 1405 (2002) and reiterates
the obligation of Israel, as the occupying Power, to
respect the Fourth Geneva Convention.
The draft resolution expresses grave concern at
the tragic and violent events that have taken place in
the occupied territories since September 2000, as well
as at the continuing violence.
The resolution also stresses the need to end the
Israeli occupation and emphasizes the importance of
the safety and well-being of all civilians in the whole
Middle East region.
By the operative paragraphs, the Assembly would
demand the immediate cessation of all military
incursions and demand the immediate withdrawal of
the Israeli occupying forces from Palestinian
population centres towards a return to the positions
held prior to September 2000. Furthermore, the
operative paragraphs stress the need for all concerned
parties to ensure the safety of civilians and to respect

the universally accepted norms of international
humanitarian law. The other operative paragraphs deal
with the dire humanitarian situation in the occupied
territories.
The Acting President: Before we proceed
further, I should like to consult the Assembly with a
view to proceeding immediately to consider the draft
resolution contained in document A/ES-10/L.11. In that
connection, since document A/ES-10/L.11 has only just
been circulated in the Hall, it would be necessary to
waive the relevant provision of rule 78 of the rules of
procedure. The relevant provision of rule 78 reads as
follows,
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees with the proposal to waive that
provision of rule 78.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/ES-10/L.11. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina,
Botswana,
Brazil,
Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Morocco,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,

23

A/ES-10/PV.19

Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian
Federation, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, Honduras, Nauru,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Romania, Samoa, Solomon
Islands, Tonga
Draft resolution A/ES-10/L.11 was adopted by
114 votes to 4, with 11 abstentions (resolution
ES-10/11).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Eritrea informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour; the delegation of Cameroon informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
the speakers in explanation of vote on the resolution
just adopted, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Price (Canada): With regard to the events in
Jenin and other Palestinian cities last April, the
Government of Canada has consistently supported the
initiative of the Secretary-General to develop accurate
information. We are grateful to the Secretary-General
for overseeing the completion of the report (A/ES10/186), which speaks to the value of factual inquiry
and to the important role of the United Nations. It also
underscores the responsibility of both sides in finding a
resolution to this tragic conflict.
Canada was disappointed by the Israeli decision
not to cooperate with the fact-finding team mandated
by the Security Council. We felt it was important to
bring the facts to light.
My delegation abstained in the vote on the draft
resolution before the Assembly today because the text
fails to deal adequately with the full balance of

24

responsibility for the continuing violence, which has
resulted in far too many deaths. That, in our view, is a
fundamental weakness. Canada cannot concur with the
interpretation of those events as provided by the text of
the resolution or with the singling out of one party.
In addition, while we did not wish to block the
proceedings of the Assembly this evening, we would
note that this text, which we received only this
evening, is substantially changed from that which had
been circulated earlier today — indeed, I would say it
is a new text.
While we welcome these developments, thorough
consultations in our capital would be required to
properly evaluate such changes on this complex matter.
We note with regret that there was insufficient time for
such evaluation and reflection.
A negotiated peace which fulfils the term of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002) is the best guarantee of the security of
Israelis, Palestinians and of the entire region, whose
population has the right to live in full security and
freedom from fear.
The international community ardently desires the
resumption of dialogue and negotiation. It stands ready
to assist the parties, and the parties must make use of
that goodwill. I should like to reiterate Canada’s
willingness to assist in these efforts.
Mr. Jacob (Israel): Israel voted against the draft
resolution just adopted because it fails to reflect the
realities of Palestinian terrorism, distorts the report of
the Secretary-General and fails even the minimum test
of basic fairness in that it ignores the deaths of Israelis
from a brutal terrorist campaign which has been
condemned in all forums, including by the “quartet” —
but not, ironically, by the General Assembly.
On 7 May 2002, just an hour before resolution
ES-10/10 was adopted, 15 innocent Israelis were
murdered in a pool hall in Rishon Letzion. That suicide
attack prompted several States to withdraw their
support for the draft resolution and to demand that a
different text be adopted which included a specific
condemnation of Palestinian suicide bombings. As
usual, the Palestinian Observer remained wilfully blind
to the suffering of Israelis, and, declaring that the
General Assembly was the property of the Third World,
refused to allow his one-sided text to include a genuine
condemnation of Palestinian terrorism, even though he

A/ES-10/PV.19

had purported to condemn it in his speech before the
Assembly.
One may ask why it is that a Palestinian suicide
attack must occur within an hour of the adoption of a
United Nations resolution in order for certain Member
States to be prompt to call for its condemnation. Is it
not enough that Israeli civilians have been targeted
almost daily by suicide bombers hunting innocents? Is
the murder of students at a university campus just last
week, or the five separate attacks yesterday, not enough
to prompt a degree of sympathy for the Israeli lives
required to generate a resolution which recognizes
Israelis as victims and calls on the Palestinian
Authority to finally fight terror.
Is the Secretary-General’s report, which finds
Palestinian terrorists responsible for war crimes and
affirms that the Palestinian Authority has used
terrorism as a political weapon, not enough to produce
a draft resolution that recognizes that dead and injured
Israelis are also a humanitarian crisis that must be
remedied?
It seems, sadly, that those States that have
supported this resolution are willing to tolerate the use
of the Assembly for partisan initiatives that ignore the
reality of the relentless Palestinian suicide campaign.
Were it not such a familiar pattern in the Assembly,
Israeli and other victims of Palestinian terrorism would
indeed be saddened. But we have known for some time
now not to overly invest our hopes in the willingness of
States in the Assembly to confront the terrorism crimes
that prevent a peaceful resolution of this conflict. None
of these one-sided resolutions has made any
contribution to peace and security for the Palestinian
and Israeli peoples. They have, however, hurt the
reputation of the General Assembly and revealed the
closed hearts and minds of too many States, and that,
really, is saddening.
Mr. Blazey Australia): Our vote reflected our
view that the resolution did not accurately reflect the
balance found in the report of the Secretary-General, in
particular with regard to the responsibilities set out in
paragraph 13, which speaks of the obligations to
refrain from carrying out attacks against civilians, to
prevent groups from engaging in such attacks,
including suicide bombings, and to actively protect
civilian populations.
In Australia’s view, and as reflected in the
Secretary-General’s report, the deliberate targeting and

reckless endangerment of innocent civilian lives, in
particular through suicide bombings — a practice not
mentioned in this resolution — is totally unacceptable.
It is also with regret that I repeat what my
delegation said at the last emergency special session,
namely that we do not regard the procedures applied at
today’s session as satisfactory. The lack of opportunity
for consultation with our capital on the contents of
substantive proposals put forward today is not
consistent with the rules of procedure.
We very much hope that for such important
matters we can find a better way of working together in
future meetings.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union — the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia and
Slovenia — and the associated countries Cyprus, Malta
and Turkey, as well as the European Free Trade
Association countries of the European Economic Area
Iceland and Liechtenstein align themselves with this
statement.
We voted in favour of the draft resolution
contained in document A/ES-10/L.11. We have
discussed today, during this tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly, the report prepared
by the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution ES10/10. In the statement delivered earlier today, the
European Union welcomed the report.
The European Union has repeatedly condemned
all attacks against civilians, including suicide
bombings. As the Secretary-General noted, of
particular concern is the use by combatants on both
sides of violence that places civilians in harm’s way.
This is unacceptable and must be stopped. The
European Union would have preferred this to have
been more strongly reflected in the resolution.
Finally, the European Union would like once
more to underline that we agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s conclusion in the report, namely that the
events described therein, along with the ongoing cycle
of violence and the continuing deterioration of the
situation, demonstrate the urgent need for the parties to
resume a process that would lead back to the
negotiating table.

25

A/ES-10/PV.19

The European Union reiterates its readiness to
support, in cooperation with our partners in the
“quartet” and in the Arab world, the parties in this
process towards achieving a just, comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the Middle East conflict, in
accordance with Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002).
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala voted in favour of draft resolution A/ES10/L.11 because its final version reflects much greater
balance than we had seen in earlier texts on the same
issue and because we had no wish to break the
consensus of the regional group to which we belong.
However, I must confess that that decision was a
difficult one for us, and I would like to explain why.
Let me begin by noting that we are very grateful
to the Secretary-General for the factual and objective
nature of his report (A/ES-10/186), which is the basis
of the resolution. We feel that he has done excellent
work in difficult circumstances, especially owing to the
lack of direct access to one of the parties. In our
opinion, the content of the report is distressing. It
indicates that all parties have their share of
responsibility, and it is very hard for us to allocate that
responsibility between the parties. We find equally
repugnant the suicide attacks against Israeli civilians
and the grave excesses committed against the
Palestinian civilian population by the Israeli Defence
Forces, as reported in paragraphs 62 to 69 of the report.
We are extremely saddened by the debate on the
number of victims of the events covered in the report,
since even one victim on either side must be regarded
as excessive. We are alarmed at the spiral of violence
that has been so lucidly described in paragraphs 14 to
22. We fully endorse the observation made by the
Secretary-General at the end of his report, where he
underscored the urgent need for the parties to resume a
process that will lead them back to the negotiating
table to find a just, lasting and comprehensive
settlement of the situation prevailing in the Middle
East, based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), to which I would add resolution 1397
(2001).
Mr. Balarezo (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): The
Peruvian delegation voted in favour of this resolution.
However, I wish to place clearly on record that we
regret the fact that the resolution does not include a
clear and categorical repudiation or condemnation of

26

the terrorist acts committed against innocent Israeli
civilians.
Mr. Loizaga (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes first to thank the Secretary-General
for the report (A/ES-10/186) submitted pursuant to
General Assembly resolution ES-10/10, which
motivated the reconvening of this session. We
recognize the limitations that the Secretary-General
encountered in preparing the report submitted to us for
consideration, as it was prepared using available
sources and information, including from third parties,
concerning the events in Jenin and other Palestinian
cities. The report indicates that the parties involved are
responsible for the events of recent months. They
must assume their responsibility and respect their
commitments to provide security to the civilian
population without delay.
My delegation voted in favour of the resolution
because it felt that it was an improvement on, and was
better balanced than, earlier draft versions, including
the one that was submitted originally for consideration
this morning in document A/ES-10/L.10. However, my
delegation reiterates its condemnation of all acts of
violence and terrorism that cause death and suffering
among the Israeli and Palestinian civilian populations.
Finally, we fully agree with the observations of
the Secretary-General contained in paragraph 83 of his
report. Once again, my delegation associates itself with
the appeal of the international community that the
parties urgently resume a process that will lead back to
the negotiating table to achieve a just and lasting
solution to the conflict, which will permit Palestinians
and Israelis to coexist peacefully.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote. I now call on the
Permanent Observer of Palestine.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me first to express our thanks and deep
appreciation to all those who supported the important
resolution just adopted by the General Assembly. I
would like to place on record our thanks to those who,
despite all the difficulties, undertook difficult
negotiations to arrive at a broad consensus on the issue
before members today.
A short time ago, the General Assembly heard an
example of Israeli arrogance and perfidy, not only
towards the Palestinian people — a people under

A/ES-10/PV.19

occupation — but also towards the international
community as a whole, including the General
Assembly, the representative of all the world’s peoples.
The Israeli representative cannot understand that Israel
is an occupying Power like any other colonial Power
throughout history. It is the only State Member of the
United Nations that is considered an occupying Power.
It has been colonizing our land for years. It is the only
country that has not implemented or abided by any
General Assembly or Security Council resolution. It is
the only country that for years has not ceased to violate
international humanitarian law and international law or
to commit gross violations and breaches of the Fourth
Geneva Convention, including war crimes and State
terrorism.
Israel has killed the Palestinian people as a
whole, including those who are living: it has uprooted
half of them from our land and has subjected the other
half to an unprecedented, heinous occupation. The
problem is that the Israeli representative cannot
understand that.
In any case, I shall not address the absurd
comments he made a short time ago and at this
morning’s meeting about the positions of the
Permanent Observer of Palestine and of the Palestinian
leadership. We have made our positions very clear
before the Assembly. We believe they are correct and
that they have won the respect of the Assembly.
I would also like to refer to the fact that Israeli
representatives have completely distorted the truth,
including by their comments on the report of the

Secretary-General. The Israeli representative said
earlier that the report accused us of having committed
war crimes. Such a claim is completely unfounded and
untrue. Certain Israeli representatives have further
distorted the report of the Secretary-General, saying,
for example, that the report confirmed that no massacre
was committed. That, too, is incorrect. The report did
not say that.
Furthermore, the Permanent Observer of Palestine
never gave a definite figure of the number of
Palestinian civilians who were killed. The issue is not
about numbers; it is about the way in which the killings
took place, and about why and how they took place.
We have said that the report of the SecretaryGeneral had certain shortcomings, and we have
expressed our views in that respect today. However, we
have also said that the report included important
elements that deserve attention and should be taken
into consideration. We said so very clearly, given the
esteem in which we hold the Secretary-General and our
respect for his past role and the part that we hope he
will play in the future with regard to the Middle East
crisis. We look forward to a different situation
developing in the region, and we hope that the
members of the international community, including
those represented here, will assist us in bringing that
about.
The Acting President: The tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly is now
adjourned in accordance with the terms of paragraph 8
of resolution ES-10/11, adopted at the present meeting.
The meeting rose at 9 p.m.

27
