,

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

. c*.-

YEAR

2530’”

MEETING:

19 APRIL’

1984

JAN‘12 1993

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2530). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . ..*.........................................

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon(S/16472).......................,.........................
1

SlPV.2530

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
’
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly. Supplements of the Oflcial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the .document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2530th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. Vladimir A. KRAVETS
(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (SIAgendal2530)

of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/16472)
The meeting

was called to order at 6.15 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda ’

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (S/16472)
1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter from the representative of Lebanon in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fakhoury
(Lebanon) took a place at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
Members of the Council have before them the report of
the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
for the period 13 October
1983 to 9 April 1984 [S/16472]. Members of the Council
also have before them the following other documents:
S/16471, containing the text of a letter dated 9 April
1984 from the representative of Lebanon to the Secretary-General; and S/16491, which contains the text of
a draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s consultations.

19 April

1984, at 6 p.m.

3. It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Against:

None.

Abstaining:
Ukrainian
Union of Soviet Socialist

Soviet Socialist
Republics.

Republic,

The draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions [resolution 549 (1984)].
4. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I shall now call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements following the vote.
5. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) [interpretation
from Russian]: Time and
again the Council has had to return to the question of
the abnormal situation in Lebanon, a situation which
has been caused by Israeli aggression. This matter
has become a permanent feature of the activities of
the Council for six years now. Indeed, the Council
may have devoted more time and attention to Lebanon
than to any other country. The already lengthy list of
resolutions adopted on this item continues to grow.
Eventually, the chronic failure to implement Council
resolutions on Lebanon may come to be regarded as
commonplace and normal.
6. Such a situation cannot but cause grave concern. In
the opinion of the Soviet delegation, the time has now
come for the Council to take another serious look at the
root causes of the dangerous tension which has turned
Lebanon into a constantly smouldering source of war.
I am referring, of course, to the Israeli aggression
against Lebanon and to Israel’s continued illegal occupation of more than a third of Lebanese territory.
7. In its resolution 425 (1978), adopted almost six
years ago after Israel’s invasion of Lebanon in March
1978, the Council demanded that Israel cease its aggression and withdraw its troops behind the internationally
recognized borders of Lebanon. As the Council is
aware, that resolution has remained virtually unim-

plemented, and the United Nations Interim Force that
was created on the basis of that resolution has, as
it were, received a permanent mission in southern
Lebanon.

12. How did the United States conduct itselfin these
circumstances? As can be seen from the same memoirs,
it simply advised Israel to find some sort of excuse for
the invasion, for otherwise, as the Israelis were told by
Haig, American public opinion might, not tolerate such
an operation. The conclusion is that the United States
was aware of Israel’s planned aggression against Lebanon eight months before it actually began. It was regularly in consultation with Israel at all stages of preparation. But the United States not>only did nothing to
stop the invasion; it continued to;siipply Israel with
weapons and military mat&i&making
it possible for
the invasion to take place through its, material support.
That is why-and this is now quite irrefutable-Israel’s
aggression against Lebanon was ,:,virtually a joint
American-Israeli
aggression.
,,.,

8; In the light of the new, even larger-scale, bloody
aggression in Lebanon that was unleashed by Israel
in June 1982, the Council unanimously adopted resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982), in which it demanded the immediate cessation of all military actions
in Lebanon and the unconditional withdrawal of Israeli
troops from Lebanese territory. That demand was reconfirmed in subsequent resolutions of the Council.
9. However, to date all those resolutions continue to
be blatantly ignored by Tel Aviv, and the Zionist occupiers continue to lord it over Lebanese soil. The hundreds of thousands that have been killed and injured,
the towns and villages that have been destroyed and the
misdeeds in the Palestinian camps of Sabra and Shatila
are by no means a complete list of the crimes committed
by the Israeli military machine.

13. The following stage of the Uniteh’States involvement in the war against the Arabs w&the introduction
of American fighting troops in Lebanese territory under
the banner of so-called multinational~forces
and their
ensuing land, sea and air bombardment
of the Arab
population. So here we have it: twosides of the same
coin, the aggression of Israel and the aggression of
the United States against the Arabs. That, then, is
American-Israeli
strategic co-operation in action.

10. We can only regard this as a continuation of the
expansionist policy pursued by Israeli ruling circles,
which are hatching plans to divide up Lebanon and
making use of the experience as occupiers they have
acquired on the West Bank of the River Jordan, in the
Gaza Strip and the Golan Heights. The blood and suffering of the Lebanese and other Arab peoples have fed
the ill-fated strategic alliance between Tel Aviv and
Washington: no longer a mere conniver, Washington
has become a direct accomplice in Israeli aggression.
As is perfectly obvious, Israel’s aggression against
Lebanon in June 1982 was from the very outset prepared with the knowledge of the United States.

14. In connection with the situation that now obtains
in southern Lebanon, it is the profound conviction of
the Soviet delegation that the Security Council faces an
extremely important problem. One .may legitimately
ask how long the principal organ of the United Nations,
the Security Council, can acquiesce in Israel’s continuing occupation of the territory of a neighbouring
Member State. How long will it continue to allow the
aggressor and its protectors to ignore with impunity its
numerous resolutions when their strict,implementation
is an obligation incumbent upon all States Members of
the Organization?
There can ‘be no doubt as to the
answer to that question: the Council cannot, nor should
it, acquiesce in such a situation, when-; as a result of
Israel’s stubborn refusal to put an end to its occupation
of Lebanese territory, the aggressor, in defiance of the
entire world, continues to grow in strength on-the lands
it has seized and United Nations forces are unable to
perform the main task they have been given by the
Council-that
is, to ensure supervision of the withdrawal of Israeli troops from Lebanon.“’

11. ‘In his memoirs, which have just been published,
the former Secretary of State of the United States,
Alexander Haig, gives the following very telling
account of events. As far back as October 1981 the then
Prime Minister of Israel, Mr. Begin, informed Haig that
Israel had started to plan its invasion of Lebanon.
Nevertheless, a month later, in November, the United
States signed a memorandum on strategic co-operation
with Israel. In mid-January 1982, Mr. Begin once again
reminded Haig that Israel was preparing to attack
southern Lebanon. In February 1982, at a meeting with
Haig in Washington, the Commander of Israeli military
intelligence made it clear that Israeli troops that had
invaded Lebanon intended to advance right up to the
southern suburbs of Beirut. In other words, the United
States already had a clear idea of the scope of the new
act of aggression being prepared by Israel. In the beginning of May 1982, Begin warned the United States
that the Israeli invasion of Lebanon was becoming, as
he expressed it,, imperative and inevitable. Finally, at
the end of May, both Begin and Sharon told their American allies that Israel’s decision to invade Lebanon was
final and irreversible. That is the history of how Israel’s
aggression was‘prepared.

.15. It is the bounden duty of the Security Council to
insist that Israel unconditionally
fulfil the previously
adopted decisions demanding that an end be put to the
Israeli aggression in Lebanon.
‘y. ;
I.
.
16. In the light of the request by the Lebanese Govemment and the recommendations
of the SecretaryGeneral, the Soviet delegation feels that there is no
particular objection‘ at the present stage to extending
the mandate of UNIFIL
for the next regular period. At
the same time, however, it is our as,s$nption that
during that period the-council
will ta@’ every step
necessary to put an end to the Israeli occupation. If
2

22. All the inhabitants of southern Lebanon aspire to
peace. UNIFIL
should be in a position to ensure more
effective protection and greater security for the civilian
population of that region.

Israel nevertheless fails to withdraw its troops from
Lebanon, the Council will have to-we stress: will have
to-carry out the task entrusted to it by the Charter and
consider the adoption of effective practical steps in
response to those circumstances.
We can no longer
continue to acquiesce in Israel’s occupation of Lebanese territory and its concomitant disregard of Council
decisions.
;:,’ ;I’

23. My delegation has noted with great interest the
observations made by the Secretary-General in his report, and particularly
the idea of having the Council consider at the appropriate time a future course
of action that would make the Force’s mandate more
effective. France shares the Secretary-,General’s
view
that the re-establishment of peace and stability in southern Lebanon, under the authority and sovereignty of
the Lebanese Government,
“represents, in the long
run . . . the best guarantee of security for all concerned” [S/26472, para. 261. UNIFIL
can make a
useful contribution
to that development. That is why
France is prepared to consider the new tasks that the,
Council might in due course see fit to entrust to
UNIFIL.
We are prepared, especially if a request to
this effect is made in due course by the Government of
Lebanon, to consider the extension of UNIFIL’s
mandate and deployment area. It is in that spirit that France
will co-operate with the Secretary-General in the fultilment of the mandate just given him.

17. The Soviet-delegation
takes this opportunity to
confirm once again’ the Soviet Union’s fundamental
position of principle with regard to UNIFIL.
First, the
maintaining of theeForce on Lebanese territory should
in no wise impinge upon Lebanon’s sovereign rights.
Secondly, UNIFI’L
should not be entrusted with functions not in accordance with its duties as defined by the
Charter; nor should it intervene in Lebanon’s affairs.
Thirdly, full account should be taken of Israel’s responsibility, as the$ggressor,
for the deeds it has perpetrated.
18. In this connection, we confirm that all the expenses related to tdealing with the consequences of
Israel’s armed Zaggression against Lebanon should be
borne by the aggressor itself. For that reason, the
Soviet Union, as in the past, will not participate in
defraying expenses connected with the establishment
and functioning of UNIFIL.

24. Before concluding, I would pay a tribute to the
persevering work done by UNIFIL’s
officers and soldiers, who have constantly discharged their obligations
with courage and dedication, in particularly delicate
circumstances.

19. Mr. CL&K
(United States of America): Members of the Council have unanimously agreed that the
resolution just adopted does not in any way go beyond
resolution 538 (1983), but simply extends it. It was with
this understanding that the United States voted in favour of the resolution.

25. France, which contributes the largest number of
troops to UNIFIL,
is fully aware of the effort made by
the countries contributing to the Fortie. We understand
the concerns of some of our partners at the oftenfrustrating conditions in which their troops operate. We
hope that a satisfactory solution may quickly be found
to the financing problems emphasized by the SecretaryGeneral in paragraph 27 of his report. None the less,
France is convinced that it is important to maintain.
in southern Lebanon a United Nations presence that
could, in what we hope will be the near future, prove to
be a crucial factor in the re-establishment
of peace and
security in that region.

20. Mr. LOUET
(France) [interpretation
from
French]: The Security Council has just once again renewed the mandate of UNIFIL.
By according its support to the Council’s decision, the French delegation
has demonstrated France’s support for the United Nations role in Lebanon and the importance it attaches to
UNIFIL’s
complete fulfilment of the task assigned to it
by resolutions‘ 425 (1978) and 426 (1978).
21. In this. donnection, my delegation cannot but
share the con&ms expressed by the Secretary-General
in his report issued in connection with the renewal of
the Force’s mandate. UNIFIL
has not been able to live
up completely to the hopes that the international community, represented by the Council, and the Lebanese
people, victim of an interminable conflict, had placed in
it. The Israeli invasion of June 1982 in fact radically
_ changed the conditions in which UNIFIL
acts. The
Israel Defence Forces continue to operate, in violation
of Council resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982), in the
Force’s deployment area. That is the main reason for
the diffrculties encountered by UNIFIL
in fulfilling its
tasks. It is to be hoped that this abnormal situation will
soon come to ,an end, so that Lebanon’s integrity and
its Government’s
authority can be restored within its
internationally,:
recognized boundaries,
pursuant to
resolution ~~~ (1982).
, I_I”
_‘,,

26.

Mr. KHALIL

(Egypt) [interpretation from Aruof Egypt views the endorsement by
the Council of the extension of the mandate of UNIFIL
for another six months’as further evidence of the international community’s
continued commitment
to support the independence,
sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lebanon, as expressed in numerous resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly.
kc]: The delegation

27. The delegation of Egypt supports the statement by
the Secretary-General in his last report, whicli included
a call for restoring the situation in southern Lebanon to
normal. We agree in fact with the comments made by
the Secretary-General
at the end of the report, and we
cannot fail to note the earlier references therein to the
3

marked increase in hostility on the part of the local
population
to the presence of the Israel Defence
Forces. Such hostility is a natural result of any occupation.

32. We strongly concur with the observation of the
Secretary-General
in his latest report on UNIFIL
that
a return to genuine peace and normality in southern
Lebanon would be in the interest of virtually all. We are
pleased to note a more general recognition of UNIFIL’s
stabilizing role in southern Lebanon:and of the important role the Force could play in changing for the better
the situation in that region. The Secretary-General has
suggested in his report that the Council

28. The Lebanese Government considers UNIFIL’s
continued presence in Lebanon indispensable
and
imperative, as is reflected in the letter of its representative of 9 April, in which he requests the extension of
UNIFIL’s
mandate for another six months, under the
same terms of reference set forth in resolutions 425
(1978) and 426 (1978), among other relevant Council
resolutions.

“consider at the appropriate time, and without prejudice to arrangements elsewhere in Lebanon, a
future course of action which would make more effective the mandate of UNIFIL
specifically in southem Lebanon, in the context of the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from that area” [ibid:, paru. 251.

29. We, too, feel that the UNIFIL
presence in Lebanon is an important expression of the United Nations
commitment
to support the Lebanese Government in
its efforts to regain complete control and authority over
southern Lebanon. Hence, we supported the draft resolution which was put to the vote a few moments ago.

33. We commend the Secretary-General for the ideas
he has put forward and for the consultations he has
undertaken in recent weeks on further means to achieve
the objectives of an Israeli withdrawal, the restoration
of peace and normality and the re-establishment
of the
authority and sovereignty of the Lebanese Government
in southern Lebanon in conformity with resolutions 425
(1978) and 426 (1978), and other relevant Council resolutions. For our part, we stand ready to vote for any
Council resolution providing for a better framework for
the attainment of these objectives, with which all parties would seem to concur. As one of the troop contributors, we feel that a Council decision that would
reactivate the role of UNIFIL
is already long overdue.

30. Egypt’s position is well known: on previous occasions, both inside and outside the United Nations, we
have consistently called for the complete withdrawal
of foreign forces-in
particular those of Israel-from
Lebanese territory. We wish today to reiterate that
position by quoting the offtcial joint communique
issued at Cairo on 11 April 1984 following the offtcial
visit to Egypt by President Andre-Dieudonne
Kolingba
of the Central African Republic. Presidents Mubarak
and Kolingba called for the complete and immediate
withdrawal of the Israeli forces from Lebanese territory
in accordance with Security Council resolutions. The
two Presidents expressed support for all efforts aimed
at achieving conciliation in Lebanon and the preservation of its independence,
sovereignty and territorial
integrity.

34. In his report, the Secretary-General
has also cautioned that one should not underestimate the difficulties
of working out a plan directed to the attainment of these
overall objectives-a
plan which would at the same
time meet the rights and interests of the Government
and people of Lebanon and the concerns of all those
now involved in southern Lebanon. Notwithstanding
these difficulties,
we think the time has come for
all parties involved to reconsider seriously the role
UNIFIL
could play in the re-establishment of peaceful,
normal conditions in southern Lebanon, which, as the
Secretary-General has pointed out, would represent in
the long run the best hope for the future and the best
guarantee of security for all.

31. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands):
When the
Council extended the mandate of UNIFIL
in October
1983, I informed the Council of my Government’s
decision to retain a limited contingent with the Force
in southern Lebanon. In close co-operation with both
the Secretary-General
and UNIFIL
headquarters at
Naqoura, the Netherlands battalion has since been repatriated and replaced by a reinforced infantry company of the strength of approximately
165 men. I may
also recall that the main reason for our decision to
maintain a presence in UNIFIL
has been our conviction that UNIFIL
still could and should play a more
meaningful role than the Force is able to fulfil at
present. I need not recall here that the tasks currently
carried out by UNIFIL,
in particular the humanitarian
assistance rendered to the local population in its area
of operation, together with its contribution
to peace
and stability in southern Lebanon, however beneficial
these may be, do not conform to the original mandate as
spelt out in resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978), nor
to the intentions of later Council resolutions on the
withdrawal of Israeli forces and the restoration of
the authority of the Lebanese Government in southern
Lebanon.

35. We therefore urge all parties concerned to make
appropriate use of the potential of United Nations
peace-keeping operations to restore international peace
and security in the region. Failure to grasp the opportunities which seem to present themselves now could
have grave consequences later. Moreover, it is also
evident that the international
community-which
at
great costs, particularly
for the troop-contributing
countries, has maintained UNIFIL
in the region for
almost two years since the Israeli invasion of Lebanon-cannot
be expected to support Lebanon indefinitely.
36. In this connection, I may be forgiven if1 draw the
Council’s attention once more to the financial diffrcul4

ties faced by UNIFIL.
We read in the report of the
Secretary-General
that, as of the beginning of April
1984, the accumulated shortfall in the UNIFIL
Special
Account has risen to some $186.4 million. We are all
aware that some Member. States consistently fail to
honour their obligations, thereby creating major financial problems for the Organization and for the troop
contributors,
for that matter. The Secretary-General
has shown himself extremely concerned about this
state of affairs, which indeed could jeopardize the
whole concept of peace-keeping operations.

have common interests in changing
southern Lebanon for the better.

the situation

in

40. For our part, the United Kingdom is ready at the
appropriate time to consider with the rest of the Council
the future course of action suggested by the SecretaryGeneral. We hope that other Council members will join
us in encouraging the Secretary-General
to continue
his exploration
of the possibilities
with the parties
concerned. We interpret the resolution we have just
adopted as endorsing further action by the SecretaryGeneral on these lines. For this reason, and because
we support in the meantime the further extension of
UNIFIL’s
existing mandate, we were pleased to vote in
favour of the resolution. My delegation regrets that two
delegations have not felt able to support this otherwise
universally praised peace-keeping action by the United
Nations.

37. Lastly, although UNIFIL
has been set up by the
Council for the purpose of facilitating the withdrawal
of Israeli forces *from southern Lebanon, it would be
unfair and unrealistic to ignore the other aspects of the
crisis in Lebanon, which need to be addressed urgently
as well. Let me therefore briefly restate the position of
my Government: we continue to be deeply concerned
about the situation in and around Beirut and we again
call on all parties concerned to refrain forthwith from
the use of force and to agree promptly to a cease-fire.
We once more wish to stress the need for a resumption
without further delay of the process of conciliation and
negotiation aimed at the establishment of a government
enjoying the widest possible national support and exercising authority throughout the territory of Lebanon.
Such a government would be in a much stronger position to assert its authority and to accomplish the desired
goal of a complete withdrawal of all non-authorized
non-Lebanese forces from Lebanese territory. The
position of my Government on this issue remains unchanged: we fully support the territorial
integrity,
unity, sovereignty and independence of Lebanon, and
it is clear that this requires the withdrawal of all
unauthorized foreign forces from Lebanese territory.

41. I am obliged once again to draw attention to‘the
grave financial difficulties confronting UNIFIL.
My
delegation echoes the Secretary-General’s
extreme
concern at this unacceptable state of affairs. We join
with him in calling on the States concerned to pay their
assessments without delay.
42. Finally, I should like to take this opportunity once
more to pay tribute to General Callaghan, his staff, the
officers and men of UNIFIL
and the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization military observers, for
their continued dedication to their task.
431 The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
I call upon the representative.of
Lebanon.

Russian]:

44. Mr. FAKHOURY
(Lebanon)
[interpretation
from Arabic]: Mr. President, allow me at the outset to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of April and to thank you
for your efforts to promote the success of the consultations on renewal of UNIFIL’s
mandate. Those efforts
reflect your statesmanship and experience.
’

38. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom): The continuing plight of the Lebanese people touches most, if
not all of us. The Council has a duty to do all it can
to help restore the peace and stability which they seek
and to uphold the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
independence of their State.

45. Allow me also to extend thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Arias Stella, the representative of Peru, President of the Council during the month of March, for his
excellent and tactful conduct of the Council’s work.

39. In his letter of 9 April to the Secretary-General,
the representative of Lebanon stated that his Govemment believed that the time might have come for the
Security Council to reassess the mission of UNIFIL
so that it could perform a more dynamic role. My Government agrees with this and has long advocated an
expanded United Nations presence in Lebanon. We
much regretted that the Council was prevented, two
months ago, from taking action to strengthen the
United States presence in Beirut. We are pleased,
therefore, that the Secretary-General
has proposed
in his report to the Council that UNIFIL
should be
enabled in the near future to play an expanded role.
This is both helpful and constructive. We welcome the
soundings which he has already taken with the parties
concerned. We believe that this is the right way to
proceed and we support the objectives which he has set
out in his report. As he rightly states, all concerned

46. Once more Lebanon requests a six-month renewal of the UNIFIL
mandate, on the basis of the terms
defined in resolution 426 (1978).
47. UNIFIL,
about whose situation the SecretaryGeneral spoke indetail in his report of 9 April 1984, has
been unable, for reasons well known to everyone here
which I see no need to repeat now, to discharge in full
the mandate assigned it by the Council.
48. UNIFIL
still has a long way to go to discharge and
complete its mission in the best possible manner. In this
connection, the report of the Secretary-General recommended an extension of UNIFIL’s
mandate and a fu5

ture course of action to make it more effective. I requested a reassessment of the Force in my letter dated
9 April addressed to the Secretary-General.
My Government believes that time may have come for the
Council to reassess the mission of UNIFIL
in the
light of the dangers looming over occupied southern
Lebanon and their effects on that population. Hence,
we strongly support the contents of the report of
the Secretary-General,
his comments on the future of
UNIFIL,
and the initiative he called for, in consultation with the Lebanese Government
and the parties
concerned, to enable UNIFIL
to achieve the objectives
of resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978) and other relevant resolutions.
49. In addition, we strongly support the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal for the temporary deployment of
UNIFIL,
with elements of the Lebanese army and
internal security forces, in areas vacated by Israeli
forces. Similarly,
we strongly support UNIFIL’s
expanded deployment to assist in the restoration of
Lebanese authority and sovereignty up to the internationally recognized boundary, as well as the working
out of the necessary arrangements to.ensure the speedy
transformation
of southern Lebanon into a zone of
peace under the sovereignty and authority of the Lebanese Government.
50. My Government also hopes that the main arterial
roads in the south will soon be brought under UNIFIL
supervision. My Government calls for an opening of all
crossing points and roads leading to the south. We call
for an end to all activities being carried out against the
civilian Lebanese population and officials.
51. The conditions prevailing in southern Lebanon
are extremely grave, and the measures taken by the
Israeli authorities, including blocking the main highway
to the south, lead to the dismemberment
of southern
Lebanon and its partitioning from Lebanon and subject
it to economic and security regulations that have
adverse effects on the status of the population there.
Southern Lebanon is part and parcel of the Lebanese
homeland. Peace throughout Lebanon is closely bound
to the question of southern Lebanon and its fate.
52. In this connection, it is imperative to affii categorically that the Lebanese Government does not recognize any military formations or commands that have
not been officially and legitimately
established or
appointed. Hence it does not recognize or deal on any
level or in any context with any such artificial military
formations and commands,
including the so-called
Army of South Lebanon, or Lahad’s army.
53. The Council’s responsibility
in this question is
both direct and of great importance
because it is
charged with the preservation of international
peace
and security and, hence, with responsibility
for the
peace and security of any Member State in the world
whose citizens are beset by the same suffering being
inflicted on the population of southern Lebanon. The

peoples of the world look to the Council as virtually
their last chance to put an end to their sufferings and
their tragic situation. The Council’s positive response
to any rightful demand enhances the confidence of the
peoples of the world that, in thelend, there is an authority to which they can have recourse, one that will
assist them in achieving their hopes and aspirations to
live in peace and security.
.:I ;-‘
54. In view of the critical conditions that exist at 4
present in southern Lebanon, we regard the resolution
adopted by the Council today as a further step forward
in the discharge of UNIFIL’s
basic, mission. We also
regard it as a point of departure for serious initiatives,
under the Council’s supervision, to be undertaken personally by the Secretary-General.
1’
55. In conclusion, I must, on behalf of the Govemment and people of Lebanon, express great thanks to
the Secretary-General
for his report, which is characteristically
clear and candid and. which includes
practical and realistic elements and a comprehensive
outlook inspired by his sincere desire to contribute
effectively to the restoration of peace and security
in southern Lebanon. I should also like to extend
thanks to the States participating
in, UNIFIL
and to
their troops in southern Lebanon under the command
of Lieutenant-General
Callaghan, as well as to all his
staff, civilian and military, for their praiseworthy work
under conditions that are, to put it mildly, extremely
difficult, in view of the fact that circumstances do not
yet allow UNIFIL
to discharge its mission as expected.
56. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation from Russian]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have just received a letter from therepresentative
of
Israel in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Blum (Israel)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber.
57. The PRESIDENT
[interpretutionf[om
Russian]
The representative of Israel has asked to speak. I therefore invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
I 8’:
58. Mr. BLUM (Israel): At the outset; permit me to
express to you, Sir, my respects on your assumption of
the presidency for this month. May I also take this
opportunity to express our warm appreciation to the
representative of Peru for the very able and effective
manner in which he carried out the functions of the
presidency last month.
<,t ‘.<
,
59. It had not been my intention to intervene in this
deb.ate.. However, in view of the highly .&temperate and

grossly inaccurate statements made by some of the
speakers here today, I feel constrained to restate
my Government’s
position on the matter before us
-which, may I remind certain members of the Council,
is the extension of the mandate of UNIFIL.

the Government
of Israel cannot accept the overall
approach reflected in paragraph 25 of the report.
64. Secondly, it is equally regrettable that the Secretary-General’s
report makes no mention of those
resolutions of the Council which call for the withdrawal
of all foreign forces from Lebanese territory, as for
example resolution 520 (1982).

60. As I have repeatedly had occasion to state in the
Council, it is my Government’s
view that, in the circumstances surrounding the situation in Lebanon since
June 1982, UNIFILhas
outlived its usefulness in southem Lebanon and ,its presence is no longer called for
there. As was rightly stated by the Secretary-General
in his report on,UNIFIL
dated 14 October 1982, the
events of 1982 had Yradically altered the circumstances
in which UNIFIL
was established and under which it
had functioned since March 1978” [S/154.5.5, para. I7J.
Likewise, in his report on UNIFIL
dated 12 October
1983 the Secretary-General
again stated that those
events “radically, altered the conditions under which
UNIFIL
was created and is intended to function”
[S/16036, para. ,211. The growing recognition to this
effect is also evidenced by the position adopted in recent months by a number of contributing
countries
which, seeing no,effective mission for UNIFIL
in its
present area of deployment, have accordingly reduced
their troops in the.field.

65. Thirdly, Israel likewise regards paragraph 16 of
the report as incomplete in its treatment of the numerous terrorist incidents in the area. This is further’
compounded by the fact that the identity of the perpetrators of those terrorist acts is omitted.
66. I have deliberately refrained in my statement from
responding to some provocative
and inflammatory
statements made earlier here containing the customary
distortions regarding the situation in Lebanon as a
whole. My Government’s
position on that question is
well known and requires no repetition here. Since the
matter.on the agenda is the extension of UNIFIL’s
mandate, which apparently seems to have been forgotten by the representative of the Soviet Union, I have
confined myself in my statement to the issues properly
related to the item on the agenda. Any outburst such as
the outburst of the representative of the Soviet Union
which we have heard here earlier in this meeting is’
in our view hardly worthy of comment in a civilized
debate.

61. It is Israel’s position that the security of southern
Lebanon should eventually be guaranteed by Lebanese
forces. At the same time, Israel believes that UNIFIL
could perform a useful role by serving as a buffer separating the Israel Defence Forces and the Syrian forces
currently in Lebanon.. Likewise, in the view of the
Government
of Israel, UNIFIL
could fulfil a useful
function north of the area of deployment of the Israel
Defence Forces, where it could serve as a genuine
peace-keeping force. With regard to the possibility of
UNIFIL’s
deployment there, including the Sidon area,
the Government of Israel would be prepared to consider and discuss this matter in due course.
62. As for the Secretary-General’s
recent report on
UNIFIL,
in general my Government has reservations
in regard to many of the remarks, statements and
observations contained therein. Some of these reservations have already been communicated
to the Secretary-General. I will therefore confine myself here today
to the following remarks.

67. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)
[interpretation
from Ruisian]:
Today’s
statement by the representative of Israel is typical on
two scores: first, there is no reference in his statement
to any intention on Israel’s part to withdraw’its forces
from Lebanon; secondly, his statement clearly reflects
Israel’s designs on southern Lebanon and Israel’s notion that ‘it can there promulgate its own regime. This
once again confirms the propriety of the Soviet delegation’s raising the matter. Indeed, it is time the Council
seriously considered how to force Israel to withdraw its
troops from Lebanon.
-_
68. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The representative of Israel has asked to exercise his
right of reply. I therefore invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

631 First, theresolutions
of the Council referred to in
paragraph 22 of the Secretary-General’s
report cannot
be regarded by Israel as the basis for consideration by
the Council of the issue before us, in view of the fact
that the situatitin on the ground clearly demonstrates
that it is not Israel’s military presence in the southern
part of Lebanon that lies at the root of Lebanon’s
instability. Regrettably, the report makes no mention
of the presenCe of Syrian and terrorist forces in Lebanon, of their well-documented
responsibility
for destabilizing that country as a whole and of their role in
depriving the ,Lebanese Government of its authority by
arrogating thaY‘authority to themselves. Consequently,

69. Mr. BLUM (Israel): It is indeed not my intention
to be drawn into a debate by the representative of the
Soviet Union, who uses every opportunity to divert
attention from agenda items before the Council. He has
now appointed himself to be the offtcial interpreter of
my statement, Members of the Council have heard my
statement and I think they will all readily agree-with
the exception, of course, of the representative of the
Soviet Union-that
his interpretation
of my statement
is as accurate as was his presentation of facts before;
but then, of course, we have all become accustomed to
his customary departures from the truth, and we should
have been surprised if for once he had stuck to the truth.
7

70. We have been told by the representative of the
Soviet Union that Lebanon has been discussed in the
Council perhaps more than any other issue. I am sure
he has checked on his facts-he always does-but then,
of course, one should not be surprised. Afghanistan
obviously could not be discussed in the Council because the representative of the Soviet Union saw to
that. The ongoing massacre carried out in Afghanistan
by the forces of his country cannot be discussed in the
.Council. He has seen to that. Nor can the very strong
indications of the use by the Soviet Union of chemical
and bacteriological
warfare against the Afghan people
be discussed in the Council. Instead, of course, it is
much more convenient for him to give a distorted presentation of the situation in Lebanon, including what he
believes to be the root causes of that situation.

done to date for reasons you would, I am sure, care to
elaborate on.
72. All this expose on the alleged root causes of the
situation in Lebanon is given by the representative of a’
country which over the years has not contributed one
penny to the peace-keeping operations in Lebanon and
which never supported the establishment of UNIFIL
in
the first place, or the subsequent extensions of its mandate.
73. Now, this argument obviously was intended to be
pre-empted in the statement of Ambassador Ovinni-‘
kov. But the facts remain the facts and cannot be
explained away. It is standard tactics on the part of
Soviet representatives to try and lead a debate on matters, while, when it comes to the financial implications.
of those matters, they are rather reluctant to join in.

71. Well, Ambassador Ovinnikov, the root causes lie
elsewhere. You are familiar with them because your
country is directly involved in them. Your country
directly and indirectly,‘through
its well-known stooges
in the region, which I will not name because all of
us know them, has been instrumental in destabilizing
Lebanon for a decade and more. Those .are the .root
causes, and you cannot .divert attention from them by
engaging the Council in your periodic book reviews of
American authors. I am sure we all appreciate your
book reviews and your recommendations
as to what we
ought to read and what we should not. read. But the
time has come for you to recommend some interesting
memoirs -of the Soviet leadership, which you have not

74. I should like to ask one question, in the same vein
in which Ambassador Ovinnikov asked it; I will only
change one word in that question. How long does he
think the United Nations can acquiesce in the ongoing
Syrian occupation of Lebanon, which, together with
the terrorist presence in that country, is the root cause
of the tragedy of that country?
75. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
There are no further speakers. The Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting

8

rose at 7.25 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore or write fo: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Inf’ormez-vous
auprb de votre libraire ou adressez-vous B : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes. New York ou Genive.
KAK

COMO

l-XO.Yl.YYZITh

CONSEGUIR

H3nAHHH

OPl-AHHX.41~1111

PUBLICACIONES

OI;-I>E;~UHEHHhIX

DE LAS NACIONES

HAlUlR

UNIDAS

Las pubiicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas es& en venta en librerias y casas distribuidotis
en
todas panes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas.
Nueva York o G&bra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

cm300

90-61313-January

1993-2.050
