United Nations

A/RES/57/221

General Assembly

Distr.: General
27 February 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 109 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/57/556/Add.2 and Corr.1-3)]

57/221. Strengthening of the rule of law
The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by adopting the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1
fifty-four years ago, Member States pledged themselves to achieve, in cooperation
with the United Nations, the promotion of universal respect for and observance of
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Firmly convinced that the rule of law is an essential factor in the protection of
human rights, as stressed in the Declaration, and should continue to attract the
attention of the international community,
Convinced that, through their own national legal and judicial systems, States
must provide appropriate civil, criminal and administrative remedies for violations
of human rights,
Recognizing the importance of the role that can be played by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in supporting national efforts
to strengthen the institutions of the rule of law,
Bearing in mind that, in its resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993, the
General Assembly entrusted the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights with, inter alia, providing advisory services and technical and financial
assistance in the field of human rights, enhancing international cooperation for the
promotion and protection of all human rights and coordinating human rights
activities throughout the United Nations system,
Recalling the recommendation of the World Conference on Human Rights,
held at Vienna from 14 to 25 June 1993, that a comprehensive programme should be
established within the United Nations with a view to helping States in the task of
building and strengthening adequate national structures that have a direct impact on
the overall observance of human rights and the maintenance of the rule of law, 2
Recalling also its resolutions 53/142 of 9 December 1998 and 55/99 of
4 December 2000,
_______________
1
2

02 55376

Resolution 217 A (III).
See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III, sect. II, para. 69.

A/RES/57/221

1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General; 3

2.
Also welcomes the efforts of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to make the promotion of the rule of law a priority
in its technical cooperation programmes;
3.
Notes with appreciation the increasing number of Member States seeking
assistance in strengthening and consolidating the rule of law, which indicates the
growing awareness of its importance, and the support provided to these States
through the technical cooperation programme of the Office of the High
Commissioner, as outlined in the report of the Secretary-General;
4.
Praises the efforts made by the Office of the High Commissioner to
accomplish its ever-increasing tasks, in a wide range of areas, with the limited
financial and personnel resources at its disposal;
5.
Expresses its deep concern about the scarcity of means at the disposal of
the Office of the High Commissioner for the fulfilment of its tasks;
6.
Notes with concern that the United Nations Programme of Advisory
Services and Technical Assistance in the Field of Human Rights does not have
sufficient funds to provide any substantial financial assistance to national projects
that have a direct impact on the realization of human rights and the maintenance of
the rule of law in countries that are committed to those ends but are lacking the
necessary means and resources;
7.
Welcomes the deepening of the ongoing cooperation between the Office
of the High Commissioner and other relevant bodies and programmes of the United
Nations system, with a view to enhancing the system-wide coordination of
assistance in human rights, democracy and the rule of law, and in this context notes
the cooperation between the United Nations Development Programme and the
Office of the High Commissioner in providing technical assistance, at the request of
States, in the promotion of the rule of law;
8.
Also welcomes the assistance of the Office of the High Commissioner in
the design of human rights components of United Nations peace operations and in
providing advice once they are formed, including in the field of the rule of law;
9.
Reaffirms that the Office of the High Commissioner remains the focal
point for coordinating system-wide attention for human rights, democracy and the
rule of law;
10. Encourages the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
continue the dialogue between his Office and other organs and agencies of the
United Nations system, taking into account the need to explore new synergies with a
view to obtaining increased financial assistance for human rights and the rule of law
and to promoting inter-agency coordination, funding and allocation of
responsibilities in order to improve efficiency and complementarity of action
concerning, inter alia, assistance to States in strengthening the rule of law;
11. Also encourages the High Commissioner to continue to explore the
possibility of further contact with and support from the international financial
institutions, acting within their mandates, with a view to obtaining the technical and
financial means to strengthen the capacity of his Office to provide assistance to

_______________
3

2

A/57/275.

A/RES/57/221

national projects aimed at the realization of human rights and the maintenance of the
rule of law;
12. Requests the High Commissioner to continue to accord high priority to
the technical cooperation activities undertaken by his Office with regard to the rule
of law and to continue to act as a catalyst in the system by, inter alia, helping other
United Nations agencies and programmes, within their respective mandates, to
include in their work, as appropriate, attention to institution-building in the area of
the rule of law;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-ninth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution and the
above-mentioned recommendation of the World Conference on Human Rights.
77th plenary meeting
18 December 2002

3
