Reeolutious adopted oa the report.a of the Fourth Con1mittee

of the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories, to the
end that such education may be raised as soon as possible to the level enjoyed by the peoples of the advanced
countries;
2. Invites the Administering Members to communicate to the Secretary-General, for the seventeenth
session of the General Assembly, information on the
measures taken and the progress achieved towards the
establishment of universal, free and compulsory primary
education, with the aim of eradicating illiteracy among
the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
which they administer.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

1464 (XIV). Equal treatment in matters relating
to education in Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General, Assembly,
RecaUing its resolution 328 (IV) of 2 December
1949 on equal treatment in matters relating to education
in Non-Self-Governing Territories, and all other relevant resolutions,
Having regard to the fundamental importance of race
relations, particularly under modern conditions, for the
attainment of the objectives of Chapter XI of the Charter
of the United Nations,
Having considered the special report submitted by the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories, 29
Recognizing that some progress has been achieved in
equal treatment in matters relating to education in
Non-Self-Governing Territories,
1. Reaffirms its resolution 328 (IV) ;
2. Urges the Administering Members to intensify
their efforts to fulfil the basic objectives of the abovementioned resolution ;
3. Endorses the view expressed by the Committee
on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
that on no ground whatsoever can education on a racial
basis be justified ;30
4. Requests the Committee to pay special attention
to this matter and to continue to bring out the salient
facts in its annual report on conditions in the NonSelf-Governing Territories.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

1465 (XIV). Dissemination of information on
the United Nations in the Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling the obligations of Member States, enumerated in Chapter XI of the Charter of the United
Nations, which have or assume responsibilities for
the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories
towards the inhabitants of these Territories,
Reiterating the principle that the interests of the
inhabitants of these Territories are paramount,
C onsi.dering it necessary that the political, economic,
social and educational advancement of these inhabitants,
as envisaged in the Charter, should he accelerated,
211 Ibid., paras. 30-38.
ao Ibid., para. 37.

SS

Re.caUing the principle uaderlying the public information activities of the United Nations that the Organization cannot achieve the purposes for which it has been
created unless the pe.oples of the world are informed
of its aims and activities,
Considering therefore that it is important that the
peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories be widely
informed concerning the United Nations,
1. Requests the Administering Members to adopt
necessarv measures for the dissemination of information
concerning the United Nations among the inhabitants
of Non-Self-Governing Territories and for this purpose
to seek the active support and participation of the
organizations representative of these inhabitants;
2. Invites the attention of Administering Members
to the recommendations contained in paragraph 54 of
part two of the 1959 report of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories, 31 and
requests them to furnish the Secretary-General with
information concerning the implementation of the
recommendations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare for the
fifteenth session of the General Assembly a special
report on the present state of the dissemination of
information concerning the United Nations in NonSdf-Coverning Territories, and un further measures
necessary to this end.
855th p!roary mel'tinr,,
12 December 1959.

1466 (XIV). Participation of the Non-Self-Gov•
erning Territories in the work of the United
Nations and of the specialized agencies
The General Assembly,
Rcralling its resolution 5(i6 (VI) of 18 January 1952,
and in JJarticular:
(a) The first preambular paragraph, in which it noted
the Secretary-General's proposal concerning the use of
the Cnited Nations to promote by peaceful mean, the
progress of dependent peoples to a position of equality
with Member States of the lJnited Nations,
( b) The fourth prean1bular paragraph, in which it
stated that the direct association of the N 011-SelfGoverning Territories in the work of the United
Nations and of the specialized agencies is an effective
means of promoting the progress of the peoples of
those Territories towards a position of equality with
Member States of the United Nations,
( c) Operative paragraph 2, in whic-h it commended
the use of the spec-ial provisions in the constitutions of
some of the specialized agencies and of the regional
t·con,nnic commissions of the United \'ations permitting
1he admission of the No11-Self-Govcrni11g Territories
to those agencies and commissions as assoriate memh~rs,
1111 tht' proposal of the Administering Member concerned,
Rerallin_q its rt'solutions 647 (\"IT) of 10 Dect>mbcr
1G5:.? and 7•+~ ! V f I I ) of :.?7 N ovcmber 1953, in whic-h
1t re:iffirnwcl the provisions of the above-mentioned
resolution Jll(] expressly im·ite<l the Member States
administering Non-Self-Governing Territories progressively to increase the participation of indigenous representatives from those Territories in the work of the
technical organs of the United Nations, including the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories and the specialized agencies,
81 fbid., Supflletn-ent No. 15

(A/4111).

36

General AHembly-Fourteenth Seseion

Noting with satisfaction that some Non-~elf-Governing
Territories are already participating fruitfully in the
work of certain specialized agencies and certain regional
economic commissions,
1. Invites the Administering Members to submit to
the specialized agencies the candidature of the Territories referred to in Article 73 of the Charter of the
United Nations with a view to their admission as members, associate members or observers, according to the
constitution of the agency concerned ;
2. Specially requests all Member States administering Non-Self-Governing Territories in Africa to propose the participation of these Territories in the work
of the Economic Commission for Africa ;
3. Re-emphasizes the great advantage of the Administering Members including in their delegations representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to
participate in the work of the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories and in the discussion of such matters in the Fourth Committee;
4. Invites the Administering Members to furnish the
Secretary-General with a report on the practical measures taken to implement the present resolution ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fifteenth session on the progress
made.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

1467 (XIV). General questions relating to the
transmission and examination of information

The General, Assembly,
Having regard to the provisions of Chapter XI of
the Charter of the United Nations, and in particular to
tl:e obligation to transmit information under Article 73 e
accepted by Members which have or assume responsibilities for Territories whose peoples have not yet
attained a full measure of self-govern-nent,
Recalling that, hy its resolution 334 (TV) of 2 December 1949, the General Assembly considered that it
is within its responsibility to express its opinion on
the principles which have guided, or may in future
guide, the Administering Members in enumerating the
Territories for which the obligation exists to transmit
information under Article 73 e of the Charter,
Recalling also that, by its resolution 742 (VIII) of
27 November 1953, the General Assembly approved a
list of factors to be taken into account in deciding
whether a Territory is or is not a Territory whose
people have not yet attained a full measme of selfgovernment,
Noting that Member States have expressed differing
opinions as to the application of the provisions of
Chapter XI to Territories whose peoples have not yet
attained a full measure of self-government, including
the obligation to transmit the information called for in
Article 73 e of the Charter,
1. Considers that it would be desirahle for the
General Assembly to enumerate the principles which
should guide Members in determining whether or not
an obligation exists to transmit the information called
for in Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations:
2. Decides to establish a special committre consisting
of six members, to be elected hv the Fourth Committee
on behalf of the General Assrmhlv----three of whom shall

be l\lembers who transmit information under Article 73 e
oi the Charter and three non-administering Memberstu study these principles and to report on the results of
its study to the Assembly at its fifteenth session ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare for the
use of this committee an account of the history of this
matter. including a summary of the opinions on the
subject which have been expressed by Member States
in the past and of the relevant legal treaties on the
interpretation of the Charter;
4. Invites Member States to submit in writing to
the Secretary-General, before I May 1960, their views
on these principles, in order that the committee may
take them into account.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

•

•

•

At ,ts 994th meeting, the Fourth Committee, acting in the
name of the General Assembly, elected the members of the
sf,ecial committee established under the terms of the above
resolutiott. At its 857th plenary meeting on 12 December 1959,
the General Assembly confirmed the election.
The Committee is composed as follows: INDIA, MEXICO,
MOROCCO, NETHERLANDS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN
A ND \'oRTHERN IRELAND and UNITED STATES m· AMERICA.

1468 (XIV). Voluntary transmission of information on political developments in Non-SeliGoverning Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 144 (II) of 3 November
1947, 327 (IV) of 2 December 1949, 551 (Vl) of
7 December 1951 and 848 (IX) of 22 November 1954
regarding the voluntary transmission of information
on political developments in the Non-Self-Governing
Territories,
Noting that only some Members resp0nsible for the
administration of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
voluntarily transmit information on the c1evelopment of
political institutions in those Territories,
Rccogni::ing that the principles and objectives set
forth in Article 73 of the Charter of the United Nations
relate as much to the political advancement of the
inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories as
to their advancement in economic, social and t'ducational fields,
Recalling further that under Article 73 b of the
Charter the Administering Members have assumed the
obligation to develop self-government in the Non-Self(;overning Territories, with due regard to the political
aspirations of the peoples, and to assist them in tht'
progressive development of their free political instituti(ln,..
Conscious of the inextricable relationship lwtween
developments in the political and functional fields,
1. Endorses the observations of the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories, based
on its examination of the information transmitted by
the Administering Members, that speedy advancement
in the functional fields is usually obtained where there
i, tht' broadest participation of the inhabitants in political
hodit's empowere(I to establish policies and to vote
I,udgets ;32
3 :: /hi ..

Suf'l'lnncnt

\",,

15 IA/41111, part two, para. 27,
