S/2015/138

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 February 2015
Original: English

Letter dated 25 February 2015 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the seventeenth monthly report of the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), submitted pursuant to paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution 2118
(2013) (see annex). The report covers the period from 23 January to 22 February
2015.
I am pleased to note that the destruction of the remaining 12 chemical wea pons
production facilities in the Syrian Arab Republic is continuing and that the destruction
of the first and second underground structures has now been verified by OPCW.
With regard to the Syrian Arab Republic’s initial declaration and subsequent
amendments, OPCW technical experts are continuing their dialogue with the Syrian
authorities. Since my previous letter (S/2015/56), the OPCW Declaration Assessment
Team has carried out a visit to the Syrian Arab Republic to hold further consultations
with the Syrian authorities and to continue technical-level discussions. As I have
previously underlined, continuing cooperation between the Syrian authorities and
OPCW remains critical for the resolution of any outstandi ng issues in this regard.
As you are aware, on 4 February 2015 I received a communication from the
Director-General of OPCW transmitting the decision of the Executive Council
regarding the reports of the fact-finding mission that is looking into allegations of
the use of toxic chemicals as weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic. I conveyed that
communication to the President of the Security Cou ncil by way of a letter dated
6 February 2015 (S/2015/95). In that decision, the Executive Council, among other
things, noted the Director-General’s statement that he would include the reports of
the fact-finding mission, along with information on any discussions within the
Executive Council on the work of the mission, as par t of his monthly reports that he
forwarded to the Security Council. Accordingly, the three reports of the fact -finding
mission released to date are attached herewith (see annex, enclosures II -IV).
Information on related discussions by the Executive Council is provided in the
regular monthly report of the Director-General.
The work of the fact-finding mission is continuing. As always, I take this
opportunity to reiterate my unequivocal condemnation of the use, by any party to
the conflict, of toxic chemicals as weapons.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex urgently
to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon
15-02871 (E)

020315

*1502871*

S/2015/138

Annex
I have the honour to transmit to you my report entitled “Prog ress in the
elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme”, prepared in accordance
with the relevant provisions of Executive Council decision EC -M-33/DEC.1 of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013), both dated 27 September 2013, for transmission to the
Security Council. My report covers the period from 23 January to 22 February 2015
and also covers the reporting requirements of Executive Council decision EC-M-34/
DEC.1, dated 15 November 2013. Please also find attached the three reports by the
fact-finding mission mandated to establish the facts surrounding the allegations of
use of chlorine as a weapon in the Syrian Arab Republic.
(Signed) Ahmet Üzümcü

2/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Enclosure I
Note by the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Progress in the elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme
1.
In accordance with subparagraph 2(f) of the decision by the Executive Council
(hereinafter “the Council”) at its Thirty-Third Meeting (EC-M-33/DEC.1, dated
27 September 2013), the Technical Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”) reports
to the Council on a monthly basis regarding the implementation of that decision. In
accordance with paragraph 12 of United Nations Security Council resolution 2118
(2013), the report by the Secretariat is also submitted to the Security Council
through the Secretary-General. This is the seventeenth such monthly report.
2.
The Council, at its Thirty-Fourth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled
“Detailed Requirements for the Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapons and Syrian
Chemical Weapons Production Facilities” (EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November
2013). In paragraph 22 of that decision, the Council decided that the Secretar iat
should report on its implementation “in conjunction with its reporting required by
subparagraph 2(f) of Council decision EC-M-33/DEC.1”.
3.
The Council, at its Forty-Eighth Meeting, also adopted a decision entitled
“Reports of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria” (EC-M-48/DEC.1, dated
4 February 2015).
4.
This report is therefore submitted in accordance with the above -mentioned
Council decisions. It includes information relevant to their implementation during
the period from 23 January to 22 February 2015.
Progress achieved by the Syrian Arab Republic in meeting the requirements of
EC-M-33/DEC.1 and EC-M-34/DEC.1
5.
Progress achieved within the current reporting period by the Syrian Arab
Republic in fulfilling its obligations as per decisions EC-M-33/DEC.1 and EC-M34/DEC.1 is described below:
(a) With respect to the destruction and verification of the 12 chemical
weapons production facilities (CWPFs) (seven aircraft hangars and five underground
structures) in the Syrian Arab Republic as per Council decision EC-M-43/DEC.1
(dated 24 July 2014), significant progress has been made since the start of the
destruction operations on 24 December 2014. The destruction of the first
underground structure was fully completed on 31 January 2015 and the fina l
inspection report was signed on 9 February 2015. The second underground structure
was verified by the OPCW team as destroyed on 22 February 2015. Destruction
operations are currently under way at two of the three other underground structures.
Regarding the destruction of the aircraft hangars, the preparatory works have been
completed at five sites where the soil covering the hangars has been removed. The
equipment required for the destruction of the aircraft hangars has been moved to the
first site scheduled to be destroyed. With regard to the planned time frame, it is
expected that the destruction of all five underground structures will be completed
before 30 June 2015. The operations to destroy the seven aircraft hangars are

15-02871

3/123

S/2015/138

expected to be fully completed shortly thereafter. Another meeting of the Steering
Committee also took place to discuss all relevant details concerning the destruction
of the 12 CWPFs.
(b) Pursuant to paragraph 19 of EC-M-34/DEC.1, the Syrian Arab Republic
is required to submit a monthly report to the Council regarding activities on its
territory related to the destruction of its chemical weapons and CWPFs. The
fifteenth such report was submitted to the Secretariat on 16 February 2015
(EC-78/P/NAT.3, dated 16 February 2015).
(c) In accordance with subparagraph 1(e) of EC-M-33/DEC.1 and paragraph 7
of United Nations Security Council resolution 2118 (2013), the Syrian Arab
Republic shall cooperate fully with all aspects of the implementation of the decision
and the resolution. The Syrian authorities have continued to extend the necessary
cooperation during the reporting period.
Progress in the elimination of Syrian chemical weapons by States Parties hosting
destruction activities
6.
As reported previously, all declared chemicals have been removed from the
territory of the Syrian Arab Republic, while all declared stocks of the Category 1
chemicals have been destroyed, with only one Category 2 chemical remaining to be
destroyed. As at the cut-off date of this report, 89.8% of the Category 2 chemicals
had already been destroyed, representing a combined total of 98%, including the
isopropanol previously destroyed in the Syrian Arab Republic. The following
subparagraphs provide information on the destruction of the remaining Category 2
chemical and the effluents at commercial facilities selected pursuant to paragraph 24
of EC-M-34/DEC.1, and at facilities sponsored by States Parties pursuant to
paragraph 7 of decision EC-M-36/DEC.2 (dated 17 December 2013):
(a) As at the cut-off date of this report, a total of 16.5% of the only
remaining Category 2 chemical had already been destroyed at Veolia ES Technical
Solutions, LLC in the United States of America and at Mexichem UK Limited in the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Destruction of the only
remaining chemical at these two facilities is currently on hold as technical issues are
sorted out.
(b) As at the cut-off date of this report, 57.5% of the DF effluent and 86.3%
of the HD effluent, which were produced by the neutr alisation process on board the
United States Vessel MV Cape Ray, had already been destroyed by Ekokem in
Finland and at the GEKA facility in Germany, respectively.
7.
The Secretariat will continue to provide information on the aforementioned
destruction activities during briefings to States Parties in The Hague and through the
monthly reports. Timelines for the completion of the destruction of Syrian chemical
weapons were provided in the overall report on the elimination of the Syrian
chemical weapons programme (paragraph 25 of EC-76/DG.16, dated 4 July 2014),
which was noted by the Council at its Seventy-Sixth Session. While the Secretariat
is not able to give a forecast at this stage about the completion of the destruction of
the remaining chemical in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America, estimates for Germany and Finland
remain the end of March and June 2015, respectively.

4/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Activities carried out by the Secretariat with respect to the Syrian Arab Republic
8.
Cooperation with the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) has
continued in the context of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic. As at
the cut-off date of this report, four OPCW staff members were deployed as part of
that Mission. Ambassador José Artur Denot Medeiros of Brazil, in his capacity as
Special Adviser to the Director-General on Syria, travelled to Damascus for
meetings with senior Syrian officials, UNOPS staff, and the United Nations
Designated Official in Syria, from 25 to 27 January 2015.
9.
The Director-General has continued to meet with senior representatives of the
States Parties hosting a destruction facility or otherwise providing assistance with
the destruction of Syrian chemical weapons. He also communicated regularly with
senior officials from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. As requested by
the Council at its Seventy-Fifth Session (paragraph 7.12 of EC-75/2, dated 7 March
2014), the Secretariat has continued to provide regular information briefi ngs to
States Parties in The Hague on behalf of the Director-General.
10. As stipulated by the Council at its Seventy-Sixth Session (paragraph 6.17 of
EC-76/6, dated 11 July 2014), the Secretariat and the Syrian authorities continue to
cooperate on outstanding issues regarding the Syrian declaration. From 25 January
to 5 February 2015, the Declaration Assessment Team visited the Syrian Arab
Republic for the seventh time in order to hold further consultations with the
representatives of the Syrian National Authority and to continue technical-level
discussions. Visits were carried out at two sites where samples were collected.
These samples, together with those taken during previous visits, were transported to
the OPCW Laboratory and to two designated laboratories for analysis. Further
consultations with the Syrian authorities will be held with a view to updating the
Syrian declaration, and the next visit has been scheduled towards the end of March
2015.
11. As reported previously, the implementation of additional special monitoring
measures, as specified in Note EC-M-43/DG.1/Rev.1 (dated 21 July 2014), will
include the use of a vault monitoring system, which is based on technology already
in use by the International Atomic Energy Agency. The Secretariat has fi nalised all
administrative requirements for the first phase of implementing the monitoring
system in the underground structures, and has also finalised the administrative
requirements for the delivery of the system by Aquila Technologies. The
implementation of the special remote monitoring system will be in line with the
agreed time frame for the planned construction activities related to the interior
plugs. Fibre-optic cables have been already installed and successfully tested in two
interior plugs at two underground structures. The supplier of the special monitoring
system, Aquila Technologies, will provide training for operators on system
installation and operation at the OPCW in The Hague in April 2015, to coincide
with the delivery by Aquila Technologies to the OPCW of the first set of the special
monitoring system to be installed in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Supplementary resources
12. As at the cut-off date of this report, the total contributions of EUR 50.3 million
in the Syria Trust Fund for the Destruction of Chemical Weapons and the
contributors thereto remained unchanged compared to the previous report.

15-02871

5/123

S/2015/138

13. As reported previously, the Secretariat had approached the Syrian Government
with a request for reimbursement of costs relating to verifi cation activities for the
period from September 2013 to August 2014, amounting to EUR 2.3 million. The
request was made in keeping with States Parties’ obligations under Articles IV and
V of the Chemical Weapons Convention (hereinafter “the Convention”). T he Syrian
authorities have indicated that they remain unable to cover these costs on the basis
of the reasons stipulated at the time that the Syrian Arab Republic joined the
Convention.
Activities carried out with regard to the Fact-Finding Mission
14. At the conclusion of its Forty-Eighth Meeting on 4 February 2015, the Council
adopted a decision entitled “Reports of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria”
(EC-M-48/DEC.1) in which it, inter alia, “expresses serious concern regarding the
findings of the Fact-Finding Mission, made with a high degree of confidence, that
chlorine had been used as a weapon in Syria in the villages of Talmenes,
Al Tamanah, and Kafr Zita from April to August 2014”.
15. Delegations addressing the Council at its Forty-Eighth Meeting expressed their
positions on the work undertaken by the Fact-Finding Mission and on its three
reports. The Council heard expressions of support for the work done thus far by the
Mission. Some doubts and questions were also raised in regard to the pr ocedures
and methods followed by the Mission. For his part, the Director-General
underscored the integrity and professionalism of the Fact-Finding Mission and the
validity of its work and conclusions.
Conclusion
16. The main focus of the future activities of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic will continue to be on the destruction of the 11 remaining CWPFs
and the installation of the special remote monitoring system in the five underground
structures. The Declaration Assessment Team and the Fact-Finding Mission will
also continue their work in the Syrian Arab Republic.

6/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Enclosure II
Note by the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Summary report of the work of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission
in Syria covering the period from 3 to 31 May 2014
1.
On 29 April 2014, the Director-General announced the creation of an OPCW
Fact-Finding Mission in Syria. The Mission was mandated to establish the facts
surrounding allegations of the use of toxic chemicals, reportedly chlorine, for
hostile purposes in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The summary report of the Fact-Finding Mission is hereby circulated for the
information of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Annexes:
Annex 1: Cover Note by the Head of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
Annex 2: Summary Report of the Work of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in
Syria Covering the Period from 3 to 31 May

15-02871

7/123

S/2015/138

Annex 1
Cover note by the Head of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission
in Syria
16 June 2014
Director-General,
Submitted herewith for your perusal and action as deemed appropriate is a summary
report of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria covering the period from 3 to
31 May 2014.
Malik Ellahi
Head of the FFM

8/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Annex 2
Summary report of the work of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission
in Syria covering the period from 3 to 31 May 2014
Introduction
1.
With repeated allegations of the use of toxic chemicals for hostile purposes at
a number of locations in the Syrian Arab Republic, on 29 April 2014 the DirectorGeneral announced the formation of a Fact-Finding Mission (FFM), “to establish
facts surrounding allegations of use of chlorine in the Syrian Arab Republic”. The
allegations mainly referred to the use of chlorine in a number of p rovinces that the
Syrian Government does not consider to be under its effective control, more
specifically, in Hama, Idlib, and Rif Damascus.
2.
The Syrian Government, which had given its consent for the FFM, also agreed
to the “terms of reference” that would govern its work. Apart from the necessary
legal guarantees that would allow the FFM to execute its mandate, including
security assurances for areas under governmental control, the terms of reference
outlined the activities that the FFM was expected to undertake.
3.
The FFM was set up with the full awareness that, being the first OPCW-led
mission that would physically cross confrontational lines, it would face
unprecedented security risks. The official OPCW press release regarding the FFM
stated that “[t]he mission will carry out its work in the most challenging
circumstances.”
Basis for the FFM
4.
While offering a constructive means of clarifying the aforementioned
allegations, the establishment of the FFM was based on the general authority of the
OPCW Director-General to seek to uphold at all times the object and purpose of the
Chemical Weapons Convention; this authority is reinforced in the present instance
by the relevant decisions of the OPCW Executive Council and the United Nations
Security Council resolution (UNSCR) 2118 (2013); the general endorsement by the
Executive Council of the FFM; and its acceptance by the State Party concerned
through an exchange of letters on the subject between the Director-General and the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, dated 1 and 10 May 2014, respectively.
Cooperation with the United Nations
5.
Following consultations with the Director-General, on 26 April 2014, the
United Nations Secretary-General pledged full support for the FFM by the United
Nations. The modalities of this support are outlined in letters between the DirectorGeneral and the Secretary-General dated 25 April, and 2 and 5 May.
6.
The support by the United Nations encompasses: the provision of safety and
security support and advice to the OPCW; the provision of logistical support; and
assistance with liaising and coordinating, in particular, with opposition
representatives on the security, logistical, and operational aspects of the OPCW
FFM, as may be required, for the safe access and movement of OPCW personnel,
any accompanying United Nations personnel, and their equipment and samples
within the areas to be visited in the Syrian Arab Republic, including liaising with

15-02871

9/123

S/2015/138

the opposition representatives for the purposes of making available person s for
interviews.
7.
The FFM received the full cooperation and support of the United Nations, and
the staff assigned to work with the Team displayed a high standard of
professionalism and commitment.
FFM Strategic Concept of Operations
8.
In order to state unambiguously the aims and objectives of the FFM and to
create a framework for the FFM’s operational concept, planning, and
implementation, including the possibility of field visits, an internal document
entitled “FFM Strategic Concept of Operations (CONOPS)” was drafted and
finalised.
9.
The CONOPS describes the establishment by the Director-General of the FFM
as signaling “the determination of the OPCW that, despite the difficult security
situation prevailing in the SAR, it will take serious notice of allegations of use of
chemical weapons. By making every effort to bring to light the facts surrounding
these allegations, the international community can bring to bear its influence on
those who might consider such actions immune from censure”.
Conceptual considerations, including selection of sites; preparation and conduct
of site visits
10. Due to its manifold civilian applications, chlorine is a widely available
chemical. It is a chemical that is non-persistent, making conclusive evidence of its
use a challenging task.
11. Given this fact, the conduct of site visits at the locations of the alleged
incidents was considered a key source for gathering as much evidence and as many
facts surrounding the allegations as possible. To this end, the planne d FFM activities
at the locations included:
(a) the conduct of interviews with casualties of the alleged incidents, as well
as first responders, treating physicians, and eye witnesses to the incident;
(b) the collection, review, and analysis of documentation relevant to the
alleged incidents, including clinical histories, admission records, and investigation
reports of casualties and autopsy findings, if available, of victims;
(c) the collection of samples, including biomedical and post -mortem, as
required, of alleged casualties/victims; and
(d)

the collection of environmental samples; and

(e) the review and analysis of munitions or remnants of munitions reportedly
used to carry out the attacks, if deemed feasible and safe.
12. All reported incidents took place at locations that the Syrian Government
considers to be outside its effective control. Therefore, elements considered crucial
for the success of the FFM were identified as:
(a) identification of key actors, such as local authorities and/or
representatives of armed opposition groups in charge of the territories in which
these locations are situated;

10/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

(b) establishment of contacts with these groups in an atmosphere of mutual
trust and confidence that allows the mandate and objectives of the FFM t o be
communicated;
(c) provision of credible assurances of safe access and passage and/or escort
for the FFM Team on the part of the armed groups in charge of the relevant areas
and willingness and agreement by the armed groups to allow for and actively
prepare the work of the FFM Team on the ground prior to the Team’s entry; and
(d) assurances by the Syrian Arab Republic for escort to the last checkpoint
prior to entry into areas the Syrian Government considers outside its effective
control and escort upon exit from these territories.
13. Furthermore, the field operation(s) associated with access to the alleged
locations, and the carrying out of the planned activities on site, were envisaged to be
conducted under conditions of an active war zone, namely, in a dynamic high-risk
security environment involving various factions of armed opposition groups, as well
as numerous and shifting confrontation lines.
14. With a view to managing the practical aspects of safe access and passage to
the selected locations, and the safety and security of the FFM members throughout
the operation, the Office of United Nations Department of Safety and Security
(UNDSS) in the Syrian Arab Republic (hereinafter “UNDSS Syria”), which is in
charge of the Security Cell for the FFM, was to prepare and manage a multi-layered
security concept, including security risk assessments and security and contingency
plans, and coordinate the integration of aspects related to communications and
logistics into the security planning process.
15. The FFM could request access to sites other than those initially identified in
the terms of reference.
Safety and security of the FFM
16. The safety, security, and well-being of the FFM staff being a high priority
while enabling the effective discharge of their operations, the entire work of the
FFM was placed under the framework of the United Nations Security Management
System (UNSMS) and the direction of the Designated Official (DO) for the Syrian
Arab Republic.
17. UNDSS Syria provided advice, guidance and technical assistance. To this end,
UNDSS Syria dedicated a security cell to the FFM coordinated by the Chief
Security Adviser (CSA) of UNDSS Syria, under the overall authority and guidance
of the United Nations DO, who also serves as the Resident Coordinator (RO) for
Syria.
18. The ultimate authority to take a “go/no go” decision, accepting the risk level
of deployment for a field mission, rested with the Director-General and the
Secretary-General in accordance with the UNSMS accountability framework .
19. The Advance Team established contacts with representatives of UNDSS Syria,
including the DO and the CSA, immediately upon arrival in Damascus, and engaged
in a regular close consultation process with the UNDSS on all matters related to
security and safety of the FFM, including through the designated FFM Security
Cell.

15-02871

11/123

S/2015/138

Activities of the FFM
20. Upon arrival in Damascus on 3 May 2014, the Advance Team commenced
preparations and planning of activities. These included preparations for the
deployment of the remainder of the Team and the initial collection and analysis of
information and identification of options and next steps, in particular with regard to
site visits. The Advance Team established contacts with representatives of the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, various components of the United
Nations, and other relevant actors in order to gather information and to select
suitable locations for possible field visits.
Meetings with the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
21. The Vice Minister of the Syrian Arab Republic, H.E. Mr Faisal Mekdad,
invited the OPCW Advance Team to a meeting at the Foreign Ministry on 4 May
2014. The meeting was attended, inter alia, by officials of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, including General Hassan Al-Sharif, and the Ministry of Defence of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
22. The Minister welcomed the Team to the Syrian Arab Republic and noted the
mutual determination to achieve the success of the FFM, as well as the expectation
that the FFM would be conducted in an independent and impartial manner.
Furthermore, the Minister stated that the FFM was supported at the highest level of
Syrian authorities, including the political and military levels, and expressed his
Government’s commitment to providing all necessary support, in particular as
regards the security and protection of the Team. He informed the Team that the
Government had learned about the alleged incidents of use of chlorine from some
States and that their own enquiries had not yielded any reports of the hospitalisation
of victims or reports by local authorities to that effect. He added that this enquiry
excluded field hospitals in rebel-held areas. The Minister further stated that a
National Commission had been established to investigate any further i ncidents that
might occur in the future.
23. Over the course of the following days, the Advance Team met with General
Al-Sharif and his team. In these meetings, the position of the Syrian Government
that armed terrorist groups, some of which included foreigners, were engaged in
efforts to obtain and use toxic chemicals was elaborated upon. Incidents of
smuggling of certain chemicals across the borders from neighbouring countries were
highlighted. The FFM members were also informed that at two locations, in Tartous
and Al-Bayda, chemicals had been captured from armed opposition groups (AOGs)
and that a chlorine-producing plant located some 40 kilometers from Aleppo had
been seized by armed groups. The delegation presented a video at the meeting
showing an apparently abandoned plant being visited by a camera crew from one of
the AOGs interviewing two guards at the facility. The General further recalled that,
on 8 December 2012, the Syrian Permanent Representative to the United Nations in
New York had asked for the United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria
(UNSMIS) to make an inventory of the chemicals at the plant. The UNSMIS
contingent heading for the plant was fired upon and the effort was aborted.
24. In addition, several videos from social media websites and other open source
information was provided to the FFM in support of the position of the Syrian
Government, together with other documents, such as reports about intercepted
communications.

12/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

25. These discussions concluded with the FFM stressing the impo rtance of
primary material, preferably Government documentation that would serve to
validate some of the material, such as original transcripts of the intercepts and
additional information regarding the confiscated chemicals at Tartous and Al Bayda.
The FFM undertook to reflect in its report the perception of the Syrian Government
regarding the threat from non-State actors seeking to obtain and use toxic chemicals
for unlawful purposes. It will also look into the requests made by the Syrian
Government to follow up on some of the information that it has provided.
Team preparations in Damascus
26. By 18 May, the FFM team had reached full strength. The FFM office was set
up at the Four Seasons Hotel.
27. The work of the Team and preparations for field visits commenced, with
planning briefings for the Team members and the distribution of tasks, immediately
upon arrival. The Team undertook preparations for field activities during site visits,
including operational planning and arrangements to conduct intervi ews with
casualties, as well as first responders, treating physicians, and eye witnesses; the
collection, review, and analysis of documentation relevant to the alleged incidents,
including clinical histories, admission records, and investigation reports of
casualties and autopsy findings, if available, of victims; the collection of samples,
including biomedical and post-mortem, as required, of alleged casualties/victims to
this end; and the collection of environmental samples, and the review and analysis,
if deemed feasible and safe to do so, of munitions or remnants of munitions
reportedly used to carry out the attacks.
28. The Team also continued to deepen its contacts with relevant components of
the United Nations relevant to the preparation of field visits. With these elements in
the lead, contacts were established and maintained with representatives of the
opposition for preparations to carry out site visits; and contacts were maintained
with representatives of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, with a view to
preparing for site visits.
29. In close consultation with the UNDSS, the FFM reviewed and identified
options for the selection of suitable locations for site visits and commenced
planning and preparation of documentation required under the UNSMS.
Selection of locations for site visits
30. On 19 May, it was decided that the first on-site field mission would be
conducted on 22 May to Harasta, which was one of the first locations to have been
allegedly attacked with chlorine and was also located close to Damascus. Since the
arrival of the FFM in early May, no further attacks had been reported. However, on
that same day, allegations of a new attack on the town of Kafr Zeyta came to light.
This was followed by another allegation on 21 May of an attack on the nearby town
of Al-Lataminah. As its contacts with representatives of the opposition were already
well under way, the FFM was in a position to establish contacts with two treating
physicians in Kafr Zeyta and obtained their verbal medical r eports relating to the
treatment of individuals allegedly affected by exposure to chlorine. In addition, the
Team was also able to review video footage covering the alleged attack, as well as
showing items reported to be the remnants of the munitions used, as well as some
that remained intact. On the same day, the FFM decided to change its plans and to

15-02871

13/123

S/2015/138

head to Kafr Zeyta instead of Harasta. This decision was welcomed by the
opposition.
Notification to the Syrian Government and safety and security arrangements
31. On 19 and 20 May, the entire FFM Team, including OPCW and UN
components, underwent two-day pre-mission Safe and Secure Approaches in Field
Environments (SSAFE)/Security Awareness Induction Training SAIT), including
modules on mine/UXO 1 awareness as well as training on communications during
field activities.
32. On 22 May, the FFM submitted a note verbale to the Syrian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs informing the Government of the likely date of the mission to Kafr
Zeyta, then planned for Sunday, 25 May, and requesting the initiation of
arrangements, including a cease fire, to ensure the safe movement and travel of the
team to Homs, where it would break its journey for the night, before proceeding the
next day for the site visit.
33. The Head of the FFM met General Al-Sharif the next day to further discuss
and finalise the necessary arrangements.
34. Contacts with representatives of the opposition continued and satisfactory
understandings were reached regarding the concrete arrangements during the fie ld
mission. The Team established contact with two treating physicians through
interlocutors, and they agreed to make arrangements in a local hospital for the Team
would carry out its work. They also agreed to share their medical credentials,
various clinical records of affected individuals, investigation reports, and blood
samples collected immediately after the incident.
35. The local authorities and treating physicians also agreed to make arrangements
to enable the Team to conduct interviews with individuals from the pre-identified
target groups (victims, first responders, treating physicians, and witnesses) on site
and, as applicable, to carry out medical sampling. To this end, the Team prepared
specific interview packages for each group of individuals.
36. On 23 May, a conference call was held with all key players involved in the
security arrangements from the side of the opposition, and their commitment to
these arrangements was confirmed.
37. The Mission Security Clearance Request (MSCR) was finalised by the UNDSS
and submitted through the OPCW Office of Confidentiality and Security to the
Director-General, who signed it. The MSCR was also approved by the United
Nations Under-Secretary-General in charge of the UNDSS.
38. Given the mission’s rating as “Very High Risk Mission”, key risks were
identified and associated applicable risk-mitigating measures were adopted.
39. The arrangements leading to the site visit of 27 May included a number of
follow-up meetings with the Syrian authorities, who continued to offer their full
support while cautioning that reliable arrangements might not be possible in dealing
with armed groups.

__________________
1 UXO = unexploded ordnance.

14/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

40. On 24 May, two meetings were held with the hosts in the morning, covering
the most feasible route to Kafr Zeyta.
41. The road to Homs was described as completely safe by the General. The
discussion focused on the route to be taken from Homs to Kafr Zeyta. The Syrian
Government’s preferred route was identified.
42. In the afternoon, the General’s Deputy met with the Team Leader an d the
Security Adviser and discussed further details about the identified route, especially
the access road leading into Kafr Zeyta.
43. Various routes had been under discussion with the opposition. The selected
route, including the access road, was agreed with two major groups operating in the
area. They informed the team that they would also make arrangements with some
other field commanders heading different armed factions in the area.
44. The date for the field mission was finally fixed for 27 May. The Concept of
Operations for Kafr Zeyta was reviewed and finalised between the Head of Mission
and the Team Leader and shared with the team focusing on convoy security,
communication procedures, sequence of activities on the ground, and sub -team
assignments. Since Kafr Zeyta had by then been subjected to a number of alleged
attacks, there were several locations of interest, as well as a number of munition
remnants and alleged devices claimed to be more or less intact, with cylinders inside
tubular shaped encasings.
45. The route map that clearly identifies the access road was fully shared with
both the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the opposition interlocutors.
46. In a letter dated 25 May, the National Authority of the Syrian Arab Republic
informed the FFM that, on 19 May, an armed group had tested a “locally made
rocket with a gas cylinder warhead”, which had resulted in a toxic release. The letter
also claimed that the Syrian Government had come across information on the
existence of barrels containing chlorine gas in a certain house owned by an
individual in the town of Kafr Zeyta, together with other unidentified canisters
stored at another location. The Team was requested to inspect these locations when
it arrived in Kafr Zeyta.
47. A day prior to the field visit, both the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
and the opposition confirmed in writing their commitment to observe a cease fire on
27 May 2014.
Incident of 27 May
48. The composition of the FFM convoy for the cross-line mission was six (6)
armoured vehicles; four (4) of these were to cross into the designated mission area
and the other two (2) were to remain at the last Syrian Government checkpoint with
a Syrian Government ambulance. The mission arrived in Homs from Damascus on
26 May. On 27 May, it departed from the hotel in Homs at 7:10 and arrived at the
last Syrian Government checkpoint at 9:20.
49. From this point, an escort arranged by the Syrian Government led the OPCW
FFM convoy towards the perimeter of the town of Tayyib at-Al-Imam, where he
stopped, signalling the way to Kafr Zeyta, and then left, taking another road. While
travelling through the town, the team did not observe any unusual or suspicious
circumstances. The convoy continued on the planned route towards the a greed point

15-02871

15/123

S/2015/138

of meeting with the opposition escort, which was located between the TayyibatAl-Imam and Al-Lataminah villages. Approximately 1,000 meters of the agreed
road lay ahead. With a slight incline in the road, it appeared possible that the
opposition contacts might not be visible. In order to overcome the visual
disadvantage due to the terrain gradient and in order to establish a direct line of
sight, the first vehicle in the convoy proceeded ahead, with the second vehicle
waiting some distance behind and the rest of the convoy still further back. At 9:35,
the leading vehicle was struck by an improvised explosive device, causing severe
damage to the vehicle but no injuries to the occupants except for minor soft -tissue
injuries to the left arm of the driver.
50. After the occupants were evacuated into the other vehicles, the convoy made
an effort to return to safety. On re-entering the town, the first vehicle in this convoy
was attacked with automatic gun fire. While this vehicle managed to get away, s ome
distance ahead from the point of the shooting, the remaining two vehicles were
intercepted by armed gunmen and members of the team detained for some time.
Upon the intervention of the opposition group with which the arrangements for the
visit had been made, all team members were released unharmed.
51. Given the circumstances and the loss of time, together with the approaching
deadline for the end of the cease fire, the field mission was aborted and the team
returned to Damascus via Homs.
Conclusions
52. The FFM has reviewed the information available to it, including that in the
public domain relating to the several similar incidents. Some of this information
seems to corroborate the testimonies provided by the treating physicians with whom
the FFM was able to establish contact. The similarities in the witness accounts
reviewed over the course of time became conspicuous. It is for this reason that,
despite the high risk involved, the FFM decided to conduct a field visit to Kafr
Zeyta — the town that seemed most affected by incidents of use of chlorine and that
was most likely to yield evidence that was fresh from the most recent reported
attacks. A field visit would have enabled the Team to collect for themselves clinical
and environmental evidence and to authenticate information already available in the
public domain, including information relevant to the munitions and the possible
mode of deployment.
53. The attack on the Team and the resulting denial of access to the FFM prevents
it from presenting definitive conclusions. It is nonetheless the considered view of
the FFM that the available information cannot be dismissed as unconnected,
random, or of a nature attributable to purely political motives. This information
lends credence to the view that toxic chemicals, most likely pulmonary irritating
agents such as chlorine, have been used in a systematic manner in a number of
attacks.
54. The Director-General has taken the decision for the FFM to continue its work
“by closely monitoring the situation and using all possible means to gather
information and data in order to establish the facts surrounding allegations of the
use of chlorine in Syria”. The Mission is now planning the next steps. On a
preliminary basis, the FFM will continue its interactions wi th all interested parties
in order to advance the objectives of a logical and systematic inquiry.
55. While field visits are not envisaged for the immediate future, these remain an
option.

16/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Enclosure III
Note by the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Second report of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
Key findings
1.
On 29 April 2014, the Director-General announced the creation of an OPCW
Fact-Finding Mission in Syria. The Mission was mandated to establish the facts
surrounding allegations of the use of toxic chemicals, reportedly chlorine, for
hostile purposes in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The Fact-Finding Mission submitted its summary report covering the period
from 3 to 31 May 2014 on 16 June 2014 (S/1191/2014, dated 16 June 2014) which
was circulated to the States Parties.
3.
The Second Report of the Fact-Finding Mission, including its key findings, is
hereby circulated for the information of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons
Convention.
4.
The Director-General considers it expedient for the Fact-Finding Mission to
continue its work, which will include transcribing the recorded evidence and data
that it has obtained as well as continuing to look into other alleged incidents.
Annexes:
Annex 1: Cover Note by the Head of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
Annex 2: Second Report of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria — Key
Findings

15-02871

17/123

S/2015/138

Annex 1
Cover note by the Head of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission
in Syria
10 September 2014
Director-General,
In continuation of the Summary Report of the Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) in Syria,
dated 16 June 2014, I submit herewith the second report on the work recently
conducted by the FFM, including its key findings.
Malik Ellahi
Head of the FFM

18/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Annex 2
Second report of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
Key findings
Introduction
1.
On 16 June 2014, the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) in Syria submitted
to the Director-General the “Summary Report of the Work of the OPCW FactFinding Mission in Syria Covering the Period from 3 to 31 May 2014”
(S/1191/2014, dated 16 June 2014). The Executive Council of the OPCW
(hereinafter “the Council”), at its Forty-Second Meeting, and then at its SeventySixth Session, emphasised its unequivocal support for the Director-General’s
decision “to continue the Mission, while stressing that the safety and security of
Mission personnel remains the top priority. The Council called upon all parties in
the Syrian Arab Republic to extend their full cooperation to the Mission and to
ensure that it completes its work safely and effectively. The Council also
encouraged all States Parties that are in a positio n to do so to work with the relevant
parties in the Syrian Arab Republic in this respect.”
2.
Based on the Director-General’s decision and the guidance provided by the
Council, the FFM commenced preparations to conduct the second phase of its work.
A key objective for the FFM was to carry out some of the activities that it had been
unable to perform because of the attack on its convoy while heading for Kafr Zita
on 27 May 2014. Such activities would have included on-site collection of samples
and other evidence and, more significantly, the acquisition of the testimony of
victims, treating physicians, first responders, and eye -witnesses. On return to the
Headquarters, the FFM began planning to interview witnesses at a safe location
outside of Syria as an alternative to visiting the sites in question. A plan was
finalised to bring witnesses from the villages of Talmenes, Al Tamanah, and Kafr
Zita to an identified safe location. The FFM arrived at the location on 18 August
2014. The first group of witnesses from Talmenes arrived on 25 August 2014 and
the interviews started the same day. Subsequently, two additional groups of
witnesses from Al Tamanah and Kafr Zita were interviewed, with the process
concluding on 4 September 2014.
3.
As part of the arrangements for the interviews, the FFM agreed that, except for
the names of the villages in question, the names of individuals and any other such
information that the witnesses deemed might cause risks to their safety, would not
be mentioned in this report or otherwise divulged.
4.
This report presents the key findings from the interviews and the considerable
amount of documentation and other relevant information collected by the FFM. For
background purposes, reference may be made to the earlier report of the FFM
(S/1191/2014).
a.

Organisation of work
5.
The FFM organised its work in two teams, each led by an OPCW medical
doctor and supported by another interviewer/note-taker and an interpreter. The Head
of the FFM acted as the interview coordinator. All witnesses agreed to participate in
a recorded interview by signing a consent form. This includes both an audio and
video record. Four individuals consented to an audio record only. After each

15-02871

19/123

S/2015/138

interview was recorded (audio and video), the consent form, the recordings, and any
other information provided by the witness, such as medical documents, sketches,
photographs, or videos, were collated, sealed, and registered as confidential
material.
6.
Each individual submitted their identification documents issued by the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, indicating their date and place of birth,
place of residence, and other particulars. The treating physicians also submitted
copies of their medical credentials.
7.
In organising the interviews, the FFM worked closely with the organisation
“Violations Documentation Center in Syria”.
8.
Independently of the individuals from the three villages who were interviewed,
the FFM interviewed and received information from members of the “CBRN 2 Task
Force”, who had performed a systematic collection of data in the field following
reported attacks in Talmenes and Kafr Zita.
a.

Events and conditions in the three villages as described to the FFM

i.

Salient description of events relating to each of the three villages
9.
Talmenes, a village located in the province of Idlib, has a population of some
20,000 inhabitants. The village has one small field medical clinic, established about
18 months ago, with very limited resources and facilities offering only basic
medical aid. Fourteen individuals from Talmenes were interviewed between 25 and
29 August 2014. This group included two treating physicians, two nurses/medical
responders, and 10 victims/witnesses. Witnesses recalled two attacks with b arrel
bombs containing chlorine dropped from helicopter s. These attacks occurred on
21 and 24 April 2014, respectively. The first attack, as related to the FFM, was at
around 11:00, with two devices striking close to each other and resulting in nearly
200 casualties. One woman, a teenage girl, and a seven-year-old boy died as a result
of exposure to lethal doses.
10. Al Tamanah is a nearby village that has two field medical clinics with
minimal resources in terms of medicines and medical equipment. They hav e the
capability to provide only the most basic medical aid to limited number of
individuals. The FFM interviewed and collected testimonies from 14 individuals,
including two treating physicians, two nurses/medical responders, and 10 victims/
witnesses. These interviews were held from 29 August 2014 to 2 September 2014.
According to the witnesses, this village has been attacked five times with barrel
bombs containing chlorine dropped from helicopters. The dates recounted are 12,
18, and 30 April 2014, and 22 and 25 May 2014. All attacks, except the one of
22 May 2014, occurred at night. These attacks resulted in more than 150 casualties,
and eight of the most severely affected, mostly women and children, died from
exposure to lethal doses of the toxic chemical.
11. Kafr Zita is a small town located some 30 km from the city of Hama in
northern Syria. The town had two hospitals, one of which was destroyed during an
air raid. Witnesses reported some 17 “chlorine” attacks, with the last one occurring
as late as 28 August 2014. These attacks led to dozens of casualties. The witnesses
could recall at least two deaths, and a high number of casualties. One of these

__________________
2 CBRN = chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear.

20/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

attacks occurred in the vicinity of the town hospital and medical personnel
themselves suffered exposure. The FFM interviewed nine individuals from this
town, including two treating physicians, two nurses/first responders, and five
witnesses/victims. These individuals were interviewed from 2 to 5 September 2014.
Given the frequency of the attacks on Kafr Zita, these witnesses seemed to suffer
from stress and could not exactly recall the numerous dates and the times of the
attacks. The medical records handed over to the team by the treating physicians,
however, provide the dates on which casualties were treate d.
a.

Key Findings in Narrative
12. The 37 recorded testimonies from witnesses belonging to the three villages,
together with documentation, including medical records collected by the FFM,
present a composite account of the conditions experienced in the three villages,
especially in the aftermath of the attacks. The frequency of the reported attacks, the
first-hand accounts provided by a relatively large number of witnesses, and the
significant amount of supporting data and documentation create a distinc tly
discernable and revealing narrative.
13. When the attacks began, people responded in the manner to which they had
become accustomed. These villages are under constant attack from high -explosive
ordnance. Such attacks would typically occur following the sound of helicopters
flying at high altitude. A rudimentary early-warning mechanism would warn people
to take shelter. Some spotters would position themselves so as to keep an eye on the
movements of the aircraft. Given the high altitude, the features of the helicopters
would be barely visible, though some witnesses described the helicopters as having
a “wing like” extension on both sides, from which the ordnance — described by
them as barrel bombs — was released. Once released, people expected the familiar
strong thunderclap of high explosives and proportional destruction.
14. In describing the incidents involving the release of toxic chemicals, witnesses
invariably connected the devices to helicopters flying overhead. When dropped, a
piercing heavy, whistling sound — some comparing it to that of a fighter jet in a
dive — would be heard before the barrel hit the ground. Witnesses also invariably
reported the explosions as being muffled. As described, these explosions were more
akin to high-impact crashes rather than to loud explosions. The descriptions of the
locations impacted and of immediate environments suggest that the devices were
designed either to rupture on impact or carry a small improvised explosive charge.
Villagers have collected a grainy compound from an unexploded device that
resembles synthetic chemical fertiliser. A bag full of this material was presented to
the FFM.
15. The physical damage in the immediate environment of the points of impact, as
described and as seen on video, is consistent with what would normally occur as a
result of a heavy object impacting a built-up area with massive force: no fires were
reported, and no obliteration of residential compounds. Common features included
the partial collapsing of roofs — where these devices struck the houses directly —
collapsed walls, and impact craters.
16. In courtyards, domesticated birds and animals died, and leaves on plants
facing the point of impact withered and wilted “as autumn leaves”. In one case, a
child standing close to the impact site died later because of exposure to the toxic
chemical, while showing none of the obvious physical trauma as that usually

15-02871

21/123

S/2015/138

inflicted by a conventional explosive device. In the houses that were exposed to the
toxic chemical, discolouration of clothes and furniture was reported.
17. These descriptions are consistent with many publicly available accounts as
well as with the video footage acquired by the FFM. Some of the locations
described by the witnesses tally with those previously reported to hav e been
attacked. Videos seen and retained by the FFM include a demonstration of
geographic coordinates confirming the points of impact in Talmenes and Kafz Zita.
18. Other reports that provide further insight into the conditions include
observations by ordinary citizens that low-lying areas created greater exposure than
higher elevations. In one village, citizens had identified and used a low -lying area in
the north-east of the village as a refuge against shrapnel and flying debris during
conventional attacks. On 21 April 2014, when Talmenes was first struck by toxic
chemicals, the wind was blowing towards the east. Unaware of the downwind
hazard of toxic chemicals, unsuspecting villagers attempted to escape to their usual
shelter. The gas cloud also headed in the same direction and descended into the
depression, thus leading to the large number of casualties. Relating a similar
observation, a volunteer first responder with no training and only basic education
said that, driving through the village, the lower lying parts carried a stronger odour
of the substance than higher elevations.
19. The FFM repeatedly encountered accounts of people attempting to flee the
affected areas and taking precautions instinctively or to best of their knowledge and
resources. One family, whose house was struck, reportedly took shelter in the
bathroom, standing under a shower; others reported covering their mouths and faces
with wet towels, and still others unsuccessfully tried to protect themselves using
paper masks that are effective only against dust. A sleeping toddler escaped serious
exposure because her face was covered with a blanket to protect her against insects.
Other family members suffered much greater exposure.
20. One account described to the FFM concerned an attack that occurred “one day
before the end of Ramadan” this year, and just a few minutes before the time to
break the daily fast. The affected individuals in this case had taken refuge in a
basement shelter, expecting a conventional attack from a helicopter, whe n a barrel
bomb with chlorine fell some 40 to 50 m away from the shelter. This basement
shelter, approximately 10 x 10 m in size, has two entrances/exits; one opening to the
north and another opening to the south-east. The latter is connected to a street at a
higher elevation compared to the northern exit. The shelter was packed with people
from the neighbourhood. They were informed about the chlorine attack and asked to
escape to higher ground. By this time, the victims also began to smell the odour of
chlorine. Some people took the south-east exit and were less exposed, whereas those
who took the north exit ran directly into the chlorine cloud heading in a north -south
direction. These individuals developed more severe symptoms, with some
immediately falling unconscious and regaining consciousness later in the hospital.
21. People typically described a dense, honey wax-to-yellow hue towards the
centre of the cloud rising from the impact of the devices. The cloud would rise to a
height of approximately 60 to 70 m and then settle, moving along the ground in the
direction of the wind. All described the toxic chemical smell as being very strong,
irritating, and of “chlorine”. The intensity of the odour would begin to reduce in the
vicinity of impact sites some 30 to 45 minutes later.

22/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

22. Casualties were evacuated from the vicinity of the impact sites by ambulance;
some were makeshift, with volunteers using personal cars and motorbikes, and some
people were evacuated on foot. Another striking feature in the testim onies was that
local field hospitals established to treat the war wounded were severely handicapped
in treating the high number of casualties, and there was therefore a frequent transfer
of patients to the neighbouring villages. The doctors who were interv iewed reported
treating patients from other locations. This was a recurring theme during the
interviews. Many severely affected individuals were reported to have been
evacuated for treatment outside of Syria. The hospital admission and discharge
records from these hospitals have not yet been accessed by the FFM. The FFM was
made aware that autopsies on at least two victims were also performed outside
Syria, and the findings from the pathology report are also of interest to the FFM as
further confirmatory information.
23. In the earlier attacks, first responders rushing to the scene to help reported
getting exposed themselves, some seriously, with many requiring medical attention.
As the attacks became more frequent, people adapted. First responders started u sing
wet cloths or trauma bandages as masks. With the very first attacks, medical
professionals expecting the usual war victims reported being taken aback by the fact
that the mere presence of victims in the hospitals made the entire premises smell
strongly of a substance similar to what was variously described as bleach, cleaning
material, or chlorine. The medical personnel at these clinics did not have personal
protective equipment for their personal safety, and had to manage with surgical
masks and latex gloves. Most of them also later suffered from symptoms resulting
from cross-contamination. Physical injuries, such as those caused by conventional
ordnance, were nearly always absent among those reporting to the hospitals for
medical treatment.
24. Those reporting casualties to the clinics frequently decontaminated themselves
by washing their face and exposed parts of body with soap and water. In one
instance, people even used the available carbonated drinks, believing these to be
effective.
a.

Clinical effects of exposure as described to the FFM
25. The typical presenting symptoms of those who were exposed to the toxic
chemical included a burning sensation in the eyes, redness and itching in the eyes,
excessive tearing, blurred vision, a burning sensation on the face and exposed skin,
burning in the throat, coughing, difficulty breathing, shortness of breath, a feeling of
suffocation, excessive nasal discharge, excessive watering in the mouth, nausea,
vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, headache, generalised weakness, drowsiness,
disorientation, a feeling of panic, and loss of consciousness.
26. The spectrum of clinical signs as observed by medical personnel included
redness of the eyes, excessive lacrimation, rhinorrhoea, coughing, tachypnoea,
dyspnoea, orthopnea, cyanosis, increased tracheal secretions, which were frothy and
pink in severe cases, hypoxemia, with pulse oximetry showing an SpO2 of less than
60% in severe cases, agitation, and altered levels of consciousness. In the most
severe cases, patients had diffuse crepitations on auscultation and advanced
respiratory distress. Available X-rays of those most severely affected show
pulmonary oedema.

15-02871

23/123

S/2015/138

27. The medical team members of the FFM clinically examined some of those
who were exposed but did not detect any abnormalities, though these individuals
complained of increased sensitivity to strong odours, generalised weakness,
occasional bouts of coughing, reduced stamina, and dyspnoea on exertion.
28. The treatment provided to those affected after initial exposure included oxygen
inhalation, nebulisation with salbutamol, intravenous delivery of the steroids
hydrocortisone or dexamethasone, intravenous fluids, and airway suction to remove
secretions. Most of the less exposed casualties responded well to the treatment
provided, with people being discharged from clinics within two to three hours. The
most severely affected needed to be intubated and required mechanical ventilation.
Since the local clinics are without ventilators, such casualties were referr ed to other
hospitals outside of Syria, with a number of them not surviving the journey.
a.

Conclusions
29. Thirty-seven testimonies of primary witnesses, representing not only the
treating medical professionals but a cross-section of society, as well as
documentation including medical reports and other relevant information
corroborating the circumstances, incidents, responses, and actions, provide a
consistent and credible narrative. This constitutes a compelling confirmation that a
toxic chemical was used as a weapon, systematically and repeatedly, in the villages
of Talmanes, Al Tamanah, and Kafr Zeta in northern Syria. The descriptions,
physical properties, behaviour of the gas, and signs and symptoms resulting from
exposure, as well as the response of the patients to the treatment, leads the FFM to
conclude, with a high degree of confidence, that chlorine, either pure or in mixture,
is the toxic chemical in question.
30. Following the establishment of the FFM in late April, there was a marked
reduction in allegations, especially in the months of May, June and July. However,
during the month of August there was a spate of new allegations, with accounts of
the incidents bearing strong resemblance to those that are now confirmed as having
been chlorine attacks.

24/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Enclosure IV
Note by the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Third report of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
1.
On 29 April 2014, the Director-General announced the creation of an OPCW
Fact-Finding Mission in Syria (hereinafter “the Mission”). The Mission was
mandated to establish the facts surrounding allegations of the use of toxic
chemicals, reportedly chlorine, for hostile purposes in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The Mission submitted its summary report covering the period from 3 to
31 May 2014 on 16 June 2014 (S/1191/2014, dated 16 June 2014) and its second
report on 10 September 2014 (S/1212/2014, dated 10 September 2014). Both reports
were circulated to the States Parties.
3.
The third report of the Mission is hereby circulated to the States Parties. This
report provides a more detailed account of the work undertaken by the Mission in
the second phase and the process leading to the findings presented in its second
report regarding the use of chlorine for hostile purposes. The Mission has presented
its conclusions with a high degree of confidence that chlorine has been used as a
weapon. The work of the Mission has remained consistent with its mandate, which
did not include the question of attributing responsibility for the alleged use. Based
on the available information, the Mission has completed its work with regard to the
allegations of the use of chlorine in the villages of Talmenes, Al Tamanah, and Kafr
Zita.
4.
The Director-General should also like to advise the States Parties that the
Syrian Arab Republic, through a letter dated 15 December 2014, has informed him
that some documents providing information on the allegations of use of chlorine in
the Syrian Arab Republic would be delivered soon. Once these documents are
received, they will be examined by the Mission and the outcome of the examination
will be circulated to the States Parties.
Annexes:
Annex 1: Cover Note by the Head of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
Annex 2: Third Report of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria

15-02871

25/123

S/2015/138

Annex 1
Cover note by the Head of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission
in Syria
17 December 2014
Director-General,
In continuation of the Second Report of the Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) in Syria,
dated 10 September 2014, I submit herewith the third report of the FFM.
Malik Ellahi
Head of the FFM

26/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Annex 2
Third report of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
1.

INTRODUCTION
1.1 This report, while chronologically the third of the OPCW Fact -Finding
Mission in Syria (hereinafter “the Mission”), is essentially an expansion of the
second report issued in September 2014, presented in support of its key findings.
1.2 The first report issued in June 2014 detailed, inter alia, the genesis of the
Mission, its objectives and purposes, and its mandate. That report also covered the
extensive discussions with the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in early
May 2014, as well as the Government’s views. Under the terms of reference agreed
with the Syrian Arab Republic, for locations of interest to the Mission that were not
under Government control, the Mission was to make its own arrangements for
conducting on-site activities as part of its work. These anticipated activities
included interviewing witnesses from the areas that were allegedly attacked with a
toxic chemical believed to be chlorine. Subsequently, with access to any of the areas
virtually ruled out as a result of the armed attack on the Mission convoy on 27 May
2014, the Mission, which despite the known challenges was asked to continue its
work by general consent of the States Parties, followed up its work by bringing
witnesses to a safe location outside the Syrian Arab Republic.
1.3 This report details witness examinations and the accounts of incidents
emerging therefrom. It also provides samples of the kind of supporting documents
and data that were acquired. It highlights the serious constraints of conducting an
inquiry of this nature in a conflict zone.
1.4 Despite these issues, the key findings presented in the second report follow the
application of widely used and established methods of inquiry, which this third
report will serve to highlight.
1.5 The witnesses from the three villages of Talmenes, Al Tamanah and Kafr Zita
include casualties, 3 family members of victims, 4 first responders, nurses, and
treating physicians.
1.6 In establishing that chlorine has been used as a weapon, the Mission was able
to cross-check information available from publicly accessible sources with
information that it acquired independently, including video recordings; these
collections of information and data are in harmony with the descriptions and
characterisations provided by the interviewed witnesses.
1.7 The signs and symptoms described and documented are typical of the chemical
effects of exposure to pulmonary irritants. The severity of symptoms varied and
depended on a number of factors, such as the concentration of the toxic gas, the
duration of exposure, the age of the victim, and the time medical treatment was
received.
1.8 The casualties, of which there was a large number, turned to the nearest
medical points/field hospitals in their village or neighbourhood. Different means of

__________________
3 Casualty = a person who has survived an alleged exposure to a toxic chemical and may display

clinical features consistent with the physiological effects of toxic chemicals.
4 Victim = a person who may have been exposed to a lethal dose of toxic chemical.

15-02871

27/123

S/2015/138

transportation were used and other hospitals became involved, as the immediate
medical points did not have the capacity to treat the number of patients showing up.
The field hospitals in the conflict area are poorly equipped and staffed and are
unable to provide the advanced treatment required by the number of persons
severely exposed. Such persons were often sent to other hospitals, including out -ofcountry facilities. The lack of protection, severe exposure, absence of proper
treatment, and prolonged medical evacuation to higher medical echelons led to a
number of fatalities. Of the 350 to 500 casualties reported by the witnesses, 13 died,
either at the place of the attack or shortly thereafter, or on the way to the next
hospital or a few days later, despite receiving advanced medical treatment. These
victims presented acute lung injuries induced by toxic gases followed by pulmonary
oedema.
1.9 As the report shows, witnesses also described the features of the munitions,
and the unusual and striking characteristics of the damage, including environmental
consequences and effects on livestock, vegetation, and household goods and
materials. They also described the gas, its dissipation in the open air, and its
lingering inside houses for days on end.
1.10 Insofar as these three villages are concerned, the Mission believes that its
work has now been concluded. However, the Mission could consider supplementary
information which may be obtained from other sources. Furthermore, as requested
in May 2014 and as subsequently communicated by the Director-General, the
Mission remains open to reflect any substantive information that the Syrian Arab
Republic will provide.
2.

CHALLENGES AND CONSTRAINTS
2.1 The Mission faced a number of challenges in its endeavour to collect facts
relating to the allegations of use of toxic chemicals in the conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic. Ideally, the Mission should have been able to physically visit the locations
of the alleged incidents. Such visits would have pro vided the opportunity to:
(a) assess the layout of the places, for example by studying the topography
of the villages;
(b) physically evaluate the damage caused by the munitions containing toxic
chemicals, for example the size of impact craters, and da mage to surrounding
structures;
(c) study the remnants of munitions that exploded as well as those that
reportedly remained intact, and to collect samples;
(d)

collect environmental samples from impact sites for analysis;

(e) physically observe the effects of chemicals on vegetation and collect
samples where relevant;
(f)

visit the hospitals and make assessments of the available facilities;

(g) peruse the hospital records including patient registers, treatment records,
radiographs, etc.;
(h)

28/123

interview medical staff;

15-02871

S/2015/138

(i) collect testimonies from all persons who were affected by toxic
chemicals and underwent treatment;
(j)

carry out clinical examinations of those affected;

(k)

collect biomedical samples, as necessary; and

(l)

document by video all of these activities and observations.

2.2 Chlorine, by nature, dissipates from environments rapidly, thus making its
detection difficult. At room temperature, chlorine is a yellow -green gas, more than
twice as heavy as air, and moderately water-soluble. It has a detectable odour even
at low concentrations, and is a potent eye, skin, and respiratory irritant. Chlorine
reacts promptly with water in the mucous membranes and airways to form
hydrochloric and hypochlorous acids, leading to acute inflamma tion of the
conjunctiva, nasal mucosa, pharynx, larynx, trachea, and bronchi. Acute exposures
can result in symptoms of acute airway obstruction, including wheezing, cough,
tightness in the chest, and dyspnoea. Clinical signs, including hypoxemia, wheezes,
rales, and abnormal chest radiographs, may be present. More severely affected
individuals may suffer acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome.
Severe exposure could lead to death. Chronic sequelae may include increased
airway reactivity, which tends to diminish over time. There are no established
biomarkers for chlorine.
2.3 The activities that the Mission had planned, as mentioned earlier, might have
compensated for the inherent limitations of any inquiry into the use of chlorine as a
weapon. It was intended to collect multiple environmental samples from the soil
from the point of impact, as well as from areas downwind and upwind of that point.
The expectation was that chlorine would deposit on soil and be transported into the
soil column, where it is converted to a variety of products, including chloride ion.
Chloride is a natural component in soil, however, detection of high levels of
chloride in the upper layers of the soil in areas near or downwind of the point of
dissemination could be indicative of chlorine release. Samples were therefore
planned to be collected from multiple locations both upwind and downwind of the
alleged release point. Ideally, samples would have been collected in such a way as
to maintain the soil column structure and sampled along the length of the soil
column. Chloride concentrations in the soil column can be determined in a
laboratory by means of ion chromatography or ion selective electrode. It was
expected that values of chlorides would be highest at the impa ct point, followed by
places downwind and, to a lesser extent, places upwind of the impact point.
2.4 Similarly, the Mission also planned to physically examine the munitions
containing toxic chemicals and to take swipe samples from the bodies or remnants
of these munitions, and to sample other contents such as explosive materials, if
available.
2.5 Though there are no established biomarkers in the case of exposure to chlorine,
the Mission initially researched the possibility of detecting and studying expos ure
concentration-dependent increases in 3-chlorotyrosine and 3,5 dichlorotyrosine among
those who were exposed. This method has been studied by research scientists in
rats, using biopsies from nasal tissue. However, this line of inquiry would not have
been feasible, as it would have been near impossible to collect invasive samples in
field conditions. At the same time, exposure to other chlorinated compounds, as well

15-02871

29/123

S/2015/138

as inflammatory processes in the body, can also produce 3-chlorotyrosine and
3,5 dichlorotyrosine, making the test non-specific.
2.6 However, the Mission failed to gain physical access to the location of an
alleged attack when its convoy came under armed attack in May 2014. Under these
circumstances, the focus of the inquiry was shifted to coll ecting the testimonies of
witnesses, victims, and those providing medical care, together with collecting and
examining relevant documentary evidence. Arrangements were made to ensure that
the individuals who were interviewed included treating physicians, f irst responders,
nurses, affected individuals, and witnesses to the events. Although the interviews
were conducted at a safe location, the attendant risks of movements from a conflict
zone, especially for volunteers willing to participate in this task, imp osed
limitations of time and space that had to be overcome as best as the circumstances
permitted. For understandable reasons, it was difficult to get more representation
from women from the affected locations. Physical evidence relating to
environmental samples brought by one of the interviewees was not accepted by the
Mission, owing to the lack of a chain of custody. There were also ethical issues
associated with interviewing some young individuals who were not accompanied by
their parents; these were therefore excluded from the inquiry. However, the
statement of one minor boy was recorded, as he insisted on being heard. The
documentation of casualties at hospitals was not extensive, owing to high patient
turnover and limited medical staff, who were focused on treatment rather than
documentation. In compiling its reports, the Mission made allowances for the fact
that since multiple similar events were claimed, some of the interviewees
remembered partial details or could not exactly recall which specific inc ident a
detail related to.
2.7 The Mission also could not rely on clinical examinations, as the medical
symptoms caused in survivors exposed to the toxic substance had been resolved
either through treatment or spontaneously over the intervening period. As the Syrian
Arab Republic is in a state of armed conflict, record keeping, including the
recording of deaths, is also affected. The hospitals at all locations in question are
sparsely furnished with medical equipment, thus the treating physicians were unab le
to take blood tests, perform radiographs, etc. In addition, the serious cases, which
would have yielded the most findings, were transferred to higher echelons of
medical care, and it was not possible to interview medical staff from these hospitals.
The videos of events or of post-event situations that were provided by the
interviewees were taken with mobile phone cameras, among others; a number of
these are hurried and do not necessarily focus on areas of interest to the Mission.
2.8 Despite these limitations and challenges, the Mission was able to collect
sufficient critical information and data in support of the conclusions and key
findings presented in its Second Report.
3.

METHODOLOGY/ORGANISATION OF WORK
3.1 The Mission’s preparations included the identification of credible information
available in open sources and the cross-checking of this directly against information
that it acquired in the course of its work, the identification of cases that would
provide maximum information, and the identification of individuals who were
directly involved in incidents in some capacity, including casualties and treating
physicians. As it was no longer feasible to conduct on -site work as a result of the

30/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

security incident in May 2014, a suitable location outside the Syrian Arab Republic
was identified, and arrangements were set in motion to conduct witness interviews
and collect data there. Contacts established during the work carried out in the first
phase of the Mission, during which the team remained in Damasc us for nearly a
month, were utilised to facilitate this second phase of work. The arrangements that
had been made for the aborted site visit to Kafr Zita were facilitated by these same
sources, who were also instrumental in securing the release of the memb ers of the
team who were detained near Kafr Zita following the armed attack on the Mission’s
convoy.
3.2 The advance party, comprising the OPCW Team Leader and the second
medical specialist, departed from OPCW Headquarters on 17 August 2014 and
reached the site planned for conducting interviews on 18 August 2014. The advance
party members carried with them the required equipment and supplies. They also
established a safe location that would provide anonymity to all participants from
both the OPCW and the Syrian Arab Republic. Arrangements were also made to
ensure the physical safety of team members and interviewees. The advance party
was joined by two externally hired interpreters on 19 August 2014.
3.3 The main body of the team, led by the Head of the Mission, the political
affairs officer, and the OPCW interpreter, reached the planned site on 20 August
2014. The team then set up four collocated offices where interviews were to be
conducted; these included two rooms for interviews that would run concurrent ly. All
offices were sealed with OPCW tags, and arrangements were made to guard these
offices at all times throughout the duration of the Mission. These security
arrangements, besides providing safety and anonymity to all persons, were also
required to ensure the safe custody of the data that was being gathered by the
Mission.
3.4 The rear party of the Mission consisted of the OPCW chemical weapons
munitions specialist, who carried with him additional equipment and material and
joined the team on 23 August 2014.
3.5 The first interviewee provided his testimony and data to the Mission on
22 August 2014. The first group of interviewees from Talmenes reached the site on
25 August 2014. The Mission started with the interviews of two treating physicians
on the same day, followed by interviews of other individuals from the group. A total
of 14 individuals from the village of Talmenes were interviewed up until 29 August
2014.
3.6 The second group of interviewees from the village of Al Tamanah was
available to the Mission on 29 August 2014, and interviews were held from
29 August to 2 September 2014. A total of 14 individuals from this village were
interviewed.
3.7 The third and final group of interviewees, from Kafr Zita, was available to the
Mission as from 2 September 2014, and the collection of their testimonies as well as
data and documents concluded on 5 September 2014. Of the members of this group,
nine interviews were held. Two members of this group were minors and had come
unaccompanied by a parent or guardian and were therefore not interviewed. A few
individuals from Kafr Zita who had been pre-identified for interviews were unable
to join the group owing to unfavourable conditions.

15-02871

31/123

S/2015/138

3.8 For the interviews, the Mission was divided into two groups that conducted
concurrent interviews in two separate rooms. At the end of each day, the Mission as
a whole held a wash-up session and shared its findings. This was followed by the
registration, sealing, and securing of all data and documents acquired that day.
3.9 At the beginning of the interviews, each interviewee was given an explanation
of the process with interpretation in Arabic. Once the process was agreed, the
recording devices were switched on. Consent for the interviews was prepared using
the personal details of individuals and their identification papers, which were
checked and cross-checked with information available to the Mission. This was
followed by the signing of consent forms, of which copies were handed over to the
interviewees. Example copies of such identification papers and signed consent
forms are provided in Appendices 1 and 2, respectively. All interviewees were
assured that they would remain anonymous.
3.10 In the next step of the interview process, the group leader would introduce the
members of team to the interviewee. This was followed by the introduction of the
interviewee and his or her statement. Questions were put to the interviewees based
on the statements made by them, with a view to obtaining a full account of what
they witnessed and experienced. The testimonies and evidence thus gathered from
each individual was separately packed and sealed with OPCW seals and tags. The
list of materials that were gathered from interviewees is provided in Table A of this
report (see Attachment). All of the equipment that was used during these interviews
was officially issued from the OPCW Equipment Store; no unauthorised equipment
was used at any stage. All materials were handled in accordance with the OPCW
Manual of Confidentiality Procedure and classified as “OPCW HIGHLY
PROTECTED”. Once the report is published, all information and documents
generated during the Mission will be sealed and stored at OPCW Headquarters.
4.

LIST OF MATERIALS GATHERED
4.1 The Mission gathered all materials during the interviewing process. All
materials are listed and quantified in Table A, which shows the date of origin, the
date they were made available to Mission, the originator, and the title. The materials
include consent forms, identification documents such as ID card s, passports, and
birth certificates issued by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, diagrams,
hospital treatment records and investigation reports, certificates of qualification of
treating physicians and nurses, testimonies in audio and/or video fo rmat, videos of
incidents, photographs from incidents, documents detailing incidents, and marked
maps. Examples of such materials are attached in various appendices to this report.
4.2 Similarly, the materials produced by the members of the Mission are lis ted and
quantified in Table B (see Attachment). These materials comprise the OPCW
inspection notebooks that were used by the team members during the interview
process. An example from a page of one such notebook is provided in Appendix 3.

5.

INCIDENT DESCRIPTIONS
5.1 The Mission interviewed individuals from three locations where chlorine was
allegedly used as a weapon. These locations are the villages of Talmenes, Al
Tamanah, and Kafr Zita. The relative location of these places is shown in the map
provided in Appendix 4. The incident descriptions that follow are based on witness

32/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

statements and interviews and refer, as appropriate, to other relevant information
and documents.
Talmenes
5.2 Talmenes is a village in the Idlib Governorate of the Syrian Arab Republic.
The population of the village is approximately 20,000 and is made up of both local
residents and internally displaced persons (IDPs). The village is not under the
control of the Syrian Arab Republic and is reportedly on the front line with t he
governmental controlled Wadi al-Deif, located some 2 km to the east of the village.
Witnesses reported frequent airborne, artillery, and mortar attacks. A large number
of families including IDPs do not live in their own houses in the east of the village ,
but have instead moved into tents set up on the western side of the village.
5.3 Between 25 and 29 August 2014, the Mission interviewed and collected the
testimonies of 14 individuals from Talmenes. The testimony of one minor was also
collected in the presence of her parent, who gave permission and was present in the
interview room at the time. The group comprised treating physicians, nurses, first
responders, casualties, and witnesses, including family members of victims. The
details of these interviewees are given in Table 1 below.

15-02871

33/123

S/2015/138

TABLE 1: AGE AND GENDER DISTRIBUTION OF INTERVIEWEES FROM
THE VILLAGE OF TALMENES

No.

Interviewee

Age

Gender

1.

Witness

26

Male

2.

Treating physician

34

Male

3.

Treating physician

32

Male

4.

Witness

45

Male

5.

Casualty

37

Female

6.

Casualty

16

Female

7.

Casualty/witness

19

Male

8.

Casualty

21

Female

9.

Casualty/witness

44

Male

10.

Nurse

25

Male

11.

Nurse/first responder

26

Male

12.

Witness

45

Male

13.

Witness

38

Male

14.

Casualty

12

Female

5.4 The village of Talmenes has one field hospital, which is in one of the buildings
in the village and is intended specifically for the medical needs of this village,
including the treatment of traumatic war injuries. The hospital has a staff of seven
doctors specialised in the fields of general surgery, internal medicine, and
paediatrics, as well as 20 other staff including nurses, drivers, and cleaners. The
hospital staff members do not have formal training in the management of injuries
resulting from chemical incidents, and the treatment provided at this hospital is
symptomatic. The doctors at this hospital work at similar field hospitals in
neighbouring villages on different days of the week. The Talmenes hospital
reportedly once came under direct conventional fire, resulting in the deaths of two
patients. The structure of the hospital has been augmented contin uously since its

34/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

establishment. The resources available at the hospital are limited, and essentially
only first aid is provided locally before patients are transferred to higher medical
echelons for definitive treatment. All individuals who present to this field hospital
for routine ailments and war injuries are registered, and all medical records are
maintained.
5.5 Talmenes field hospital has around 12 patient beds, a few oxygen cylinders,
one vintage radiography machine that rarely functions, and one fu nctional operation
theatre. However, the hospital lacks any laboratory or intensive care unit. Patients
are evacuated to similar field hospitals in the neighbouring villages of Jarjenaz,
Al Tamanah, and Kafr Zita whenever the patient load exceeds the capac ity of the
hospital, as was the case during a toxic chemical attack on 21 August 2014. Patients
are transferred to higher echelons of medical care to hospitals in Saraqueb
(approximately 50 km away) and Bab Al-Hawa (approximately 100 km away).
These hospitals have some intensive care capabilities and are relatively better
resourced than the field hospitals. Those requiring further medical management are
sent to hospitals outside the Syrian Arab Republic. The Talmenes field hospital has
only one ambulance with the capacity to transport two patients. The available
ambulance has only an oxygen cylinder, a suction apparatus, and some emergency
drugs to provide medical support during patient transfer. Whenever additional
transport means are required to transfer patients, these are either provided by the
field hospitals in neighbouring villages or by volunteers from the village, who
transport patients in their personal cars or vans.
5.6 Talmenes village was attacked with toxic chemicals on two separate occasions,
first on 21 April 2014 and again on 24 April 2014. The individuals who were
interviewed described the attack of 21 April 2014 to the Mission.
5.7 All interviewees claimed either seeing or hearing a helicopter overhead at the
time of the incident. The interviewees explained that they were familiar with two
model types of helicopters. These fly at high altitudes, as explained by interviewees,
in order to stay out of the range of ground-based weapons. The helicopters that are
reportedly used in attacks carry munitions on external platforms attached to the
helicopters, which have been described as “wings” by the interviewees.
5.8 Rudimentary early-warning methods include the use of hand-held radios and
announcements from public address systems (loudspeakers) ins talled on the minaret
of the village mosque. There is currently no mobile telephone coverage in this
village.
5.9 Once warned, the villagers anticipating a conventional attack would typically
escape to an olive grove to the east of the village. As it is l ocated in a natural
depression, this place is chosen to avoid injuries from flying or falling debris.
5.10 As reported, on 21 April 2014, at around 10:30 to 10:45, two “barrel bombs”
were dropped on the village in the neighbourhood around the “big” mosque . The
bombs struck two houses at a distance of some 100 m from each other. The first
bomb fell on the kitchen roof of one house, destroying the kitchen, the adjacent
toilet, and part of the wall of one room. The second bomb fell in the open courtyard
of another house. Example sketches and a photograph of the impact points of the
munitions are given in Appendices 8 and 9.
5.11 The weather on 21 April 2014 was described as a typical spring day, sunny
with clear skies and a temperature of around 25 to 30ºC. As stated by an

15-02871

35/123

S/2015/138

interviewee, a mild breeze was blowing from west to east, which is the usual breeze
pattern in this region.
5.12 The villagers showed familiarity with the explosive sound of conventional
munitions, and compared it to the more muted sound produced by the strike of the
munitions with toxic chemicals. The latter sound is typically described as a “thud”
as compared to the “boom” accompanied with the “shaking of the ground” of
conventional weapons. As this was the first such attack on this villag e, the
inhabitants mistakenly assumed that the bomb failed to explode, until they saw the
yellow cloud. The falling barrel bombs produce a whistling sound which, as
explained by the interviewees, is caused by the air vents in the outermost
encapsulation. One witness produced a sketch of such a munition, along with other
designs with measurements (see Appendix 13). The barrel bombs, as described and
sketched by the interviewees, did not have a standard design and appeared to be
improvised constructions.
5.13 The dimensions of the bombs that reportedly struck Talmenes were
approximately 2 x 1 m in size; the thickness of the outer encasing was around
2.5 cm. The approximate weight of the bomb, in the opinion of the interviewees,
varied from 250 to 500 kg. One interviewee described and sketched the image of
barrel bomb with stabilisation fin-like protrusions from the outer barrel. These
stabilisation fins can be seen in the photograph of a barrel bomb in Appendix 12. As
seen in open sources and confirmed by interviewees, the cylinders of the barrel
bombs that were dropped on Talmenes on 21 April 2014 bore the markings “CL2”,
which were engraved on the body. These markings can be seen in the pictures of the
cylinder contained in the barrel bomb (see Appendix 14). These pictures are screengrabs from video footage provided by an interviewee.
5.14 The impact of these barrel bombs on the ground and the resulting explosion do
not cause much damage to the surrounding buildings. These barrel bombs also do
not generate splinters as is the case with conventional munitions. The Mission was
provided with a video of the damaged houses where the bombs struck. The damage
to the structure of the houses was seen only in places where the bombs had impacted
directly, and there was no other physical damage to the other structures of the
houses. Also, none of the affected individuals in the attack described had any signs
of physical trauma on their bodies, but only suffered from the effects of a toxic
chemical. The impact created a crater approximately 1.5 m deep and 2 m wide in the
first house, and 1.4 m deep and 3 m wide in the second house. Photographs of such
measurements from the first house are provided in Appendix 21.
5.15 The interviewees described the release of honey wax-to-yellow coloured gas
from the dropped bomb. The gas cloud rose to a height of some 50 to 75 m, a few
meters higher than the village mosque minaret, which stands at 40 m. The gas cloud
that was generated was described as shaped like a tree. The cloud was very dense
and people in the immediate vicinity of the impact were unable to see through the
yellow “dust” that was suspended in the air. All of the interviewees described the
smell of the released gas typically as pungent, irritating, and “of chlorine”, or
similar to household cleaning agents but much more intense. This cloud, along with
the wind, then listed and moved towards the east, settling at a height of some 1 to
1.5 m above the ground, and covering one of the main streets of the village used by
villagers as an escape route to the east. The cloud was spread over an area of some
200 m and people were affected as far as 1 to 1.5 km downwind. A screen -grab from

36/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

a video recording of such a cloud provided to the Mission by an interviewee is
attached in Appendix 23.
5.16 People escaped towards the olive grove to the east of the village, a place
where they routinely sought refuge whenever the village came under attack. They
lacked knowledge about protection against chemical attacks so ended up trying to
escape downwind, the direction of the hazard. The olive grove where people had
gathered is also in a natural depression in the ground, into which the toxic chemical
drifted. This led to approximately 200 people being affected.
5.17 The family living in the first house lost a seven-year-old boy, who died within
a few hours of exposure, and a teenage girl, who died on the third day after
exposure. The other family members were also severely exposed, and most of them
had to be transferred for medical management outside the Syrian Arab Republic.
These individuals required intense and prolonged treatment in the hospital, lasting
up to three weeks in one case. Though the seven-year-old boy was some 15 m from
the point of impact of the barrel bomb, there were no signs of p hysical trauma on
his body, which had developed cyanosis and, as explained by interviewees, “turned
blue in colour”. The Mission was provided with a photograph of this dead child; the
body lacked any signs of physical trauma. Similarly, other family member s did not
suffer from any physical trauma. In the second house, the family members who were
home at the time of the attack and inhaled the toxic chemical suffered from severe
medical effects and required medical care. The matriarch of this family died as a
result of this exposure on 25 April 2014, in a hospital outside the Syrian Arab
Republic. Photographs and/or autopsy records of the seven-year-old boy and the
teenage girl from the first house, and of the elderly woman from the second house,
were provided to the Mission. The Mission was also provided with autopsy-related
records for these purposes.
5.18 Domestic animals including cows, goats, and sheep died at both houses, with
the younger animals dying immediately and fully grown animals a few hours late r.
In addition, pigeons and chickens died in the incident. Screen-grabs from videos
filmed by interviewees are attached in Appendix 25. The vegetation at these houses,
including olive, pomegranate, fig, and apple trees, as well as grapevines and pepper
plants, was also affected. The leaves of these plants dried, shrivelled and turned
yellow shortly after exposure to the chemical. Fruit on the trees fell to the ground.
Screen-grabs from videos of dropped fruit and wilted leaves provided by an
interviewee are attached in Appendix 24. According to the testimony of one
individual explaining the effects on plant leaves, “it appeared as if the plants have
never been watered”. The new leaves that sprouted later were normal. The cattle
feed stored in the houses started to smell of chlorine and had to be thrown away.
Similarly, household objects like mattresses also absorbed the chemical and started
reeking of chlorine, and were left unusable. Metallic doorknobs took on a greenishbrown hue some time after the attack after exposure to the chemical vapours. One
female interviewee also mentioned unusual rusting of the metal of a barrel, which
developed very quickly over a matter of days (see photo in Appendix 26). Darker
coloured clothes that were exposed also lost colour and became lighter in places
exposed to chemical vapour.
5.19 Individuals who were in the vicinity of the attack or who were caught up in the
gas cloud sought to protect themselves as best as they could, with most of them
covering their mouths and noses with wet towels or such. The members of one

15-02871

37/123

S/2015/138

family protected themselves by standing under an overhead running shower until
they were rescued. None of those who were exposed possessed or used a proper
protective gas mask.
5.20 The individuals who were affected and suffering from the adverse effects of
the toxic chemicals were rescued by neighbours and other village volunteers, who
used personal cars and in some cases motorcycles. A few people at the periphery of
the event and with minimal exposure escaped on foot. Affected individuals were
initially taken to the field hospital in Talmenes. Because of the heavy patient load
which exceeded the available resources at the local hospital, patients with mild
symptoms were transferred to other similar field hospita ls in the neighbouring
villages of Jarjenaz, Al Tamanah, and Kafr Zita. Individuals exposed to higher
concentrations of the chemical had severe clinical effects and needed intensive care,
such as intubation and mechanical ventilation, and were transferred to hospitals in
Saraqueb, Bab Al-Hawa, and outside the Syrian Arab Republic.
5.21 The Talmenes field hospital received approximately 200 patients on 21 April
2014. However, the hospital staff were able to register the names of 133 individuals,
as they had referred the remaining patients directly to other hospitals in the vicinity
without providing any medical treatment locally owing to a lack of resources. A
copy of the patient registration book at the Talmenes hospital showing the name,
age, gender, and other patient details was provided by treating physicians and is
available to the Mission. This list will not be included in this report in order to
maintain the confidentiality of identities. The age distribution of the 133 patients
treated at the Talmenes field hospital is provided in Table 2 below.

38/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

TABLE 2: PATIENT DISTRIBUTION ACCORDING TO AGE GROUP

Age group

Total

Males

Females

0 to 5 years

21

8

13

6 to10 years

22

14

8

11 to 15 years

18

11

7

16 to 20 years

14

7

7

21 to 25 years

14

8

6

26 to 30 years

12

4

8

31 to 40 years

16

8

8

41 to 50 years

10

6

4

51 to 60 years

3

1

2

60 to 70 years

3

2

1

Total

133

69

64

5.22 Depending on the extent of the exposure to the toxic chemical, the individuals
who were affected and reported to the Talmenes field hospital presented with the
following symptoms: burning sensation in the eyes; redness of the eyes; itchy eyes;
excessive tearing; blurred vision; a burning sensation on the face and exposed skin;
a burning sensation in the throat; coughing; difficult y breathing; shortness of breath;
a feeling of suffocation; excessive nasal discharge; watering in the mouth; nausea;
vomiting; abdominal pain; diarrhoea; headache; generalised weakness; drowsiness;
disorientation; feeling of panic; and loss of consciousne ss. The intensity of the
symptoms experienced were more severe in persons exposed to higher
concentrations of the toxic chemical, as well as in persons who initially delayed
seeking medical help. The most commonly reported symptoms were coughing,
difficulty breathing, a feeling of suffocation, burning sensations, excessive tearing,
and excessive nasal discharge.
5.23 The decontamination of patients in a few cases involved the washing of the
exposed area of skin, especially the face, with soap and water. Th is decontamination
was not organised centrally at the hospital for everyone who sought medical care,
owing to a lack of resources at the hospital. However, the Talmenes field hospital
has now set up two separate tents to provide privacy for males and femal es needing
to wash with soap and water.

15-02871

39/123

S/2015/138

5.24 The attending medical staff complained of the strong smell of chlorine
emanating from the clothing of casualties. The only protective means available to
hospital staff were surgical masks and latex gloves, which hardly offered any
protection from the vapours. As a result, the staff also became cross -contaminated
and suffered from coughing, a burning sensation in the eyes and throat, and
excessive tearing. These symptoms were relieved by moving into the fresh air, and
no medical intervention was required.
5.25 On clinical examination, the spectrum of signs as observed and documented by
treating physicians from the Talmenes field hospital and higher medical echelons
included: redness of the eyes; excessive lacrimation; rhinorrhea; coughing;
perspiration; tachypnoea; dyspnoea; orthopnoea; cyanosis; increased tracheal
secretions that were frothy and pink in severe cases; hypoxemia with SpO2 5 on pulse
oximetry readings as low as 60%; widespread rhonchi and crepitations bilaterally;
agitation; and altered levels of consciousness. The severity of symptoms varied
among individuals depending on the amount and duration of the exposure. People
with mild exposure complained only of tearing and coughing, however people
exposed to higher concentrations and for a longer duration, as was the case of those in
the immediate vicinity of the point of release of the toxic chemical, had respiratory
distress at the time of presentation. Examples of documentary evidence showing
hypoxemia and pulmonary oedema are attached in Appendices 29, 30, and 31.
5.26 Individuals who had mild symptoms were managed at the field hospitals of
Talmenes, Jarjenaz, Al Tamanah, and Kafr Zita. All these individuals responded well
to the administration of oxygen. Those with moderate symptoms benefitted from
nebulisation with the bronchodilator salbutamol, and the intravenous steroids
hydrocortisone or dexamethasone. Supportive treatment was also provided by
means of intravenous fluids and airway suction to remove copious secretions from
the respiratory tract. Most of these individuals were discharged from hospital after
two to three hours. An example of the treatment provided to one of the patients is
attached in Appendix 28.
5.27 Individuals with severe symptoms required intubation and mechanical
ventilation. Such facilities were not available at the field hospitals, and therefore all
individuals requiring intensive care were transferred to hospitals in Saraqueb and
Bab Al-Hawa. As these hospitals too had limited resources, they had to further
transfer the most severe cases to outside the Syrian Arab Republic for further
medical management. The most severe cases were those of the families whose
houses were struck. Every member of these families who was in the house at the
time experienced severe symptoms. Five members of the family in the first house
and two members of the family in the second house had to be transferred to higher
medical echelons for further management. Out of these seven severely exposed
persons, three died, including a 65-year-old woman, a teenage girl, and a sevenyear-old boy, who was cyanosed at the time of presentation to the hospital and died
within an hour or so of exposure. The autopsies of two of these three individuals
were conducted outside the Syrian Arab Republic, where they died.

__________________
5 SpO2 = peripheral capillary oxygen saturation.

40/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Al Tamanah
5.28 The village of Al Tamanah is located in the Idlib Governorate of the Syrian
Arab Republic. The village is currently under the control of opposition groups. The
village population is estimated to be around 20,000. A large number of village
residents have moved to other areas within or outside the Syrian Arab Republic.
Similarly, 5,000 to 10,000 IDPs have moved from other parts of the country to this
village.
5.29 The Mission interviewed 14 individuals from this village between 28 August
and 2 September 2014. Individuals interviewed were those who were directly
affected by exposure to the chemical or who helped in the evacuation of or provided
first aid or medical care to those affected. Inter viewees drew sketches, marked
maps, and provided photographs and videos in support of their testimony. There
were no minors in this group. Among the interviewees, seven persons were exposed
to the toxic chemical immediately at the impact sites and suffered adverse effects.
This includes five first responders who evacuated casualties from the impact sites.
Three people, including two ambulance drivers and one witness from the
neighbourhood evacuating casualties in his personal car, suffered secondary
contamination. They were contaminated from the vapour off-gassing from the
clothing of primary casualties. The details of the interviewees are given in Table 3
below.

15-02871

41/123

S/2015/138

TABLE 3: AGE AND GENDER DISTRIBUTION OF INTERVIEWEES,
AL TAMANAH
No.

Interviewee

Age

Gender

1.

Treating physician

31

Male

2.

Treating physician

39

Male

3.

Medical assistant

32

Male

4.

Witness/casualty

33

Male

5.

First responder/casualty

30

Male

6.

Casualty

23

Female

7.

Witness

30

Male

8.

Casualty

28

Female

9.

Nurse

31

Male

10.

Witness

41

Male

11.

First responder/casualty

23

Male

12.

Casualty

23

Male

13.

Casualty

34

Male

14.

First responder/casualty

35

Male

5.30 The incidents that could be recalled by the interviewees occurred in the
months of April and May 2014. All of the places of impact described by this group
of interviewees are located in the village of Al Tamanah. Some interviewees marked
the impact points on maps provided by the Mission. This matched the information
that was already available to the Mission. The details of five incidents that could be
recalled by interviewees are reflected in Table 4 below.

42/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

TABLE 4: CHRONOLOGY OF INCIDENTS IN AL TAMANAH VILLAGE

Incident

Date

Time

No. of

Death

patients

s

Place of impact

Residential
First

12.04.14

22:45

25

–

70

4

35

–

12

4

–

–

house
Residential
Second

18.04.14

Night
house

29–
Third

Residential
Night

30.04.14

house
10:00–

Fourth

Residential

22.05.14
11:00
25–

Fifth

house
Residential

Night
26.05.14

house

5.31 The description of all of the incidents is similar to that narrated by the
residents of Talmenes. Like the narrative from Talmenes, the following represents
the story as told by the residents of Al Tamanah. Here, all but one of the attacks
happened during the night. Though people said they were unable to see the
helicopters, they heard the sound. This was followed minutes later by warnings on
hand-held radios about impact points and the release of chemicals. Some people,
who lived close to the impact points and who were exposed, smelled the typical
odour of chlorine immediately after the impact of the munitions and tried t o escape.
The interviewees stated that the public, over a period of time since the outbreak of
hostilities in the Syrian Arab Republic, had been educated by local emergency
response committees through pamphlets and public address systems about the
precautions that needed to be taken in cases of conventional attacks. Warnings to
take precautionary measures were issued over hand-held radios to all residents
whenever helicopters approached their villages or towns. The first reaction of
residents is to seek shelter in basements to protect themselves from flying shrapnel
and debris. In case of an attack involving toxic chemicals, people were advised to
escape upwind of the point of impact and to higher elevations.
5.32 The witnesses said that, when released, bombs containing toxic chemicals
produce a distinct whistling sound as they fall. On impact, these bombs explode, but

15-02871

43/123

S/2015/138

the explosion is very low in intensity as compared to conventional barrel bombs that
produce a loud bang and widespread destruction. The Mission was informed that
conventional munitions usually destroy multiple houses in the areas where they
impact, as compared to the toxic chemical munitions that only create a relatively
small crater at the point of impact. The resultant crater is not very larg e and is
usually 2 m in diameter; the surrounding structures do not have extensive damage. A
significant number of such munitions had failed to explode. The design of these
barrel bombs is improvised, with variations seen in the bombs that failed to explod e.
Essentially, these bombs have an outer encapsulating barrel with fins, which appears
to be locally manufactured, and contain an inner chlorine cylinder that is of
industrial production. At the time of impact, the outer barrel tears apart instead of
splintering, while the neck of the chlorine cylinder where the valve is attached is
damaged. For example, one barrel bomb design includes a chlorine cylinder, some
yellow powder, and a blue detonation fuse, along with yellow-coloured powder
packed tightly around the chlorine cylinder. Pictures and hand sketches provided by
interviewees who had seen both unexploded and exploded munitions are attached in
Appendices 12 to 20.
5.33 One of the interviewees was a member of the firefighting team and informed
the Mission that, in incidents involving toxic chemicals, there were no resultant
fires as is the case after a conventional attack.
5.34 Interviewees described the cloud seen by them during an attack that occurred
in the daytime on 22 May 2014. The gas cloud was white to yellow coloured,
shaped like a tree, reached a height of approximately 40 m, moved slowly in the
direction of the wind, and settled towards the ground. The cloud during the night time attack could not be seen by any of the interviewees, but the at mosphere is
described as “dusty and suffocating”. The Mission was also informed of one
incident in which the local hospital had to be vacated when the gas cloud was
moving towards the hospital along with the air current.
5.35 The emanating smell was described to the Mission as irritating to the eyes and
nose, typical of chlorine, or similar to the strong household cleaning agent, bleach.
This odour immediately induced coughing and a feeling of suffocation among all
who were exposed. The odour was absorbed by the clothes worn by people and was
also reported by hospital staff as emanating from people who sought medical aid.
The hospital staff who treated these casualties were also cross -contaminated and
suffered symptoms of exposure. One first responder descri bed the intensity of this
odour to be so strong that “I felt as if my head would explode from the smell”.
5.36 The Mission was informed that, after the chemical incidents were reported, the
ambulances attached to the local hospital in this village, which is called the “Hanin
medical point”, were dispatched to rescue those who had been exposed.
Simultaneously, volunteers from the neighbourhood used their private vehicles to
evacuate people to the hospital. Though the evacuation to the village hospital was
quick and efficient as neighbours and volunteers contributed to the effort, the
evacuation to neighbouring villages or higher medical echelons took a long time.
This happened because the roads were in a condition of disrepair and journeys were
therefore measured in terms of time rather than distance. For example, a 30 km
journey for an ambulance carrying a patient took more than one hour to reach its
destination and vehicle failures were common en route.

44/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

5.37 The Hanin medical point is run by the Hanin medical charity, and mainly
manages wartime traumatic injuries and common medical conditions. There are 14
employees at this medical clinic, including an anaesthetist and cardiologist. The
hospital has limited equipment and other medical resources and is equipp ed to
provide basic medical care only. The hospital has one operating room with
anaesthesia equipment and basic surgical instruments. Additionally, the hospital has
six rooms, some eight to 10 beds, a number of oxygen cylinders, neonatal intensive
care units (incubators) for premature babies, and other medical monitoring
equipment. There is only one ambulance, which is equipped with an oxygen
cylinder and managed by a nurse and a driver, with a capacity to transport two
patients at a time. Whenever a large number of people simultaneously arrive at the
clinic seeking medical aid, as happens during attacks with chemicals, the hospital
staff and resources are overwhelmed. Because there are not enough beds, people are
asked to lie on the floor, where they are treated. Though the hospital maintains a
register of all patients seeking treatment, during emergency situations involving
multiple casualties, the focus of hospital staff is on providing medical care and
evacuating people. Patients who need more extensive medical care such as
intubation and artificial ventilation are referred to Saraqueb and Bab Al -Hawa, and
even outside the Syrian Arab Republic, for treatment.
5.38 From the testimonies collected, the Mission found that the predominant
symptoms among those who were exposed to the toxic chemical were coughing,
shortness of breath, and tearing of the eyes. Patients also reported a burning
sensation in the eyes, redness of the eyes, increased nasal discharge, foaming at the
mouth, burning sensation on the face, tightness of the chest, fatigue, a feeling of
panic, headache, vomiting, diarrhoea, and in cases of severe exposure, loss of
consciousness. The severity of symptoms in some who were in the vicinity of the
impact site increased as they were being rescued. T he Mission’s conclusion in its
previous report concerning the possibility of the use of chlorine, either pure or in
mixture, is partly based on this symptomatology of gastrointestinal effects along
with respiratory symptoms.
5.39 There is no established procedure or designated area at the Hanin medical
point hospital for showers or washing arrangements to decontaminate individuals
who suffer exposure. During all of the incidents, the only decontamination measures
were to wash the face and other exposed parts of body with soap and water. In a few
instances, carbonated drinks such as 7Up or Coca-Cola were used for
decontamination, but the reason for this choice could not be explained by the
interviewees. They follow this method based on hearsay about its effi ciency.
However, as seen in video recordings, small children were more thoroughly
decontaminated by removing all their clothing and bathing them with soap and
water. The unique method of decontamination with carbonated drinks was reported
by other interviewees also.
5.40 The treating physicians informed the Mission that a large number of
individuals who sought medical aid had no adverse clinical signs other than anxiety.
Those who were in the immediate vicinity and had inhaled larger amounts of the
chemical presented with severe coughing, increased tracheal secretions, bilateral
lung crepitations, and cyanosis. There were no signs of physical trauma on the
bodies of any of the casualties who reported to the hospital seeking medical aid
after exposure.

15-02871

45/123

S/2015/138

5.41 Most people who sought medical aid did so because they were in a state of
panic and responded well to the first aid provided, consisting of moving the
casualties to fresh air, decontamination, and giving reassurance. The treatment
provided to others demonstrating clinical signs included oxygen inhalation,
nebulisation with the bronchodilator salbutamol, intravenous steroids
hydrocortisone and dexamethasone, along with intravenous fluids. The treatment
provided was effective and the patients’ medical status improved quickly. However,
among those who were severely exposed, the response to treatment was poor. These
individuals required intubation and artificial ventilation, and therefore needed to be
referred to higher medical echelons. Some severe cases did not survive the
exposure. Based on information provided by the interviewees, the Mission was able
to document eight deaths from two separate incidents in this village.
5.42 The treating physicians diagnosed people based on history, presenting
symptoms, clinical examination, and response to treatment. No biomedical
investigations or chest radiographs could be carried out at the Hanin medical point
because of a lack of such equipment. The chest radiographs that were performed at
referral hospitals reveal pulmonary oedema, as told by the treating physicians.
5.43 The treating physicians who were interviewed did not bring along with them
any patient registration documents or other documents related to treatment of
patients. However, a number of videos of incidents recorded on different dates by
the interviewees themselves were provided to the Mission. These videos show
people suffering from the effects of toxic gas inhalation being decontaminated,
being provided treatment, and being transferred to other hospitals. The treating
physicians interviewed can be seen in these videos.
5.44 The Mission was informed that the medical staff had access only to surgical
masks and gloves for their own protection and that they were also contaminated
from chlorine emanating from people’s clothes. The symptoms suffered by medical
personnel were not severe and were relieved upon reaching fresh air. However, the
ambulance drivers and nurses who had participated in the rescue and evacuation of
people to the hospital were more severely affected, with some of them requiring
oxygen therapy to relieve symptoms.
5.45 The members of two families, each consisting of four people, died shortly
after separate attacks involving the toxic chemical.
5.46 During the attack in the night of 18 April 2014, the father, mother, and two
teenage children (a boy and a girl) died. The parents had died almost immediately
after the attack. The two children, who were in a critical condition, were referred to
hospitals outside the Syrian Arab Republic for better medical management and died
at the referral hospital.
5.47 In another case, a mother aged 30 years, her sister aged 16 years, and two
children (a five-year-old girl and a four-year-old boy) belonging to the same family
died in an attack. The autopsy for the male child aged four years was conducted on
23 May 2014 outside the Syrian Arab Republic. The mother had died in the
ambulance while being transferred, her sister died in Talmenes hospital, and the girl
died at Saraqueb hospital.
5.48 Members of both these families were IDPs who had taken refuge in
Al Tamanah.

46/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

5.49 In respect of the effect on animals, birds, and plants, the interviewees
informed the Mission that the leaves of trees and plants in the immediate vicinity of
locations where toxic chemicals were released turned yellow in colour and became
dry. Domestic livestock, pigeons, and chickens of these households were also
exposed to the gas cloud and died immediately or soon after exposure.
5.50 One female, a housewife, informed the Mission about the fading of the colour
of the clothes that were worn and the change in the feel of the fabric after washing.
Another female, also a housewife, said that the dark clothes that she and her family
members were wearing at the time of exposure developed white spots.
5.51 The witnesses provided the Mission with multiple video clips that they had
filmed. They also drew sketches of the munitions and located the impact points on
the village map. A sketch listing the impact points is provided in Appendix 10.
5.52 Mission personnel asked the interviewees who were exposed about their
current medical status. None of the interviewees had any remaining symptoms from
the time of exposure and all were in good physical health at the time of the
interviews.
5.53 One of the witnesses provided the Mission with three different materials taken
from one of the munitions and its vicinity. One sample was a yellowish-brown
powder (possibly ammonium nitrate) drenched in and with a strong smell of organic
solvent (possibly benzene), the second sample was metallic scrapings from the body
of the munition, and the third was twigs and leaves from a nearby tree. These
samples could not be accepted on account of chain of custody issues.
Kafr Zita
5.54 Kafr Zita is a town in the north of the Syrian Arab Republic, administratively
part of the Hama Governorate, located 30 km north of Hama with a population
originally of some 18,000 residents; the number has decreased as a result of the
conflict. This town is not under the control of the Syrian Government. Most of the
houses in the village are single storey and infrastructure such as roads, electricity
supply, and water supply is in a state of disrepair. Kafr Zita has frequently been the
subject of reports concerning attacks involving chlorine. The Mission was informed
by witnesses that the village had suffered hundreds of conventional attacks since the
start of the current conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as frequent attacks
involving toxic chemicals.
5.55 Mission personnel interviewed and collected testimonies from nine individuals
comprising two treating physicians, two nurses/first responders, and five
witnesses/casualties. All individuals interviewed were also witnesses to incidents.
The testimonies of this group were collected between 2 and 5 September 2014. All
individuals interviewed were either directly affected by exposure to the chemical,
helped in the evacuation of casualties, were given first aid, or were given definitive
medical care. Among the interviewees, all individuals except for three agreed to be
interviewed and recorded both in audio and video format. The three who declined to
be recorded on video consented to be interviewed in audio format. Among this
group, there were two minors (a boy and girl, brother and young er sister) who were
not accompanied by a parent or guardian. At the insistence of the boy, Mission
personnel agreed to record his statement in audio format. The team did not cross examine this individual. As the boy was underage, the interview consent form was

15-02871

47/123

S/2015/138

not signed and the discussion in this context was recorded. The boy is among the
three who agreed that the interview was to be recorded in audio format only.
Though the boy gave a statement consistent with other interviewees, his statement is
not included in the assessments conducted by the Mission. The age/gender
distribution of interviewees is provided in Table 5 below.
TABLE 5: AGE AND GENDER DISTRIBUTION OF INTERVIEWEES,
KAFR ZITA

No.

Interviewee

Age

Gender

1.

Treating physician

44

Male

2.

Treating physician

44

Male

3.

Witness

27

Male

4.

First responder

21

Male

5.

Casualty

19

Male

6.

Casualty

30

Female

7.

Casualty

21

Male

8.

Casualty

50

Female

9.

Nurse/first responder

35

Male

5.56 The town of Kafr Zita had until recently two hospitals, called Eastern and
Western hospitals in accordance with their location within the town. They are also
known as hospitals Number 5 and 6, respectively. On 22 May 2014, the Western
hospital (hospital Number 6) came under attack from toxic che micals, in which the
medical staff also suffered symptoms of exposure. Witnesses also reported that the
Eastern hospital (hospital Number 5) came under conventional attack on 22 June
2014 and was completely destroyed. Kafr Zita currently only has one funct ioning
hospital, the Western hospital, though the upper floors of the three-storey buildings
are unusable.
5.57 The Western hospital was established some 10 years ago but was converted to
a general hospital recently, after the outbreak of the conflict. Me dical care is
provided to everyone in the region and the hospital also treats patients from Zour
Al-Hisa, near the Al-Rayd region located between Taybat Al-Imam and Latamneh,
from Halfaya, and from Morek. The ground floor of the hospital has three operatin g
rooms: one for general surgery, a second for orthopaedic surgery, and a third for
gynaecology. Also on this floor is an intensive care unit with three beds, a ward with

48/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

two beds, a radiograph imaging room, and an emergency room. A waiting room is
located in the centre of the hospital. The first and second floors have no windows or
doors as a result of damage caused when a conventional munition exploded some
15 m from the hospital. The first and second floors have six beds each, but patients
are generally not admitted to these floors. To prevent any further physical damage to
the hospital, a reinforcing wall has been built around the ground floor and two rock
walls have been erected in front of the hospital.
5.58 The hospital has extremely limited resources in terms of equipment, drugs, and
other medical supplies. For example, the hospital has a total of only 30 oxygen
cylinders. These numbers were augmented after 11 April 2014 when, after an
appeal, donors supplied oxygen cylinders, nebulisers, antidotes, c ortisones, and
protective masks. The medical staff include one cardiologist, two general surgeons,
two orthopaedic surgeons, two resident physicians, two medical interns, two
radiograph imaging technicians, two anaesthetic technicians, approximately 10 nur ses,
three cleaning staff, and one cook. The hospital vehicle fleet has six ambulances and
four pick-up trucks that are used for medical evacuation. Each ambulance is staffed
with a driver and an assistant. In the event of a need for more ambulances, these are
requested from the neighbouring hospitals of Kafr Nabouda and Latamnah, and the
Al-Rahma hospital in Sheikh Mustafa.
5.59 Kafr Zita and its neighbourhood have been subjected to some 17 attacks
involving the use of toxic chemicals, with the first attac k occurring on the night of
10 April 2014 and the latest incident being reported to the Mission on 30 August
2014. Because of the frequency of these attacks and constantly living in a war zone,
the witnesses had essentially lost their sense of the dates and times of the various
incidents. Witnesses informed the Mission that all except one of the attacks (which
happened between 18:00 and 19:00 on 11 April 2014) occurred at night. An opinion
was expressed that in the Kafr Zita area, the air movement is minima l at night-time
and allows chlorine to hang in the environment for longer. Furthermore, the night
provides relative safety to the attackers. The weather conditions on the dates of the
attacks were described as typical for the season, with temperatures rang ing between
20 and 30o C. The details of attacks that were confirmed by multiple interviewees
are provided in Table 6 below.

15-02871

49/123

S/2015/138

TABLE 6: CHRONOLOGICAL LISTING OF ATTACKS WITH BARREL
BOMBS CONTAINING TOXIC CHEMICALS THAT COULD BE RECALLED
AND CONFIRMED BY MORE THAN ONE INTERVIEWEE

No. of
No.

Date

Place

Time
Patients

1.

10-11 April 2014

Kafr Zita

Midnight
18:00 – 19:00

2.

11 April 2014

12

Kafr Zita
hrs
21:00 – 22:00

3

12 April 2014

Kafr Zita

5
hrs

4.

14 April 2014

Halfaya

23:00 hrs

4

5.

16 April 2014

Al-Zowar region

22:00 hrs

5

6.

18 April 2014

Kafr Zita

22:30 hrs

35

7.

19 May 2014

Kafr Zita

20:00 hrs

2

8.

21 May 2014

Kafr Zita

20:00 hrs

4

9.

22 May 2014

Kafr Zita

20:00 hrs

38

10.

29 May 2014

Latamnah region

Night

17

11.

?? June 2014

Morek frontline

–

–

12.

27 July 2014

Kafr Zita

19:00 hrs

–

13.

28 August 2014

Kafr Zita

21:30 – 22:00
–
hrs
14.

50/123

30 August 2014

Kafr Zita

–

–

15-02871

S/2015/138

5.60 The Mission was informed by the witnesses that toxic chemicals were used by
means of barrel bombs that were not of standard design and appeared to be
improvised. Some had seen and photographed these bombs, both those that had
exploded and those that failed to function as designed. The design of these barrel
bombs varies, but essential components include an outer shell with fins at the tail
end; an inner cylinder usually painted in yellow and filled with chlorine and in some
instances marked with the symbol “CL2”. The length of barrel bombs is
approximately 2-2.5 m with an inner diameter of approximately 1 m. The detonation
mechanism varies from single to multiple detonators. The newer barrel bo mbs also
have a container with a liquid and powdery substance that is yellowish -brown in
colour. The Mission was provided with a video made of one such device. This video
shows a cylinder, a liquid container marked with “97-99% purity H2SO4”, and a
light yellow-brown powdery substance. The identity of the powdery substance could
not be confirmed by the presenter in the video as there is no local analytical
capacity. A sketch and screen-grab picture of this particular assembly of barrel
bomb by one interviewee are provided in Appendix 19.
5.61 The interviewees informed the Mission that, when thrown from helicopters, the
falling cylinders produced a whistling sound akin to a diving fighter aircraft. A
number of these devices failed to explode. Those that did produced a muted/low
intensity explosion, rupturing the outer barrel and damaging the valve on the
chlorine cylinders. The damage to structures is only seen at the point of direct
impact; other structures in the vicinity escaped physical damage. A video of the point
of impact provided to the Mission shows a crater of 3.6 m diameter and 1.4 m depth,
with minimal damage to buildings in the vicinity. A screen-grab picture from a video
of one such impact site provided by an interviewee is shown in Appendix 21.
5.62 Most of the individuals from this town who were interviewed reported
witnessing the attack that occurred during daylight. The gas that was released during
this attack was described by interviewees as being yellow in colour. The gas cloud
initially rose to some 50 to 60 m high and then settled towards the ground, moving
in the direction of the air current. The smell of the gas was typically described as
strong, pungent, and chlorine-like, with some interviewees comparing it to the smell
of household cleaning agent but many times stronger. The Mission was informed
that the peculiar odour was noticeable from a significant distance. This odour
disappeared from the area in normal weather conditions after a gap of some 30 to
45 minutes.
5.63 The Mission was told that the public was informed about imminent attacks
through messages relayed on hand-held radios. Spotters would communicate
information about movements of aircraft. On receiving such information,
specifically for the Kafr Zita area, the local people would escape and take refuge in
basements to shield themselves from frequent attacks involving conventional
munitions. Once the attack happened, another message would again be relayed by
the spotters in the vicinity, giving the location and type of attack and further
instructions on safety precautions.
5.64 Witnesses in this group recounted the frequency of attacks, the life of
isolation, and the lack of essential services as extremely stressful conditions. They
could not recall the dates of all the attacks; the data compiled by the Mission was
based on an analysis of all of the testimonies, and was also extracted from the
medical records provided by the treating physicians.

15-02871

51/123

S/2015/138

5.65 One incident was related in detail by the family members and a relative of th e
household whose house the munition struck, and was corroborated by other
interviewees. This incident, as communicated to the Mission, is described below.
5.66 The incident occurred on 27 July 2014 “one day before the end of Ramadan
and a few minutes before the time to end the daily fast”, at around 19:00. The bomb
struck the house of a relative of one of the witnesses. The family that was exposed
to toxic chemicals and interviewed had taken refuge in the basement of the house as
protection against a conventional attack. The bomb containing the toxic chemical
impacted some 50 m from their place of refuge. The explosion was not loud. This
basement is approximately 10 x 10 m in size and has two doors, one opens to the
north and the other to the south-east. The door on the south east opens onto a street
that is at a higher elevation than the street on the north. After the toxic release, a
message was again conveyed to the public on hand-held radios to escape to higher
ground, rather than staying in basements. Individuals who tried to escape using the
door facing north ran into the cloud of chlorine that was being carried by the air
current from north to south. As a consequence, these individuals were exposed to
higher concentrations of chlorine and suffered more severe symptoms. This same
basement shelter was destroyed in a direct hit the next day with a conventional
bomb and a cluster bomb.
5.67 The medical documents provided to the Mission by the treating physicians list
documentary details of patient names, dates of attack, location, diagnosis, treatment
provided, and the name of the treating physician. An example of these medical
documents is attached in Appendix 28. The compilation of these medical documents
is provided in Table C (see Attachment), which shows that 122 individuals were
treated at Kafr Zita on various dates. The names of casualties have been
anonymised.
5.68 Each attack with toxic chemicals produced multiple victims who complained
of symptoms of respiratory insufficiency. People who were affected did not have
any signs of physical injury to their bodies, except for one elderly man. This person
presented with symptoms of inhalation of toxic gas along with a head injury from
falling rubble, and died en route while being transferred outside the Syrian Arab
Republic for medical treatment. His 25-year-old daughter, who was exposed to
severe concentrations of chlorine in the same incident, died a few days later despite
being transferred and treated outside the Syrian Arab Republic.
5.69 The symptoms of those affected varied from mild or moderate to severe,
depending on proximity to the point of release of toxic chemical, the amount of gas
inhaled, and the duration of exposure. The young and elderly patients showed
relatively more severe symptoms. Most individuals presenting at the hospitals for
treatment had mild to moderate exposure, and a few showed severe symptoms.
5.70 The common presenting symptoms included coughing, difficulty breathing,
rapid breathing, rapid pulse and palpitation, foaming at the mouth, redness of the
eyes, burning sensation in the eyes, tearing, vomiting, pain in the throat, hoarseness,
itching in the nose and on exposed skin, anxiety, drowsiness, headache, and loss of
consciousness. The most severe cases had haemoptysis, with pulse oximetry
readings below 80%, and the treating physicians informed the Mission that the chest
radiographs showed non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema. These individuals
developed Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome. Most of the severely affected also
presented with an immediate history of unconsciousness. All severe cases had to be

52/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

managed in the intensive care unit of the hospital and needed assisted respiration. A
few people were exposed to similar incidents more than once and the second time
suffered more severe symptoms and needed treatment for a longer duration.
5.71 The decontamination method available to people was washing exposed areas
of skin with soap and water. The hospital in Kafr Zita does not have an established
procedure or the facilities to carry out mass decontamination.
5.72 All individuals presenting at the hospital who had suffered exposure had a
pungent and strong smell of chlorine emanating from their clothes. As the protective
measures available to the hospital staff were limited to latex gloves and surgical
masks, some staff members were cross-contaminated and suffered the effects of
inhaling vapour emanating from the clothes of patients. First responders are rarely
equipped with protective gas masks and thus use improvised methods to protect
themselves, such as using wet towels when rescuing and evacuating people. The
medical workers who were instrumental in the evacuation of the affected also
invariably suffered some clinical effects. The common symptoms experienced by
the hospital staff included coughing, difficulty breathing, tearing, redness of the
eyes, and pain in the throat. Most of those who were cross-contaminated suffered
from mild symptoms and obtained relief with first aid. No cross-contaminated staff
required intensive treatment or transfer to a higher medical echelon.
5.73 The treating physicians’ observation of clinical signs include coughing,
rhinorrhea, redness of the eyes, excessive lacrimation, cyanosis, increased tracheal
secretions, agitation, tachypnea, and bilateral crepitations in the pulmonary lobes.
All those exposed had compromised values of pulse oximetry: those with minimal
exposure had SpO2 readings above 85%, while the most severe cases had SpO2
readings of around 70%. Cyanosis, haemoptysis, lung crepita tions, and pulmonary
oedema were observed in those individuals who had been exposed to severe
concentrations. The level of pulmonary oedema in severe cases was observed to
increase in sequential clinical examinations and chest radiographs. None of those
who presented with a history of exposure to chemical agent had any physical injury
on their bodies except for the elderly man, who also suffered a head injury during
the incident.
5.74 Mild and moderate cases were discharged from the hospital after receivin g
first aid. Severe cases were either detained locally in the hospital or transferred to a
higher medical echelon outside the Syrian Arab Republic. The severe cases were
kept in hospital and treated intensively for up to three weeks.
5.75 Treatment for individuals who had been exposed consisted essentially of
oxygen inhalation, exposure to fresh air, nebulisation with bronchodilators,
intravenous hydrocortisone and dexamethasone, intravenous fluids, and anti -emetics.
Most individuals with mild symptoms were given treatment as out-patients and
discharged. Those with moderate symptoms were also treated as out -patients but
had to come for nebulisation therapy over many days to help improve the
respiratory effort.
5.76 Besides harming humans, the toxic chemical also killed livestock and
domestic birds, including chickens and pigeons. The trees in the vicinity were also
affected as their leaves turned yellow and dried, and fruit on trees dropped to the
ground. Furthermore, household items such as mattresses and clothes absorbed the
smell of chlorine and were left unusable.

15-02871

53/123

S/2015/138

5.77 The individuals who were interviewed and had been exposed to toxic
chemicals did not complain of any continuing medical issues post -incident, except
for occasional bouts of coughing and generalised weakness. At the time of the
interviews, none of these individuals was continuing with any medicines that had
been initially prescribed. A discussion between the medical specialists in the
Mission led to the conclusion that any medical examinatio n of this group would be
fruitless.
6.

DISCUSSION OF INCIDENTS
6.1 The Mission has compiled statistical data that has emerged from the
testimonies of interviewees. These statistics are provided in Table 7 below.
TABLE 7: OBSERVATIONS BY THE INTERVIEWEES

Observation

Talmenes

Al Tamanah

Kafr Zita

Saw/heard the helicopter

12

14

6

Heard the barrel bomb falling

10

11

5

4

8

2

6

4

5

Smelled the chlorine/odour

13

10

6

Saw the yellow cloud or dust

10

10

6

5

3

4

Large number of casualties

13

11

6

Dead animals

7

1

1

Vegetation damage

8

6

2

Bleaching of clothes

3

2

0

Saw the barrel bomb or its
remnants
Mentioned muted sound of
explosion

Insignificant damage to
surrounding structures

54/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

6.2 Of a total of 37 interviewees, 32 saw or heard the sound of the helicopter over
the village at the time of the attack with barrel bombs containing toxic chemicals.
Twenty-six individuals heard the peculiar (whistling) sound of the falling barrel
bombs containing toxic chemicals. Individuals who did not see or hear the
helicopter or the sound of the falling barrel bomb were indoors. Sixteen, mostly
men, visited the impact site later and saw the barrel bomb or its remnants.
6.3 The loudness of the explosion from barrel bombs containing toxic chemicals
was described by 15 interviewees as relatively low in comparison to the loud
explosion of a conventional bomb. The residents of these places are accustomed to
the sounds of different explosions and clearly distinguished the intensity of sounds.
6.4 The colour of the gas cloud that was released after the barrel bomb containing
toxic chemicals impacted with the ground is described by 26 individuals. This
colour is described as ranging from honey coloured to yellow to whitish outer with
yellow centre, to greenish. As a large number of such attacks happened during
night-time, it was not possible for some interviewees to comment on the colour of
the gas cloud. A large number of individuals, 29, smelled the distinctive odour of
the gas cloud. This odour is mainly described as intense, chlorine -like, similar to
cleaning material used for cleaning toilets but much stronger, and the odour
disappears after some time from the air but remains longer in absorbent material
such as a mattress.
6.5 Thirty interviewees provided information about a large number of casualties
resulting from attacks with barrel bombs containing toxic chemicals. All medical
staff, from ambulance drivers to treating physicians, mentioned a large number of
casualties. These casualties were documented in different hospitals at which they
sought medical aid. The primary reason for there being mass casualties is that
people did not have adequate knowledge to escape upwind and to higher ground,
and ended up hiding in basements and such where the chlorine, which is denser than
the atmosphere, settled. Furthermore, the delayed awareness of attacks at night -time
and bombs impacting on residential areas also contribute to mass casu alties. In all
these incidents, medical staff specifically observed an absence of physical injuries
in those who were exposed, and informed the Mission to that effect.
6.6 Most of the medical staff suffered from some symptoms of exposure when
transporting casualties or providing aid to them. It was a common observation that
medical staff were affected by the intense smell of chlorine emanating from the
clothes of people who were exposed during an attack. It should be noted that
patients were not decontaminated before being brought inside the hospital; the
medical staff did not have specific chemical protective equipment and had to use
surgical masks and latex gloves that do not provide any protection from toxic
chemicals. The intensity of symptoms suffered by medical staff was mild to
moderate, with most reporting tearing and rhinorrhea. These symptoms were
relieved in all cases by moving outside into the fresh air. However, the symptoms
experienced by ambulance drivers were relatively more intense than thos e of other
medical staff, as the drivers transported multiple casualties straight from the attack
location during the same trip and in the enclosed space of an ambulance.
6.7 Twelve interviewees described and compared the destructive force and damage
caused by barrel bombs containing toxic chemicals to conventional munitions. This
damage was minimal and limited to adjoining structures in comparison to attacks
involving conventional munitions, in which many houses in the neighbourhood are

15-02871

55/123

S/2015/138

destroyed. The lack of extensive damage to surrounding structures can be observed
in multiple videos of impact sites provided to the Mission. This can be seen in the
impact point screen-grab from the video provided in Appendix 21. There was also a
comparison by several interviewees concerning the splintering effect observed in
conventional munitions as compared to barrel bombs containing toxic chemicals,
which essentially “open up and do not disintegrate”. A screen-grab from video
footage of such an opened-up barrel bomb is provided in Appendix 16.
6.8 Nine individuals who were residents and neighbours at the impact sites
described the death of livestock and birds. The birds (chickens and pigeons) in these
houses died immediately on exposure to gas. The smaller animals such a s calves,
goats, and sheep also died within minutes to an hour of exposure to toxic chemicals,
whereas the larger animals, adult cows, died after some eight to 10 hours.
6.9 Sixteen interviewees, mostly those who lived in or adjacent to houses where
barrel bombs containing toxic chemicals impacted, described the adverse
environmental effects. These included leaves drying, wilting, and changing colour
to yellowish, as well as fruits dropping from the trees, immediately or within a short
period of time. The statement of one witness describes such effects by saying “it
appeared as though the trees had never been watered”.
6.10 Five of the interviewees mentioned the bleaching of dark-coloured clothes that
were worn by their family members at the time of the incidents.
6.11 From the extensive testimonies provided to the Mission, individuals, while
experiencing the same event, highlighted some observations according to the
perspective of their own educational background, societal role, or profession. For
example, housewives described the change in colour of dark clothes that became
lighter as if bleached, a family noticed excessive/rapid/unusual rusting of household
containers after some weeks, and a firefighter noticed the absence of fires in the
attacks.
7.

DISCUSSION OF MEDICAL SYMPTOMS, SIGNS, AND TREATMENT
7.1 The symptoms of exposure, the signs observed by the treating physicians, and
the treatment that was provided to casualties are discussed below. These are based
on interviewees’ testimonies, as well as medical files handed over to the Mission.
7.2 The range of symptoms experienced by the casualties as a result of exposure to
toxic chemicals included coughing, shortness of breath, tightness in the chest,
suffocation, redness of the eyes, increased mouth and nose secretions, hoarseness of
voice, agitation or disorientation, weakness, loss of consciousness, abdominal
cramps, nausea, and vomiting. In a few cases, skin irritation (itching with/without
rash) was reported. Table 8 below provides the frequency distribution of the
reported symptoms. Symptoms that are similar but explained using different
terminology are grouped together.
7.3 The common symptoms as reported by the treating physicians and nurses, or
those observed by witnesses, are not included in these statistics. The symptoms that
were experienced by only those interviewees who were exposed to toxic chemicals
are reported here. The Mission did not ask the casualties any leading questions
about symptoms and only those symptoms that were mentioned by casualties while
narrating their experiences are reported.

56/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

TABLE 8: FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION OF THE REPORTED SYMPTOMS
AS EXPERIENCED BY THE CASUALTIES WHO PROVIDED THEIR
TESTIMONY TO THE MISSION
Symptom

Frequency of Occurrence (Reported/Total)
Talmenes

Al Tamanah

Kafr Zita

4/6

5/6

4/5

6/6

6/6

4/5

Tearing, burning sensation in eyes

6/6

5/6

3/5

Nausea/vomiting

1/6

6/6

4/5

Disorientation

5/6

1/6

1/5

Loss of consciousness

5/6

1/6

3/5

3/6

2/6

1/5

Skin turned blue (cyanosis)

2/6

–

–

Frothy secretions from mouth

2/6

–

–

Feeling of tiredness

2/6

3/6

–

Feeling of constriction in chest

1/6

–

3/5

Feeling of panic

1/6

1/6

–

Headache

1/6

1/6

–

Nausea

1/6

1/6

–

Physical injuries

0/6

0/6

0/6

Coughing
Shortness of breath/difficulty
breathing

Burning sensation on exposed
skin/nose

7.4 The variety and intensity of symptoms experienced by casualties varied
depending on the distance from the point of impact, duration of exposure, location
(downwind or upwind), use of protective measures, and receipt of tr eatment in
terms of time lapse and treatment availability. Individuals who were closer to the
point of impact of barrels containing toxic chemicals experienced more diverse and
intense symptoms.
7.5 Cumulatively, 13/17 experienced coughing, 16/17 had short ness of breath,
14/17 experienced burning in the eyes and tearing, 6/17 experienced a burning

15-02871

57/123

S/2015/138

sensation in the nose or on exposed skin, 11/17 had nausea or vomited, and 9/17 lost
consciousness.
7.6 It becomes evident from data analysis that the toxic chemi cal used at Talmenes
affected predominantly the eyes and respiratory system, whereas in the villages of
Al Tamanah and Kafr Zita, casualties also reported gastrointestinal symptoms.
Gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea and vomiting are the result of ei ther
reflex reaction to the exposure, as seen from the incidents in Talmenes, or could be
due to a mixture of chemicals, as seen in Al Tamanah and Kafr Zita, where a large
proportion of casualties reported such symptoms.
7.7 In low concentrations, toxic water-soluble chemicals (such as chlorine) cause
irritation and have corrosive properties and on contact with eyes, moist skin, or on
inhalation react primarily with mucous membranes/epithelium, causing sensory
irritation leading to a feeling of burning, itching, tearing, and rhinorrhea. These
were amongst the most frequently reported symptoms.
7.8 The respiratory symptoms among the casualties appeared almost immediately
after the exposure to toxic chemicals and persisted for a few hours and in some
cases for a few days. The cough was non-productive in the majority of cases. A
productive cough with whitish to yellow expectoration and in some cases blood tinged expectoration (haemoptysis) was seen in those who had been exposed to
severe concentrations. A dry cough occurs as a result of irritation of the upper
respiratory tract. When they affect the lower respiratory tract, toxic gases result in
an excessive production of inflammatory fluids leading to expectoration. One of the
immediate reactions to exposure to toxic (irritant or corrosive) chemicals is
bronchospasm, whereby irritated smooth muscles of the bronchi induce constriction
and the lumen of the respiratory tract becomes narrowed. In the case of chlorine, its
oxidative properties and formation of hypochlorous and hydrochloric acid resulting
from chlorine’s reaction with water lead to damage of the parenchyma of the lungs.
The damaged lung parenchyma filled with inflammatory fluid in conjunction with
bronchospasm decreases the capacity for oxygen exchange . The narrowed lumen of
the respiratory tract also leads to wheezing, which is the whistling sound produced
by a narrowed respiratory tract. This results in symptoms of shortness of breath,
increased respiratory rate, tightness of chest or chest pain, and expectoration. The
bronchospasm thus induced is usually relieved by stopping the exposure to the toxic
substance. However, the damage to the parenchyma of the lung, leading to
pulmonary oedema depending on its extent, may require assisted ventilation for a
prolonged period of time.
7.9 Though the Mission cannot determine the dosages and durations of exposure,
according to available literature, chlorine can be smelled at a concentration of
0.1/0.2 ppm. 6 Exposure to 1-3 ppm of chlorine produces primarily nose irritation
lasting up to an hour; 5 ppm produces irritation of the eyes; 5 -15 ppm irritates the
throat and causes headache; 30 ppm leads to pain in the chest, nausea and vomiting,
coughing, and difficulty breathing; and concentrations of 40 -60 ppm lead to
pulmonary oedema. Large doses of more than 400 ppm can cause death within
30 minutes and 1,000 ppm is fatal within a minute. Children are affected more
severely as they inhale larger quantities of gas due to their greater lung surface area
to body weight ratio and increased minute volume to weight ratios.
__________________
6 ppm = parts per million.

58/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

7.10 The reduced oxygenation also leads to central nervous system hypoxia (tissue
oxygen deficiency), with patients complaining of symptoms of disorientation,
agitation, weakness, headache, and altered levels of consciousness.
7.11 As reported by the treating physicians, a large number of casualties presented
in a state of panic. This is attributable to the psychological effects of living in a
conflict area with incidents of the use of toxic chemicals.
7.12 The treatment provided included oxygen therapy, application of intravenous
fluids, and broncholytic and steroid therapy.
7.13 The mainstay of the treatment provided was oxygen, which provided relief to
casualties within minutes. Oxygen relieves hypoxia in exposed patients and calms
those who are in state of panic, thus bringing immediate relief. The efficacy of
oxygen administration is evident in the readings of oxygen saturation seen in the
available videos from hospitals that show improved SpO2 value s on inhaling
oxygen.
7.14 The use of bronchodilators relaxes the constricted airways, thus improving
oxygenation and relieving symptoms. The efficacy of steroids is unproven but is
frequently used after exposure to toxic gases due to its anti -inflammatory effects.
7.15 The use of intravenous fluids (“serum”) as reported by a large number of
casualties and physicians is more for providing quick access to the peripheral
vessels for intravenous drug administration. Fluids replenishment in treating the
effects of exposure to toxic gas or vapour seems to have less value, as the
mechanism of action of those toxic substances does not create significant fluid loss
or shift in the body. Moreover, in cases of pulmonary oedema, administration of
fluids has to be carefully justified and weighted.
7.16 There were other medicines used for treatment, such as antibiotics, pain
killers, and anti-emetics. The use of these drugs was based on the patients’
symptoms, medical status, and drug availability.
7.17 Cases of exposure to high concentrations of toxic chemical that developed
pulmonary oedema required intensive airway management (intubation) and
mechanical ventilation. Such treatment was not available at field hospitals but at
higher medical echelons, namely, Saraqueb and Bab Al-Hawa, or outside the Syrian
Arab Republic.
7.18 There were two cases — from two separate incidents in two different
villages — involving casualties who were pregnant. Both babies were delivered
normally on the expected delivery dates and were healthy.
7.19 The outcome of exposure to the toxic chemicals used was fatal in 13 cases
(three in Talmenes, eight in Al Tamanah, and two in Kafr Zita). One had died
immediately, nine en route to higher medical echelons, and three in a specialised
hospital outside the Syrian Arab Republic. All these individuals were close to the
impact site of munitions containing toxic chemicals.

15-02871

59/123

S/2015/138

Attachment
DESCRIPTION OF EVIDENCE

60/123

1.

Video MAH02613: A casualty discussing his medical condition after exposure
to toxic chemicals.

2.

Video MAH02649: A treating physician at an intensive care unit of the
hospital taking a sample of tracheal secretions from a patient. The tracheal
secretions in his opinion have dissolved blood.

3.

Video MAH02650: A treating physician at an intensive care unit of the
hospital taking a sample of tracheal secretions from another patient.

4.

Video MAH02656: A treating physician at an intensive care unit of the
hospital taking a sample of tracheal secretions from the third patient. The
tracheal secretions in his opinion have dissolved blood.

5.

Video MAH02657: A treating physician discussing the case of one casualty
who has hypoxemia after exposure to toxic chemicals.

6.

Video MAH02667: A treating physician discussing the case of another
casualty who has hypoxemia after exposure to toxic chemicals.

7.

Video MAH02708: A treating physician, an intensive care specialist, discusses
the case of a 35-year-old woman who is on assisted ventilation after exposure
to toxic chemicals.

8.

Video MAH02709: A treating physician discussing the case of another
casualty who has hypoxemia after exposure to toxic chemicals. The chest
radiograph, in his opinion, shows extensive bilateral pulmonary oedema.

9.

Video MAH02710: A treating physician describing the condition of a pregnant
woman who was among the casualties that were exposed to toxic chemicals.

10.

Video MAH02745: Interview with the mother of a casualty giving her account
of what happened to her daughter.

11.

Video MAH02746: Continuation of video MAH02745.

12.

Video MAH02747: A witness whose parents were exposed to toxic chemicals
providing his account of the incident.

13.

Video MAH02748: Continuation of video MAH02745.

14.

Video MAH02753: A witness talks about the use of toxic chemical agents in
Kafr Zita, the region of Hama, and in Talmenes, in the suburbs of Idlib.

15.

Video MAH02754: A witness’s video records of his travel between the village
of Kafr Zita and Bab Al-Hawa.

16.

Video MAH02755: Continuation of video MAH02754.

17.

Video MAH02756: A witness video records his detailed plan about
documenting his travel to the places where toxic chemicals were used.

18.

Video MAH02757: Treating physicians account of casualties that reported to
their hospital after one incident wherein toxic chemicals were used.

19.

Video MAH02767: Continuation of video MAH02755.

15-02871

S/2015/138

15-02871

20.

Video MAH02768: Continuation of video MAH02767.

21.

Video MAH02769: Continuation of video MAH02768.

22.

Video MAH02770: A treating physician discusses the casualties of 11 April
2014 after their exposure to toxic chemicals.

23.

Video MAH02771: A treating physician discusses the casualties of 11 April
2014 after their exposure to toxic chemicals.

24.

Video MAH02772: Continuation of video MAH02771.

25.

Video MAH02773: This video shows the point of impac t of barrels.

26.

Video MAH02774: Continuation of video MAH02773.

27.

Video MAH02775: Video of the remnants of barrel bombs.

28.

Video MAH02776: The impact point of barrel bombs on 18 April 2014.

29.

Video MAH02777: Continuation of video MAH02776.

30.

Video MAH02778: A witness travelling from one village to another.

31.

Video MAH02779: The impact point of barrel bombs on 11 April 2014.

32.

Video MAH02780: The village of Kafr Zita.

33.

Video MAH02781: A witness heading towards Talmenes.

34.

Video MAH02782: A witness travelling from one village to another.

35.

Video MAH02783: A witness travelling from one village to another.

36.

Video MAH02786: A treating physician discussing the casualties that were
exposed to toxic chemicals.

37.

Video MAH02787: The impact point of barrel bombs on 21 April 2014.

38.

Video MAH02788: Impact point of the first barrel bomb in Talmenes village.

39.

Video MAH02790: Travel video of a witness.

40.

Video MAH02791: Video from the Bab Al-Hawa hospital.

41.

Video MAH02807: A pregnant casualty describes the incident and her
exposure to toxic chemicals.

42.

Video entitled “Coverage of the attack with chlorine toxic gases — The Syrian
Media Centre”: A video about the attack with barrel bombs containing toxic
chemicals.

43.

Video entitled “Talmenes — suburbs of Idlib — injury of children due to the
attack with chlorine toxic gases”: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

44.

Video entitled “Attack on Talmenes village in the suburbs of Idlib with
chlorine toxic gas”: A video about the attack on the Talmenes village with
toxic chemicals.

45.

Video entitled “Attack on Talmenes village in the suburbs of Idlib with
chlorine toxic gas 2”: Same as the previous video.

46.

Video 3: The video shows the village of Mashashyah.

61/123

S/2015/138

62/123

47.

Video 00050: Video of casualties after exposure to toxic chemicals.

48.

Video 00051: Video of casualties after exposure to toxic chemicals.

49.

Video 00052: A witness describes the incident of the use of toxic chemicals.

50.

Video 00053: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

51.

Video 00054: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

52.

Video 00056: Casualties evacuation to the hospital.

53.

Video 00057: A treating physician discussing the casualties that were exposed
to toxic chemicals.

54.

Video 00058: A treating physician discussing the casualties that were exposed
to toxic chemicals.

55.

Video 00060: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

56.

Video 00061: A casualty being treated at the hospital.

57.

Video 62: A hospital staff member talking about mass casualties at the hospital
after an incident involving toxic chemicals.

58.

Video 100_2177: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

59.

Video 100_2180: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

60.

Video 100_2181: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

61.

Video 100_2184: Casualties evacuation to the hospital.

62.

Video M2U00331: The video shows the impact point of a barrel bomb at Al
Tamanah village on 12 April 2014.

63.

Video 100_2270: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

64.

Video 100_2271: Video about panic among the public after suspected exposure
to toxic chemicals.

65.

Video 100_2272: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

66.

Video 100_2273: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

67.

Video 100_2274: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

68.

Video 100_2275: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

69.

Video 100_2276: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

70.

Video 100_2277: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

71.

Video M2U00330: The video shows the impact point of a barrel bomb.

72.

Video entitled “Abu Mohamed Al-Sousi”: A video showing an unconscious
casualty.

73.

Video entitled “Ismail”: A casualty being treated at the hospital.

74.

Video M2U01555: Casualties evacuation to a hospital on 22 May 2014.

75.

Video 100_2603: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

76.

Video 100_2604: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

15-02871

S/2015/138

15-02871

77.

Video 100_2610: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

78.

Video 100_2613: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

79.

Video 100_2614: Decontamination of a casualty at the hospital.

80.

Video 100_2615: Continuation of previous video 100_2614.

81.

Video 100_2616: Transfer of casualties to higher medical echelons.

82.

Video 102_2350: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

83.

Video 102_2351: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

84.

Video 102_2353: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

85.

Video 102_2354: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

86.

Video M2U01556: Casualties being treated at the hospital.

87.

Video M2U01576: A barrel bomb containing toxic chemicals that failed to
function.

88.

Video entitled “Giving first aid to an injured woman and her son who inhaled
toxic gases dropped by helicopters in Al Tamanah on 29 April 2014”:
Casualties being treated at the hospital.

89.

Video entitled “Al Tamanah chlorine gas”: Casualties being treated at the
hospital.

90.

Video entitled “Helicopter dropping barrel containing chemicals on
Al Tamanah on 19 July 2014, [no injuries]”: The incident of 19 July 2014.

91.

Video entitled “Chemicals”: Impact point of 22 May 2014.

92.

Video entitled “Removing the barrel containing chlorine gas in Al Tamanah on
26 May 2014”: A barrel bomb with toxic chemicals being removed from the
impact site.

93.

Video entitled “Dismantling the barrel containing chlori ne gas dropped on
Al Tamanah on 26 May 2014”: A barrel bomb with toxic chemicals being
dismantled.

94.

Video entitled “Helicopters dropping barrels containing toxic gases on
Al Tamanah on 22 May 2014”: The incident of 22 May 2014.

95.

Video entitled “The moment the container was dropped by the helicopter on
Al Tamanah in Rif Idlib on 28 December 2013”: The incident of 28 December
2013.

96.

Video entitled “Injured people as a result of the toxic gas attach on
Al Tamanah on 22 May 2014”: A hospital staff member talking about the
incident of 22 May 2014.

97.

Video entitled “The site where one of the containers with toxic chlorine gas
was dropped but did not explode in Al Tamanah on 26 May 2014”: A barrel
bomb from the incident of 26 May 2014 that failed to function.

98.

Video entitled “The site where the second barrel containing toxic chlorine gas
was dropped on Al Tamanah on 30 April 14”: The impact site of a barrel bomb
containing toxic chemicals on 30 April 2014.

63/123

S/2015/138

99.

Video entitled “The site where a chemical barrel was dropped on Al Tamanah
on 13 April 2014”: The incident of 13 April 2014 wherein a barrel bomb
containing toxic chemicals was used.

100. Video entitled “The site where a chemical barrel was dropped on Al Tamanah
on 13 April 14”: The same as the previous video.
101. Video entitled “The site where a chemical barrel was dropped on Al Tamanah
on 13 April 2014”: The same as the two previous videos.
102. Video entitled “The site where a chemical barrel was dropped on Al Tamanah
on 13 April 2014”: The same as the three previous videos.
103. Video entitled “The site where a barrel containing chlorine gas was dropped on
Al Tamanah on 26 May 2014”: The impact site of a barrel bomb containing
toxic chemicals on 26 May 2014.
104. Video entitled “Transport of casualties of toxic gases in Al Tamanah on
22 May 2014”: Voice of the commentator: Casualty evacuation after the
incident of 22.05.14.
105. Video entitled “Important media material — Commander of the Mohamed
Sawt Al-Haqq engineering brigade giving explanations on one of the chlorine
barrels dropped on Kafr Zita — suburbs of Hama” in Arabic: A commentator
explaining an improvised barrel bomb containing a mixture of chemicals along
with a gas cylinder.
106. Video 20140414_230306: Casualties being treated at the hospital.
107. Video 20140414_230526: Casualties being treated at the hospital.
108. Video 20140416_224606: A treating physician discusses casualties after
exposure to toxic chemicals.
109. Video 20140513_081734: Kafr Zita on 13 May 2014.
110. Video 20140828_210336: Casualties being treated at the hospital.
111. Video 20140901_113728: A commentator discussing improvised barrel bombs
containing toxic chemicals.
112. Video M2U00088: Casualties being treated at the hospital.
113. Video M2U00090: Casualties being treated at the hospital.
114. Video M2U00091: Casualties being treated at the hospital.
115. Video M2U00092: Casualties being treated at the hospital.
116. Video M2U00093: Casualties being treated at the hospital.
117. Video M2U00094: Casualties being treated at the hospital.
118. Video M2U00095: Continuation of the previous video.
119. Video entitled New — New — 2014522_201352: Casualties being treated at
the hospital.
120. Video entitled New — New — 20140522_201915: Casualties being treated at
the hospital.

64/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

121. Video entitled New — New — 20140522_201935: Casualties being treated at
the hospital.
122. Video entitled New — New — 20140522_202114: Casualties being treated at
the hospital.
123. Video entitled New — New — 20140522_202328: Casualties being treated at
the hospital.
124. Video entitled New — New — 20140522_202504: Casualties being treated at
the hospital.
125. Video entitled New — New — 20140522_210106: A treating physician
discusses casualties after exposure to toxic chemicals.
126. Video entitled New — New — M2U00030: Casualties being treated at the
hospital.
127. Video entitled New — Part II of the suffocation cases (in Arabic): Casualties
being treated at the hospital.
128. Video entitled New — New — M2U00031: Casualties being treated at the
hospital.
129. Video entitled New — New — M2U00032: Casualties being treated at the
hospital.
130. Video entitled New — New — 20140522_202328: Casualties being treated at
the hospital.
131. Video entitled New — New — 20140522_202504: Casualties being treated at
the hospital.
132. Video entitled New — New — 20140522_210106: A treating physician
discusses casualties after exposure to toxic chemicals.
133. Video entitled New — New — M2U00030: Voice of the commentator:
“22.05.14. Casualties being treated at the hospital.
134. Video entitled New — (Part II of the suffocation cases): Casualties being
treated at the hospital.
135. Video entitled New — New — M2U00031: Voice of the commentator:
“22.05.14. Casualties being treated at the hospital.
136. Video entitled New — New — M2U00032: Voice of the commentator:
“22.05.14. Casualties being treated at the hospital.
137. Video entitled New — New — M2U00033: Continuation of the previous
video.
138. Video entitled New — Report on chlorine in Kafr Zita (in Arabic): Treating
physician discusses casualties after exposure to toxic chemicals.
139. Video entitled “A physician speaking in English about gases” (in Arabic): A
treating physician discusses casualties after exposure to toxic chemicals.
140. Video entitled “Suffocation among children” (in Arabic): A treating physician
discusses casualties after exposure to toxic chemicals.

15-02871

65/123

S/2015/138

141. Video entitled New — Part II of the suffocation cases (in Arabic): Casualties
being treated at the hospital.
142. Video entitled “The moment of the explosion of a toxic gas container” (in
Arabic): The video shows the moment of the explosion of a barrel bomb
containing toxic chemicals.

66/123

15-02871

15-02871

TABLE A: LIST OF MATERIAL GATHERED DURING THE INTERVIEW PROCESS
S/N

Date of origin/ (Date
available to Mission)

Originator (DCN)

Material Title

No. of pages/items

1.

22.08.14/ (22.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/015

Consent Form.

1 page

2.

22.08.14/ (22.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/015

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

3.

22.08.14/ (22.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/015

Diagrammatic layout of house where
incident happened in Talmenes.

3 pages

4.

12.04.14; 18.04.14;

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/015

Sampling forms showing collection of
blood, urine, tracheal secretions, soil,
tree leaves, and bomb fragments.

15 pages

21.04.14; 22.04.14;
23.04.14/ (22.08.14)
21.04.14/ (22.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/015

Medical forms, Bab Al-Hawa hospital,
documenting chemical exposure cases.

7 pages

6.

21.04.14/ (22.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/015

Medical report on incident of chemical
attack on Talmenes, including
presenting symptoms, clinical signs,
and details of patients.

6 pages

7.

21.04.14/ (22.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/015

Various medical examination,
investigation, treatment documents
from Bab Al-Hawa hospital.

84 pages

8.

21.04.14/ (22.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/015

Various videos taken by interviewee
from incident of 21.04.14.

42 videos

9.

25.08.14/ (25.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/017

Consent Form.

1 page

10.

25.08.14/ (25.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/017

Speciality certificate in Orthopaedics,
Ministry of Health, SAR, copy.

1 page

11.

25.08.14/ (25.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/017

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

12.

25.08.14/ (25.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/017

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card,
32GB

13.

25.08.14/ (25.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/017

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card,
32GB

14.

25.08.14/ (25.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/017

Handover certificate for evidence.

1 page

S/2015/138

67/123

5.

Date of origin/ (Date
available to Mission)

Originator (DCN)

Material Title

No. of pages/items

15.

25.08.14/ (25.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/018

Consent Form.

1 page

16.

25.08.14/ (25.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/018

ID card, front and back, copy.

2 pages

17.

25.08.14/ (25.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/018

Doctor Licentiate in Human Medicine,
Ministry of Health, SAR, copy.

1 page

18.

25.08.14/ (25.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/018

Work certificate at the Faculty of
Medicine, Aleppo, issued for of a
student in Advanced Studies in General
Surgery, by the dean of the Faculty of
Medicine, Aleppo, copy.

1 page

19.

25.08.14/ (25.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/018

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

20.

25.08.14/ (25.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/018

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

21.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/019

Consent Form.

1 page

22.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/019

ID card, front and back, copy.

2 pages

23.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/019

Drawings of bomb, house layout where
bomb impacted and approach streets to
impact place, Talmenes.

2 pages

24.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/019

Autopsy certificate.

1 page

25.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/019

Map of Talmenes marked in presence of
mission showing impact point.

1 page

26.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/019

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

27.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/019

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

28.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/020

Consent form.

1 page

29.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/020

ID card, front and back, copy.

2 pages

30.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/020

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

31.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/020

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

32.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/021

Consent form.

1 page

S/2015/138

68/123

S/N

15-02871

15-02871

Date of origin/ (Date
available to Mission)

Originator (DCN)

Material Title

No. of pages/items

33.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/021

A copy of birth records.

1 page

34.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/021

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

35.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/021

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

36.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/022

Consent form.

1 page

37.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/022

ID card, front and back, copy.

2 pages

38.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/022

Drawings of house layout where bomb
2 pages
impacted and approach streets to impact
place, Talmenes.

39.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/022

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

40.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/022

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card,
32GB

41.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/023

Consent form.

1 page

42.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/023

A copy of birth records.

1 page

43.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/023

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

44.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/023

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

45.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/024

Consent form.

1 page

46.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/024

ID card, front and back, copy.

2 pages

47.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/024

Drawings of house with neighbourhood
where bomb impacted, Talmenes.

1 page

48.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/024

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

49.

26.08.14/ (26.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/024

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

50.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/026

Consent form.

1 page

51.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/026

ID card, front and back, copy.

2 pages

52.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/026

Drawings of layout of Talmenes
hospital; distances from referral
hospitals.

2 pages

S/2015/138

69/123

S/N

15-02871

Date of origin/ (Date
available to Mission)

Originator (DCN)

Material Title

No. of pages/items

53.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/026

Map of Talmenes marked in presence of
mission showing impact points and
important buildings including hospital.

1 page

54.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/026

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

55.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/026

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

56.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/027

Consent form.

1 page

57.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/027

ID card, front and back, copy.

2 pages

58.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/027

Drawings depicting backyard of house
where bomb impacted; location of
house in village and escape roads,
Talmenes.

3 pages

59.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/027

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

60.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/027

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

61.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/028

Consent form.

1 page

62.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/028

ID card (front and back) — copy

2 pages

63.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/028

Drawing of locations of neighbourhood
village hospitals in relation to
Talmenes.

1 page

64.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/028

Various videos showing places and
people of Talmenes after the toxic
chemical attack.

16 videos

65.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/028

Document chronologically listing some
toxic chemical attacks on the village.

2 pages

66.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/028

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

67.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/028

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

68.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/029

Consent form.

1 page

69.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/029

ID card, front and back, copy.

2 pages

S/2015/138

70/123

S/N

15-02871

Date of origin/ (Date
available to Mission)

Originator (DCN)

Material Title

No. of pages/items

70.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/029

Drawing of layout of house; important
village landmarks; relative location of
two houses where bombs impacted,
Talmenes.

1 page

71.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/029

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

72.

27.08.14/ (27.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/029

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

73.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/031

Consent form.

1 page

74.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/031

ID card, front and back, copy.

2 pages

75.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/031

Doctor Licentiate in Human Medicine,
Ministry of Health, SAR, copy.

1 page

76.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/031

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

77.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/031

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

78.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/032

Consent form.

1 page

79.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/032

ID card, front, copy.

1 page

80.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/032

Drawing of layout of house and impact
point, Al Tamanah.

1 page

81.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/032

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

82.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/032

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

83.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/033

Consent form.

1 page

84.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/033

ID card, front, copy.

1 page

85.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/033

Drawing of unexploded barrel bomb
containing toxic chemicals.

1 page

86.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/033

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

87.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/033

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

88.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/034

Consent form.

1 page

71/123

S/2015/138

S/N

15-02871

Date of origin/ (Date
available to Mission)

Originator (DCN)

Material Title

No. of pages/items

89.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/034

ID card, front and back, copy.

2 pages

90.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/034

Speciality certificate in internal
medicine, Ministry of Health SAR,
copy.

1 page

91.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/034

Authorisation to practice medicine in
SAR, Ministry of Health SAR, copy.

1 page

92.

12.04.14; 18.04.14;
29.04.14; 22.05.14;
27.05.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/034

Videos from incidents of 12, 18,
29.04.14 and 22.05.14, Al Tamanah.

32 videos

93.

12.04.14; 18.04.14;
29.04.14; 22.05.14;
27.05.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/034

Photographs from incident of 12, 18,
29.04.14 and 22.05.14.

20 photographs

94.

May.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/034

Documents, electronic copies of report
on various attacks on Al Tamanah.

3 documents (1 + 2 +
3 pages)

95.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/034

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

96.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/034

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

97.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/036

Consent form.

1 page

98.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/036

Passport ID, SAR, copy.

1 page

99.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/036

Drawing of barrel bomb and protective
mask.

2 pages

100.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/036

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

101.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/036

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

102.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/038

Consent form.

1 page

103.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/038

ID card, front and back, copy.

1 page

104.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/038

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

105.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/038

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card,
32GB

S/2015/138

72/123

S/N

15-02871

Date of origin/ (Date
available to Mission)

Originator (DCN)

Material Title

No. of pages/items

106.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/039

Consent form.

1 page

107.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/039

ID card, front and back, copy.

2 pages

108.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/039

Autopsy certificate.

1 page

109.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/039

Drawing of barrel bomb.

1 page

110.

April-May.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/039

Videos from incident of April-May
2014, Al Tamanah.

22 videos

111.

May.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/039

Photographs of unexploded barrel
bomb.

5 photos

112.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/039

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

113.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/039

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

114.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/040

Consent form.

1 page

115.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/040

ID card, front and back, copy.

1 page

116.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/040

Drawing of impact point with distances.

1 page

117.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/040

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

118.

30.08.14/ (30.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/040

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

119.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/041

Consent form.

1 page

120.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/041

ID card, front and back, copy.

2 pages

121.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/041

Licentiate in Nursing, Allepo
University, SAR, copy.

1 page

122.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/041

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

123.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/041

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

124.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/042

Consent form.

1 page

125.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/042

ID card, front and back, copy.

2 pages

126.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/042

Drawing showing the location of nearby 1 page
hospitals.

73/123

S/2015/138

S/N

Date of origin/ (Date
available to Mission)

Originator (DCN)

Material Title

No. of pages/items

127.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/042

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

128.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/042

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

129.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/043

Consent form.

1 page

130.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/043

ID card, front, copy.

1 page

131.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/043

Drawings depicting different places of
impact of barrel bombs with toxic
chemicals and escape roads from
village, Al Tamanah.

5 pages

132.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/043

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

133.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/043

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

134.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/044

Consent form.

1 page

135.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/044

ID card, front and back, copy.

2 pages

136.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/044

Drawings depicting different places of
impact of barrel bombs with toxic
chemicals, Al Tamanah.

1 page

137.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/044

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

138.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/044

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

139.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/045

Consent form.

1 page

140.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/045

Copy of civil status records.

1 page

141.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/045

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

142.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/045

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

143.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/046

Consent form.

1 page

144.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/046

ID card, front and back, copy.

1 page

145.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/046

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

146.

31.08.14/ (31.08.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/046

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

S/2015/138

74/123

S/N

15-02871

15-02871

Date of origin/ (Date
available to Mission)

Originator (DCN)

Material Title

No. of pages/items

147.

02.09.14/ (02.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/048

Consent form.

1 page

148.

02.09.14/ (02.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/048

ID Passport, SAR, copy.

1 page

149.

02.09.14/ (02.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/048

Certificate of Specialisation in General 1 page
Surgery, Ministry of Health, SAR, copy.

150.

02.09.14/ (02.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/048

Employment contract with Kafr Zita
hospital.

2 pages

151.

02.09.14/ (02.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/048

Videos from incidents, Kafr Zita.

32 videos

152.

02.09.14/ (02.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/048

2 reports by the Hama Health
4 pages
Directorate about toxic chemical attacks
on Kafr Zita.

153.

02.09.14/ (02.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/048

Patient treatment records.

140 pages

154.

02.09.14/ (02.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/048

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

155.

02.09.14/ (02.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/048

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

156.

02.09.14/ (02.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/049

Consent form.

1 page

157.

02.09.14/ (02.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/049

ID Passport, SAR, copy.

1 page

158.

02.09.14/ (02.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/049

Certificate of Specialisation in Internal
Medicine, Ministry of Health, SAR,
copy

1 page

159.

02.09.14/ (02.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/049

Employment contract with Kafr Zita
hospital.

2 pages

160.

02.09.14/ (02.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/049

Hand written details listing attacks.

1 page

161.

02.09.14/ (02.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/049

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

162.

02.09.14/ (02.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/049

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

163.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/051

Consent form.

1 page

164.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/051

ID card, front and back, copy.

1 page

165.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/051

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

75/123

S/2015/138

S/N

Date of origin/ (Date
available to Mission)

Originator (DCN)

Material Title

No. of pages/items

166.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/051

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

167.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/052

Consent form.

1 page

168.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/052

ID card, front and back, copy.

1 page

169.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/052

Drawing of improvised barrel bomb.

1 page

170.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/052

Drawing depicting patient transfer
across border.

1 page

171.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/052

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

172.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/052

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

173.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/053

Unsigned consent, as the individual was
minor and unaccompanied by guardian.

1 page

174.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/053

Audio recording of interview,
individuals statement only.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

175.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/053

Video recording of interview, couple of
minutes only until individual was
identified as minor.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

176.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/054

Consent form.

1 page

177.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/054

ID card, front and back, copy.

1 page

178.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/054

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

179.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/055

Consent form.

1 page

180.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/055

ID card, front and back, copy.

1 page

181.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/055

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

182.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/056

Consent form.

1 page

183.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/056

ID card, front and back, copy.

1 page

184.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/056

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

185.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/056

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

S/2015/138

76/123

S/N

15-02871

15-02871

S/N

Date of origin/ (Date
available to Mission)

Originator (DCN)

Material Title

No. of pages/items

186.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/057

Consent form.

1 page

187.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/057

ID card, front and back, copy.

1 page

188.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/057

Audio recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 2GB

189.

03.09.14/ (03.09.14)

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/057

Video recording of interview.

1 micro SD card, 32GB

S/2015/138

77/123

S/N

Date of origin

Originator (DCN)

Material Title

No. of pages USED/Total

1.

21.08.14

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/010

Inspection notebook

25/25 pages

2.

21.08.14

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/011

Inspection notebook

00/25 pages

3.

21.08.14

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/012

Inspection notebook

25/25 pages

4.

21.08.14

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/013

Inspection notebook

25/25 pages

5.

21.08.14

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/014

Inspection notebook

25/25 pages

6.

25.08.14

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/016

Inspection notebook

25/25 pages

7.

26.08.14

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/025

Inspection notebook

25/25 pages

8.

27.08.14

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/030

Inspection notebook

25/25 pages

9.

30.08.14

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/035

Inspection notebook

23/25 pages

10.

30.08.14

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/037

Inspection notebook

25/25 pages

11.

02.09.14

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/047

Inspection notebook

25/25 pages

12.

02.09.14

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/050

Inspection notebook

25/25 pages

13.

03.09.14

SAB/FFM3/14/5914/058

Inspection notebook

02/25 pages

S/2015/138

78/123

TABLE B: LIST OF MATERIAL PRODUCED BY THE TEAM MEMBERS OF THE MISSION

15-02871

15-02871

TABLE C: CHRONOLOGICAL SEQUENCE OF ADMISSION TO HOSPITAL, KAFR ZITA
Name

Gender/Age

Address

Date of First Aid

Diagnosis

Treatment Provided

1104-P1

Male

Morek

11.04.14

Difficulty breathing+ coughing

I.V fluids

1104-P2

Male

Latamnah

11.04.14

Intoxication by toxic gas

Symptomatic treatment

1104-P3

Male

Morek

11.04.14

Toxic gases, contusion in the
head

Symptomatic treatment+
resuscitation (This patient died)

1104-P4

Male

Kafr Zita

11.04.14

Sensation of suffocation,
difficulty breathing and
vomiting

Symptomatic treatment
Saline isotonic I.V fluids,
oxygenation, sprays. The
patient was transferred outside
of SAR

1104-P5

Female

Kafr Zita

11.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas+
acute respiratory distress

1104-P6

Male

Kafr Zita

11.04.14

Suffocation, difficulty
breathing, cyanosis

Symptomatic treatment

1104-P7

Female

Hama

11.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan (IV
treatment, oxygen, spray)

1104-P8

Female

Morek

11.04.14

Intoxication symptoms,
coughing, cyanosis, low blood
pressure

Symptomatic treatment
(condition improved)

1104-P9

Female

Morek

11.04.14

Severe coughing, difficulty
breathing, low pressure,
crepitations, cyanosis

I.V fluids

I.V fluids. The patient was
transferred outside of SAR
The patient was transferred to
an advanced medical centre

1104-P10

Male

Kafr Zita

11.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas
(severe coughing, fatigue, cold
perspiration, cyanosis,
haemoptysis)

1104-P11

Female

Kafr Zita

11.04.14

Severe coughing, haemoptysis
and acute respiratory distress

S/2015/138

79/123

Male

Kafr Zita

11.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas

I.V fluids + oxygen

1204-P1

Male

Bsirin

12.04.14 @ 22:00 hrs

Suffocation by chlorine gas

I.V treatment+ oxygen+ spray

1204-P2

Male

–

12.04.14

Suffocation by chlorine gas

Symptomatic treatment

1204-P3

Female

Kafr Zita

12.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas,
dry coughing, difficulty
breathing, low blood pressure

I.V fluids

1204-P4

Male

–

12.04.14

Suffocation by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan (oxygen
and spray)

1204-P5

Female

Kafr Zita

12.04.14

Illegible

I.V treatment

1404-P1

Male 20 years

Halfaya

14.04.14 @ 23:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1404-P2

Male 18 years

Halfaya

14.04.14 @ 23:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan (I.V
fluids, oxygen, spray)

1404-P3

Male 19 years

Halfaya

14.04.14 @ 23:00 hrs

Intoxication with chlorine gas
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan (I.V
fluids, oxygen, spray)

1404-P4

Male 21 years

Halfaya

14.04.14 @ 23:00 hrs

Intoxication with chlorine gas
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1604-P1

Male 40 years

Kafr Zita

16.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Dry cough + crepitations +
difficulty breathing

oxygen+ sprays

1604-P2

Male

Shid

16.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan (oxygen+
sprays)

1604-P3

Male

Shid

16.04.14

Intoxication with chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan (oxygen+
sprays)

1604-P4

Female 21 years

Kafr Zita

16.04.14

Severe coughing due to
exposure to chlorine gas,
irritability, tight chest

I.V fluids

1604-P5

Female 24 years

Kafr Zita

16.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

S/2015/138

80/123

1104-P12

15-02871

15-02871

1804-P1

Male

Kafr Zita

18.04.14 at 22:50 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine. Same
symptoms (coughing and
difficulty breathing)

Same treatment plan
(CORTISONE + Salbutamoul +
Spray)

1804-P2

Male

Kafr Zita

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine

Same treatment plan

1804-P3

Male 7 months

Kafr Zita

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine

Same treatment plan

Kafr Zita

18.04.14 at 24:00 hrs

Toxic gases (chlorine). Same
symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P4
1804-P5

Female

Karnaz

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P6

Male

Kafr Zita

18.04.14 at 22:50 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms (Severe
cough+ difficulty breathing)

Sprays+Salbutamoul+Dexon

1804-P7

Male

Kafr Zita

18 April 2014

Intoxication with chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P8

Female 25 years

Morek

18.04.14 at 24:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P9

Male

Kafr Zita

18.04.14 at 22:50 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment

1804-P10

Female

Kafr Zita

18.04.14 at 22:50 hrs

Delivery of baby and
intoxication by chlorine. Same
symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P11

Female

Morek

18.04.14 at 22:50 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P12

Male

Kafr Zita

18.04.14 at 22:50 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P13

Male

Kafr Zita

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P14

Male

Kafr Zita

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan
S/2015/138

81/123

Male

Morek

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P16

Male

Latamnah

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P17

Male

Morek

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P18

Male

Khattab

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P19

Female

Latamnah

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P20

Male

Kafr Zita

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P21

Female

Tawina

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P22

Female

Kafr Zita

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P23

Male

Kafr Zita

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P24

Female

Kafr Zita

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P25

Male

Kafr Zita

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P26

Female 19 years

Latamnah

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P27

Female 27 years

Latamnah

18.04.14 at 24:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan (sprays+
oxygen)

1804-P28

Male

Hayaline

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P29

Male

Kafr Zita

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

S/2015/138

82/123

1804-P15

15-02871

15-02871

Female

Al-Tawina

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P31

Male

–

18.04.14 at 23:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms (severe
coughing)

Same treatment plan

1804-P32

Female

Kafr Zita

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P33

Female

Al-Zakat

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P34

Female 24 years

Kafr Zita

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1804-P35

Female

Kafr Zita

18.04.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment plan

1905-P1

Male

Kafr Zita

19.05.14 @20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Coarse crepitations

Sprays+ Kortifint+ Salbutamol

1905-P2

Male

Kafr Zita

19.05.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.

I.V fluids

2105-P1

Female

Kafr Zita

21.05.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

2105-P2

Female

Kafr Zita

21.05.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas
(dry coughing+ difficulty
breathing)

I.V fluids

2105-P3

Male 30 years

Kafr Zita

21.05.14

Severe cough due to exposure
to chlorine gas

Sprays (salbutamol)

2105-P4

Male

Kafr Zita

21.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine

I.V fluids

2205-P1

Male 57 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas;
Coughing, coarse crepitations

Sprays

2205-P2

Female 18 years

Morek

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray

2205-P3

Female 26 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray

2205-P4

Male

Kafr Zita

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray

2205-P5

Female 12 years

Khattab

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray

83/123

S/2015/138

1804-P30

15-02871

Male 22 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray

2205-P7

Male 22 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray

2205-P8

Male 44 years

Kafr Houd

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray

2205-P9

Male 25 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray

2205-P10

Female 17 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P11

Female 18 years

Latamnah

22.05.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P12

Male 21 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P13

Male 21 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P14

Male 23 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P15

Female 40 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P16

Male 17 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P17

Female 18 years

Latamnah

22.05.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P18

Male 21 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P19

Female 8 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P20

Female 10 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P21

Female

Kafr Houd

22.05.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P22

Female

Kafr Zita

22.05.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P23

Female 29 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P24

Male 14 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P25

Male 21 years

Karnaz

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P26

Female

Kafr Houd

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P27

Female 9 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

I.V liquids+ sprays

2205-P28

Female 40 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

2205-P29

Male 22 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P30

Male 24 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P31

Female

Kafr Zita

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

S/2015/138

84/123

2205-P6

15-02871

Male

Kafr Zita

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

–

2205-P33

Female 20 years

Khattab

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray

2205-P34

Male 20 years

Khattab

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray

2205-P35

Female 9 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

I.V fluids (salbutamol)

2205-P36

Male

Morek

22.05.14 at 10:00 hrs

Injury in the middle finger

Suturing+ bandage

2205-P37

Female 5 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2205-P38

Female 45 years

Kafr Zita

22.05.14 at 20:00 hrs

Intoxication by chlorine gas

O2+ Spray+ Monitoring

2905-P1

Female, 18
years

Latamnah

29 May 2014 at
23h20

Intoxication with chlorine gas.

Same treatment

2905-P2

Male

Latamnah

29 May 2014 at
23h20

Intoxication with chlorine gas.
Same symptoms

Same treatment

2905-P3

Male, 17 years

–

29 May 2014 at
23h20

Intoxication with chlorine gas.
Same clinical symptoms

Same treatment

2905-P4

Female, 19
years

Latamnah

29 May 2014 at
23h20

Intoxication with chlorine gas.
Same clinical symptoms

Same treatment

2905-P5

Male, 16 years

Latamnah

29 May 2014 at
23h20

Intoxication with chlorine gas.
Same clinical symptoms

Same treatment

2905-P6

Female, 22
years

Kafr Zita

29 May 2014 at 24h

Intoxication with chlorine gas.
Same clinical symptoms

Same treatment (admitted to
intensive care)

2905-P7

Female, 40
years

Latamnah

29 May 2014 at
23h20

Intoxication with chlorine gas.
Same clinical symptoms

Same treatment

2905-P8

Female, 26
years

Latamnah

29 May 2014 at 24h

Intoxication with chlorine gas.
Same clinical symptoms

Same treatment

2905-P9

Female, 22
years

–

29 May 2014 at
23h20

Intoxication with chlorine gas.
Same clinical symptoms

Same treatment

2905-P10

Male, 25 years

Latamnah

29 May 2014 at
23h20

Intoxication with chlorine gas.
Same clinical symptoms

Same treatment

2905-P11

Male, 02 years

Latamnah

29 May 2014 at
23h20

Intoxication with chlorine gas.
Same clinical symptoms

Same treatment

85/123

S/2015/138

2205-P32

Female, 05 years –

29 May 2014 at
23h20

Intoxication with chlorine
gas. Same clinical symptoms

Same treatment

2905-P13

Male, 22 years

Latamnah

29 May 2014 at
23h20

Intoxication with chlorine
gas. Same clinical symptoms

Same treatment

2905-P14

Male, 28 years

Latamnah

29 May 2014 at
23h20

Intoxication with chlorine
gas. Same clinical symptoms

Same treatment

2905-P15

Male, 16 years

Latamnah

29 May 2014 at
23h20

Intoxication with chlorine
gas. Same clinical symptoms

Same treatment

2905-P16

Male, 24 years

Latamnah

29 May 2014 at
23h20

Intoxication with chlorine
gas. Same clinical symptoms

Same treatment

2905-P17

Female years

Latamnah

29 May 2014 at
23h20

Intoxication with chlorine
gas. Same clinical symptoms

Same treatment

S/2015/138

86/123

2905-P12

15-02871

S/2015/138

Appendix 1
Example of the front and back of an identification card issu ed by the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic to one of the interviewees. The identity of all interviewees
was checked and copies of identity documents were made by the Mission.

15-02871

87/123

S/2015/138

Appendix 2
Example of the consent form (copy 1 in English) signed by all participants in the
interview process. The signed form (copy 2 in Arabic) was handed over to the
interviewees.

88/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Appendix 3
Example of a single page from an OPCW inspection notebook. Only official OPCW
equipment was used while collecting and analysing data and drafting this report.

15-02871

89/123

S/2015/138

Appendix 4
Map showing the relative locations of Talmenes, Al Tamanah, and Kafr Zita, the
places where chlorine was allegedly used as a weapon.

90/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Appendix 5
Example of an authorisation certificate to practice medicine in the Syrian Arab
Republic, provided by a treating physician and checked by the Mission.

15-02871

91/123

S/2015/138

Appendix 6
Example of doctors licentiate in human medicine issued by the Syrian Arab
Republic and provided to the Mission by a treating physici an.

92/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Appendix 7
Example of a B.A. Degree in Nursing from the Syrian Arab Republic, presented by
one of interviewees.

15-02871

93/123

S/2015/138

Appendix 8
Sketch by an interviewee of the neighbourhood around the Big Mosque in Talmenes,
where the barrel bombs impacted on 21 April 2014.

94/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Appendix 9
Sketch drawn by an interviewee of the point of impact of the second barrel bomb in
Talmenes village and the accompanying destruction. The picture below is a screen grab from a video of the impact point provided by one interviewee. This picture
provides the same view as the sketch above but as visualised from the side of the
street. It also shows the collapsed wall.

15-02871

95/123

S/2015/138

Appendix 10
Sketch by an interviewee of the impact points of barrel bombs in Al Tamanah
village.

96/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Appendix 11
Sketch by an interviewee representing villages near Talmenes that have medical
clinics and their distances.

15-02871

97/123

S/2015/138

Appendix 12
A dropped barrel bomb that failed to function, as the point of impact was in soft
soil. The nose-end of the bomb has been blunted on impact. The second photograph
is the cross-section view of same bomb, showing the toxic chemical cylinder. A blue
detonation (fuse) wire is also visible.

98/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Appendix 13
Sketches by interviewees of an improvised barrel bomb. The first has two cylinders
inside, one yellow and bearing the markings “CL2”. The openings (vents) according
to interviewee produce the whistling sound, as mentioned in the main body of the
report. The second sketch shows the improvised nature of the barrel b omb. The last
sketch depicts the length and possible functioning mechanism.

15-02871

99/123

S/2015/138

100/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Appendix 14
Various markings on the toxic chemical cylinder contained inside the barrel bombs
can be seen in these screen-grabs from a video provided by an interviewee.

15-02871

101/123

S/2015/138

102/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Appendix 15
View of the base of an outer barrel reinforced with a cross-sectional support. The
toxic chemical cylinder can be seen inside.

15-02871

103/123

S/2015/138

Appendix 16
A barrel bomb that exploded (opened up rather than splintered). The toxic chemic al
cylinder can be seen inside the barrel bomb in the second picture.

104/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Appendix 17
The remnants of a toxic chemical cylinder. Note that the cylinder has ruptured at the
nose end.

15-02871

105/123

S/2015/138

Appendix 18
The view of the measurement of an inner chlorine cylinder from a barrel bomb that
functioned. The second picture shows the remnants of the outer barrel and inner
cylinder as they lay after functioning as designed.

106/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Appendix 19
A sketch by one interviewee of an improvised barrel bomb containing toxic
chemicals. A screen-grab of a similar improvised barrel bomb containing toxic
chemicals from a video provided by another interviewee. Among the smaller
containers, only 97-98% purity H2SO4 with containing black bottle is labelled.

15-02871

107/123

S/2015/138

Appendix 20
Contents of various containers. The yellow container has a caked yellow powder.
The black container has sulfuric acid as marked on the label.

108/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Appendix 21
Measurements of the impact crater from the first barrel bomb. The diameter of this
crater is approximately 360 cm and the depth is approximately 140 cm. The lack of
damage on the surrounding walls around the impact point can be noticed.

15-02871

109/123

S/2015/138

110/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Appendix 22
The dismantling of a barrel bomb. Screen-grabs taken from available video. The
toxic gas cylinder is tightly enclosed in outer barrel, the space between the gas
cylinder and the outer barrel filled with light yellow powder; and multiple blue
detonation wires between the valve of the cylinder and the base can be seen.

15-02871

111/123

S/2015/138

112/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Appendix 23
Screen-grab from a video provided by an interviewee showing the yellow cloud that
rises to height of approximately 50 m after impact of barrel bomb containing toxic
chemicals.

15-02871

113/123

S/2015/138

Appendix 24
The first picture, a screen-grab from a video provided by an interviewee, shows the
leaves of trees that faced the brunt of the released gas. They are dried, have turned
yellow, and wilted. As stated by one interviewee “it appeared the trees had never
been watered”. The second picture, a screen-grab from a video provided by an
interviewee, shows the fallen fruit from the trees. Also notice the unusually large
number of tree leaves that have fallen. This picture is a snapshot from a video
showing the incident from the month of April.

114/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Appendix 25
The dead birds and animals. There is lack of physical injury, despite being in the
immediate vicinity of the barrel bomb’s impact. These pictures are screen -grabs
from videos provided by interviewees.

15-02871

115/123

S/2015/138

116/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Appendix 26
The first picture, provided by an interviewee, is a photographic comparison of two
door handles from the same house where the barrel bomb impacted. The bluegreenish deposit (possibly copper chloride) appeared after the attack by the barrel
bomb containing toxic chemicals, on one of these copper/brass door handles. The
second picture is a screen-grab from a video provided by an interviewee in whose
house the munition impacted, shows the unusual rusting of an outer barrel that was
also described by an interviewee. This is possibly caused by the corrosive effects of
chlorine.

15-02871

117/123

S/2015/138

Appendix 27
The patient register from one of the hospitals, documenting the name, age, gender,
address, diagnosis, etc. of casualties exposed to toxic chemicals. This document was
provided by a treating physician.

118/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Appendix 28
The first scanned picture is a patient referral form from Kafr Zita hospital. The
second scanned picture is of physicians’ daily round notes. These documents were
provided by interviewees.

15-02871

119/123

S/2015/138

Appendix 29
A scanned picture of an admission form of one casualty to the hospital. This
document was provided by an interviewee.

120/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Appendix 30
A scanned picture of a form for documenting chemical exposure cases, filled in by
one of the treating physicians. The translation of this form is provided on the next
page.

15-02871

121/123

S/2015/138

122/123

15-02871

S/2015/138

Appendix 31
A scanned picture of the vital signs record of a patient, provided by an interviewee.
The initial recordings show a patient in distress, as recorded with poor oxygen
saturation of 82%, tachycardia of 104 bpm, and hypothermia. All vital signs
stabilise over a period of time, as expected after medical intervention.

15-02871

123/123
