UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/32
6 November 1998
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3941st meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 November 1998 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Croatia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the final report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations police support group (S/1998/1004), and in
particular his description of the successful conclusion of the police
support group mandate and the smooth transition of responsibilities to the
police monitoring programme of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The Council recalls the commitment of the
Government of Croatia to ensure that OSCE police monitors will have the
same access to police stations, documents and police operations, including
investigations and checkpoints, as that accorded to the United Nations
police support group.
"While the overall security situation in the Danube region remains
satisfactory and police performance has improved notably and the Government
of Croatia has taken steps to ensure that this continues, a worrying trend
of ethnically motivated incidents persists in the region. The Security
Council remains deeply concerned at the continuing departures of Serb
residents, resulting to a considerable extent from these incidents. In
this context, the Council is mindful of the importance of economic
revitalization and reconstruction in creating an environment for sustained
returns. The Council calls upon the Government of Croatia to make every
effort to enhance public confidence in the police force and to recommit
itself fully to the process of reconciliation between ethnic groups.
"The Security Council also calls upon the Government of Croatia to
address the perceived lack of security which is contributing to continuing
departures of Serbs from the region, and to remedy a number of problems
which are preventing the full implementation of the "Programme for the
Return and Accommodation of Displaced Persons, Refugees and Exiled Persons"
(S/1998/589). While noting that in his previous report (S/1998/887) the
Secretary-General recognized progress in the implementation of this
Programme, the Council calls upon the Government of Croatia promptly and
fully to address all unresolved issues, which include restitution of
98-34166 (E)

061198

/...

S/PRST/1998/32
English
Page 2

property to Croatian citizens of Serb ethnicity, harmonization of
legislation with the provisions of the return programme to enable
non-discriminatory implementation, effective functioning of all housing
commissions, equal access to reconstruction funding, restoration of rights
to socially owned apartments, access to information, removal of impediments
to the acquisition of documents needed for returnee status and benefits,
and implementation of the law on convalidation.
"The Security Council expresses particular concern about the Joint
Council of Municipalities, which represents all Serb ethnic communities in
the region and which is described by the Secretary-General as being on the
brink of collapse. The Council reiterates the continuing obligations of
the Government of Croatia under the Basic Agreement as well as under
international conventions and other agreements, and, in this context,
stresses the importance of full implementation of the ’Programme for the
Establishment of Trust, Accelerated Return and Normalization of Living
Conditions in the War-Affected Regions of the Republic of Croatia’
(S/1997/772).
"The Security Council expresses its full support for the OSCE, which
has now assumed the role of the United Nations support group, and looks
forward to being kept informed, whenever necessary, of relevant
developments in the Danube region of Croatia.
"The Security Council expresses its deep appreciation to all the men
and women who participated in the United Nations peacekeeping operations in
the Danube region of Croatia. Their dedication and perseverance made a
significant contribution to regional peace."

-----
