A /67/PV.42

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

42nd plenary meeting
Wednesday, 28 November 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Agenda item 12
Sport for peace and development
Report of the Secretary-General (A/67/282)
Draft resolution (A/67/L.26)
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Monaco to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.26.
Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): In my
capacity as co-Chair of the Group of Friends of Sport
for Development and Peace and on behalf of my
co-Chair Tunisia and the other sponsors of today’s
draft resolution, I have the honour to introduce the
draft resolution entitled “Sport as a means to promote
education, health, development and peace”, contained
in document A/67/L.26. On behalf of the Group of
Friends, I would also like to welcome our new members,
Japan and Denmark.
The year 2011 marked the tenth anniversary of
the mandate of the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Sport for Development and Peace and
of that Office within the United Nations. The efforts
led by the Special Advisers, Mr. Ogi and Mr. Lemke,
during the past 10 years have helped to establish the
recognition of sport as a tool for promoting the goals
of peace and development, as enshrined in the ideals
of the Charter of the United Nations. Sport has adopted
values that tend to promote social inclusion, gender
equality, tolerance, respect for rules and health through
its striving to outdo itself. Support for such values

is fundamental and should be encouraged in a world
dealing with new challenges every day.
In the context of the duty we bear to strive for a
peaceful, better world, we must put to good use all of
the means available to us, and sport is one of them.
We can all use sport, collectively or individually, in
many situations, as the report of the Secretary-General
(A/67/282) emphasizes. That is because, where politics
sometimes fail and life discriminates, sport can bring
divided and devastated peoples and communities
together and include everybody, regardless of social
class, age, race and even disability.
This year’s biennial draft resolution introduces
a new programme oriented towards the work of the
Office of the Special Adviser, to whom I would like to
express our sincere congratulations on his leadership
and the determination with which he has been working
on the ground, both concretely and effectively, to
further our goals. He has succeeded in meeting the
challenge of integrating sport as an instrument capable
of responding to a large number of cross-cutting
issues relating to implementation of the Millennium
Development Goals. In many situations he has shown
that sport can contribute significantly to dealing with
society’s problems.
The draft resolution also highlights the crucial
and growing importance of women in sport and how
essential it is to empower them, if we are to achieve
lasting development. Similarly, it seeks to encourage
the full participation of developing countries, especially
the least developed, in efforts to develop national sports

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-61261 (E)

*1261261*

A/67/PV.42

institutions and capacities that will enable them to take
advantage of economic opportunities.

wishing to become sponsors, that the list will be open
until the end of the debate on this agenda item.

In the light of the success and enormous popularity
of some of the great recent sporting events, the draft
resolution seeks to acknowledge and strengthen
private-public partnerships in sport, which can
have very positive effects on the development of
social and institutional infrastructures. The draft
resolution also welcomes the numerous partnerships
established between the United Nations system and the
International Olympic Committee since its attainment
of observer status in the General Assembly. It also
affirms the contribution that the Olympic movement
has made to establishing sport as a unique means of
promoting peace and development, particularly through
the Olympic Truce.

Mrs. Harbaoui (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I would
first like to express my delegation’s satisfaction with the
publication of the Secretary-General’s report entitled
“Sport for development and peace: mainstreaming a
versatile instrument” (A/67/282), and to welcome the
activities undertaken during the past year within the
United Nations system, particularly by the Office on
Sport for Development and Peace. I would also like
to emphasize my delegation’s appreciation for the
untiring and continuing efforts of Mr. Wilfried Lemke,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Sport for
Development and Peace. We wish him every success in
his worthy task and assure him of our full support in
his efforts to maximize the success of programmes to
promote sport around the world.

In my national capacity, I would also like to
recall the Principality of Monaco’s commitment to
further strengthening the power of sport. Their Serene
Highnesses Prince Albert II and Princess Charlene,
themselves both Olympians, are determined to promote
sport as a tool for development and peace. Both within
the Group of Friends of Sport for Development and
Peace, which we are pleased to say is mentioned in the
text of the draft resolution for the first time, and in its
general policies, Monaco seeks to promote dialogue
and facilitate and encourage the integration of sport in
order to achieve the goals of the United Nations.
Sport’s unprecedented ability to mobilize people
gives us this opportunity, now fully recognized, to
defend our ideals and share our ambitions to fight
poverty and achieve peace. It is in that spirit that the
International University of Monaco and the University
for Peace have formed a partnership, which, supported
by Peace and Sport, a global initiative under the high
patronage of Prince Albert II, enables students to take
master’s degrees in innovative subjects such as lasting
peace through sport. I would also like to recall the sixth
Peace and Sport International Forum, which just took
place in Sochi in the Russian Federation and which
discussed the effectiveness of the Olympic Games as a
diplomatic platform.
I cannot close without offering the Government
of Monaco’s hearty congratulations to the British
authorities for the magic moments they gave us during
the Olympic and Paralympic Games in London. On
a technical point, I would also like to thank all the
sponsors of the draft resolution and note, for those

2

Sport is a determining element in setting norms
of good citizenship and therefore plays a special role
in promoting the coherence of a healthy social fabric.
We believe that access to sport is a fundamental social
right and that sport is an important agent for social
cohesion and development. It promotes high values and
contributes to a solid education for our children and
young people.
Sport has become part of the United Nations value
system — an effective tool to be included from now on
as one of our Organization’s main themes. I reiterate
Tunisia’s resolve to take steps to enlist sport’s capacity
to promote communication and understanding and
make it a powerful national and international agent
for inclusion and development, as well as a means to
promote solidarity, tolerance and cultural and personal
diversity. I also welcome the interest shown in sport
by the whole of our membership and the general belief
in its worldwide utility as a tool for promoting peace,
development, education and health.
I take this opportunity to voice our warm
congratulations to the United Kingdom on having
organized the 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games in
London. Those two events solidified the principle of the
Olympic Truce and the ideals of the United Nations and
the Olympic movement — friendship among peoples,
harmony, non-violence and non-discrimination.
They also clearly demonstrated sport’s ability to
promote unity and friendship and the shared spirit of
sportsmanship among athletes and fans, no matter what
their origins, political leanings or faiths. I also want

12-61261

A/67/PV.42

to congratulate the Russian Federation on its upcoming
Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games in 2014 in
Sochi and the Brazilian Government for its selection to
host two major sporting events, the 2014 International
Federation of Association Football World Cup and the
Olympic and Paralympic Games in 2016.
Given the potential of sport to inspire and its vital
contribution in energizing new generations avid for
physical and mental health, Tunisia urges Member
States to take all measures necessary to address the
dangerous phenomenon of doping, which threatens not
only athletes’ health but also the image and credibility
of sporting events. We welcome the growing number
of Member States that have signed the International
Convention against Doping in Sport. It is also important
to ensure that education systems and civil society
organizations educate young people about the ethics
of sport and sportsmanship, so as to prevent sports
arenas and events from being used to promulgate racist,
xenophobic and exclusionary slogans.
Zealous to nurture the tradition of sportsmanship
and to utilize sport in the promotion of universal shared
values for the benefit of future generations, my country
joins Monaco in introducing draft resolution A/67/L.26,
entitled “Sport as a means to promote education, health,
development and peace”, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Sport for Development and Peace and the
sponsors.
The draft resolution urges all concerned parties to
cooperate with the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral in expanding awareness of the importance
of including sport in development programmes, and
encourages Member States to name focal points on
sport for development and peace, as well as to create
innovative partnerships with the United Nations Office
on Sport for Development and Peace. I hope that the
draft resolution will enjoy the support of all Member
States, which would send a strong message to the men
and women working nobly to promote the practice of
sport and raise the cheer of all athletes.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Charter of the United Nations, drafted in San
Francisco, set out principles for what was to be a new
system of international relations that would prevent a
repetition of the horrific experiences of the twentieth
century’s two World Wars. The primary challenge set
out in the first sentence of the Preamble is “to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war” and

12-61261

to create a democratic, equitable world order based on
equal respect for the dignity of all people.
The Organization that we belong to today was
created for those purposes, with the stated goal of
maintaining international peace and security, based
on the ideals of the sovereign equality of all Members,
the peaceful settlement of international disputes, the
non-use or threat of use of force and non-intervention
in the internal affairs of States. The promise was also
held out that all peoples would achieve economic and
social progress.
However, after more than six decades of the
Organization’s existence, we are witness to a
dismal economic and social picture, characterized
simultaneously by the economic and financial crisis,
the food and energy crises and the harmful impact
of climate change, every day further endangering the
human race. As a result of those problems, themselves
the result of the current unjust and inequitable
international order, the efforts of the countries of the
South to achieve progress and development have been
hampered. Today more than ever we must forge a climate
of international peace, through solidarity, cooperation
and multilateralism as our fundamental values.
Sport is an important aspect of national and
international development. Cuba believes that the
practice of sport strengthens solidarity and friendship
among nations — elements critical to peace, development
and cooperation among nations. Following the triumph
of the Cuban Revolution in 1959, sport ceased to be an
exclusive activity in our country, becoming instead
a right enjoyed by all. In order to exercise that right,
we have promoted an educational system that includes
physical education as an integral component of human
development at all stages. That has led to resounding
successes in regional and international competitions.
An example is Cuba’s success in the 2012 London
Olympic Games, in which our small developing country
ranked sixteenth in the number of medals won. We
are one of the first developing countries to rank that
high. Similarly, Cuba ranked fifteenth in this year’s
Paralympic Games, in its best performance to date,
winning nine gold medals.
We strive for early sports training for our children,
allowing us to nurture unique talents destined to meet
and raise the standards set by our country on the
international sports stage. At the same time, we oppose
an athletic spirit motivated purely by financial gain. We

3

A/67/PV.42

therefore condemn the theft of athletic talent, which
negatively impacts developing countries.
For years the Cuban sport movement, led by the
Cuban Olympic Committee and the National Institute of
Sport, Physical Education and Recreation, has provided
impartial assistance to various countries of the South
based on bilateral agreements, sending technicians,
trainers and teachers, who, in their own modest way,
have conveyed our training methods in the field of
sport and have enhanced the success and increasing
involvement in sport in those countries, thereby forging
strong ties of brotherhood and friendship between
peoples.
We have also strengthened international cooperation
by making available to countries of the South the Institute
for Sports Medicine and the Anti-doping Laboratory,
to help fight the scourge of drugs that is corrupting
athletes and that impedes fair play and the education
and culture of athletes and trainers. Furthermore, Cuba
founded the International School of Physical Education
and Sports, which is devoted to training professionals
whose fundamental value is solidarity and who are
able to transform physical education and sports in their
countries.
We would also like to highlight that the countries
of the South also deserve to host the Olympic Games,
a forum for brotherhood and solidarity in sports that
is free from commercial interests. We are certain that
the 2016 Olympic Games, to be held in Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil, will be a success for all the South.
We shall further develop international cooperation
and solidarity through the Olympic ideal. Let us invest
in projects of education, culture, sports and health,
instead of spending billions on weapons. Much could
be done for the right to development of billions of
people worldwide using relatively few resources, if all
countries had the genuine political resolve to do so.
For its part, Cuba reiterates its decision to keep
sharing, to the best of our ability, our principal
resource, namely, the human capital created by the
Cuban Revolution and our best experiences.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for convening today’s debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his report (A/67/282).
The practice of sports is deeply rooted in Brazilian
culture and society. Access to sports constitutes a
fundamental social right enshrined in our Constitution.

4

The Brazilian Government firmly believes in the
potential of sport as an important factor for social
inclusiveness and development. We also consider it
a tool for fostering role-model values concurrently
with a solid upbringing for all our children and youth.
Accordingly, sport in Brazil is traditionally regarded
as being instrumental in forging good standards of
citizenship, thereby playing a special role in maintaining
a healthy social fabric
It is therefore with the utmost satisfaction that Brazil
welcomes the imminent adoption of draft resolution
A/67/L.26 on sport as a means to promote education,
health, development and peace, which we gladly
co-sponsor. That effort seems to be in close harmony
with chief initiatives and programmes undertaken
by Member States and international organizations in
relation to the advancement of sport in an integrated
manner consistent with measures for equitable and
inclusive social and economic development.
The Brazilian Government envisages sport as part of
a broader set of policy objectives that also encompasses
access to education and health. We believe that dealing
with sport in such an integrated and holistic way
contributes to creating conditions conducive to peace
and development.
Bearing that in mind, the Brazilian Government has
launched a series of initiatives that focus on multi-stake
partnerships with representative institutions from across
our civil society. For instance, we have undertaken a
programme that employs 12,000 inmates from State
prisons in manufacturing sports equipment, whose
output is used in other educational sports programmes
carried out by the Brazilian Government. In addition,
the so-called Second Half programme, which benefits
more than one million people, proposes part-time
sports activities to children and youngsters enrolled
in public schools. Likewise, pursuant to previous
recommendations on the subject, Brazil develops
international sports cooperation projects in partnership
with other developing countries, such as Benin,
Botswana, Kenya, Palestine, South Africa, Tanzania,
Uganda and Zambia. We remain engaged in increasing
and expanding the scope of those programmes with
other countries as well as in launching initiatives
in cooperation with United Nations agencies and
programmes.
We find ourselves at the beginning of an exciting
sport-centred decade. Over the next few years, Brazil
will host three sports mega-events — the International
12-61261

A/67/PV.42

Federation of Association Football (FIFA) World Cup
in 2013, next year, the FIFA World Cup in 2014, and the
Olympic and Paralympic Games in 2016. In the coming
years, sports will be at the top of the Brazilian social,
political and economic agenda. We welcome all to the
aforementioned events in Brazil.
Mr. Charles (Trinidad and Tobago), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
The decision to host these mega-events is consistent
with the priority granted to the promotion of sustainable
development and social inclusiveness. Hence the
Brazilian Government remains committed to fostering
and adopting public policies that ensure that hosting
those events will help generate more jobs, improve our
nationwide infrastructure and increase opportunities
for Brazilian youth. Brazil also hopes that the megaevents will provide an opportunity for us to share
experience in promoting sports as a means to achieve
social inclusiveness and enhance the development of
partnerships with other nations, especially developing
ones.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Baron
Pierre de Coubertin believed that building peace and
a better world required providing young people with a
sports education and opportunities to get involved with
sports. Thus it would be possible to create a lifestyle
based on the happiness that comes from effort, from the
educational value of a good example and from respect
for the fundamental ethical principles. That legacy
remains in full force, as was demonstrated by the
impeccable Olympic and Paralympic Games in London,
where maximum effort, unity, friendship and fair and
healthy competition filled our lives to overflowing and
flourished as common values of humankind.
Sport plays a relevant role in the promotion of
social development and is a means par excellence
for communication between peoples and for the
maintenance of world peace. That is why Costa Rica
welcomes the fact that the United Nations has included
it on its agenda.
Our country recognizes the potential of sport
as a universal practice that contributes to educating
people in the values of respect, diversity and tolerance.
We also recognize the value of sport as a means to
combat all forms of discrimination. Accordingly, we
must make the necessary efforts to ensure that sport
is fully included in our national development agendas.
Sports and physical activity must not be omitted or

12-61261

sidelined from the challenges that a country faces,
Quite the contrary, they should be part of the process
of transformation for a country’s full development. The
organizing committees of major international sports
events have recognized the legacy that games can leave
by raising awareness on matters such as social inclusion
and human rights and by fostering opportunities to
create and transform infrastructure with positive longlasting effects.
Last year, the General Assembly unanimously
adopted resolution 66/5, entitled “Building a peaceful
and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”.
Even more significant was the fact that it was the first
time in history that a resolution was co-sponsored by
the 193 States Members of the United Nations. Only
sport has been able to achieve that feat.
Sport is more than a luxury or a form of
entertainment; it is more than just winning medals.
Access to and participation in sport and in physical
activity are essential to lead a full and healthy life.
Moreover, sport has also proved to be an instrument for
the most disadvantaged, for public health and for social
inclusion, in particular when focused on education and
prevention. It empowers minorities and enables them
to have a dignified place in society, as the Paralympic
movement and streetfootballworld have accomplished.
Sport also has a strong impact on the global economy
in the creation of employment, in the development of
new undertakings and in public investment. The United
Nations and other international entities, including the
International Olympic Committee and the international
sports federations, have begun to recognize, beyond elite
sports, the enormous potential of widely participatory
sports as a generator of social change. Athletes can be
a valuable instrument in promoting social stability,
reconciliation and dialogue. As models for behaviour,
they can help raise awareness of matters such as
participation, non-discrimination, gender equality and
the rights of persons with disabilities.
For the first time in its history, San José, the capital
of Costa Rica, will host in February 2013 the Central
American Games, which were established just a few
years ago. The President of the Republic and the Mayor
of San José have expressed their total commitment to
the organization of those Games, as they are an excellent
opportunity to use sports to promote the values of
peace, human security and social development among
the Central American family.

5

A/67/PV.42

In addition to that effort, our country continues to
work shoulder to shoulder with various international
organizations related to sport. Along with the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Sport for
Development and Peace, Mr. Wilfried Lemke, and with
other Member States, we are promoting the initiative
to organize in Geneva a group of friends of sport for
development and peace to replicate the group that already
exists in New York. Together with the International
Olympic Committee and the National Olympic
Committee of Costa Rica, we are seeking opportunities
for cooperation using sport as an instrument of social
prevention. Together with the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, we are promoting the organization of
a programme for young people at social risk. Working
with the Alianza A Ganar, we have developed a
programme for training and employing youth through
sport. With the non-governmental organization Peace
and Sport, we are working to establish a regional forum
for peace and sport in Costa Rica. With regard to gender
matters, in 2011 we signed the Brighton Declaration on
Women and Sport.
We trust that the international community will
continue on its steady path towards achieving the ideals
that were outlined by Baron de Coubertin more than
one hundred years ago for the benefit of humankind.
Mr. Stone (Australia): Australia is committed to
the principles of sport for development and peace and to
the role the United Nations can play in furthering those
principles. We welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral on this subject introduced this morning
(A/67/282) and would like to take this opportunity to
thank the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Sport for Development and Peace, Mr. Wilfried Lemke,
for his ongoing efforts to promote the United Nations
work in this field. We would also like to thank Monaco
for introducing draft resolution A/67/L.26, which is
before us today. Australia is pleased to co-sponsor the
draft resolution.
Sport’s popularity, its capacity as a communication
platform and its ability to connect people make it a
tool that can be used to meet a range of development
objectives, including contributing to the Millennium
Development Goals. Australia, with a reputation as a
sporting nation, is well placed to use sport as a vehicle
to contribute to targeted development outcomes. The
Australian Sports Outreach Programme supports major
programmes in seven countries and provides grants for

6

smaller activities in over 40 countries in Africa, the
Caribbean, Asia and the Pacific.
The Australian Government’s approach to using
sport to meet development objectives identifies specific
development outcomes in two key areas where we
believe we can make a real difference and deliver real
results.
The first regards reducing the risk of
non-communicable diseases (NCDs), such as heart
disease, diabetes and stroke, which place a significant
burden on health systems in developing countries already
struggling to cope. They also reduce productivity and
household income, keeping poor people poor. Sport
can play a powerful role in addressing the risk factors
causing NCDs, including physical inactivity, unhealthy
diets and harmful tobacco and alcohol use.
In March 2012, Australia, in collaboration with
the World Health Organization and the Secretariat of
the Pacific Community, convened a Healthy Islands
Through Sport Forum in Brisbane. This regional
meeting of senior officials of Pacific ministries of health
and sport aimed to facilitate ongoing collaboration and
multisectoral action to address the risk factors that
cause non-communicable diseases.
Secondly, the Australian Government programmes
emphasize the role of sport in enhancing the lives of
people with disabilities. Sport can foster the inclusion
and well-being of persons with disabilities and facilitate
social inclusion. For instance, Australian activities
have been provided to increase community awareness
about people with disability in Fiji, where the Inspiring
Fijians rugby team – a combined rugby team from Fiji’s
special schools — playing in front of large crowds
and inclusive community sports festivals have helped
promote more positive attitudes towards people with
disability.
Australia also has a number of programmes to
address the involvement of women and girls in sportrelated activities. These include the sport leadership
grants for women, which provide opportunities for
training and skills development to enable women to
take on leadership and decision-making roles in sport.
Australia recognizes the need for all parties around
the world to be vigilant in protecting the integrity of
sport. Issues such as doping in sports and illegal sports
betting have great potential to undermine the ability of
sport to be used as a vehicle for development.

12-61261

A/67/PV.42

Mr. Williams (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on sport for development and
peace (A/67/282), as well as the latest draft resolution
(A/67/L.26) on sport as a means to promote education,
health, development and peace.
The year 2012 has been special for the United
Kingdom, as London played host to the summer
Olympic and Paralympic Games. We were proud that
the Games set many new records: sporting records
and records for crowds, for television audiences and
for unbridled spirit. Throughout our Olympic and
Paralympic Games campaigning we hoped to ensure that
the Games would leave a lasting legacy. We were proud
and grateful to see parts of that legacy — specifically
the International Inspiration sports legacy programme
and General Assembly resolution 66/5 on the Olympic
Truce — mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report.
We would like to share some additional information
about those actions and their follow-up.
International Inspiration is London 2012’s
international sports legacy programme. At the
Singapore bidding event in 2005, we vowed to work
towards reaching out to young people around the
world to connect them to the inspirational power of
the Games, in order to inspire them to choose sport.
So far, International Inspiration has enriched the lives
of at least 11 million children in 20 countries around
the world, through high-quality and inclusive physical
education, sport and play and is on course to reach its
target of 12 million children by 2014.
The United Kingdom is also proud to have had
the opportunity to sponsor the 2011 resolution on the
Olympic Truce. We were extremely grateful to all
193 Member States for their sponsorship. The United
Kingdom’s aspiration has been to mobilize the Olympic
Truce resolution around the world. We hope to show
that there are many aspects of the resolution that can be
developed to promote peace.
With that in mind, we saw an opportunity to mobilize
sport and the ideals of the Olympic Truce through the
conflict prevention work of our diplomatic missions.
Working in partnership with Member States, National
Olympic Committees, parliamentarians and civil
society, including faith groups and non-governmental
organizations, we were able to deliver over 80 Olympic
Truce activities on every continent. Examples include
organizing a range of activities in collaboration with

12-61261

the Northern Uganda Youth Development Centre to
celebrate the impact of peace on young people, including
sporting events, a peace march and work within the
community; and co-hosting a football tournament and
clinic bringing people together from a diverse range of
communities in the Philippines, in order to help bridge
the gap between Christians and Muslims.
However, none of that would have been possible
without the participation and cooperation of many
different partners. We would like to give special thanks
to the Secretary-General, the President of the General
Assembly and Mr. Wilfried Lemke, Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Sport for Development and
Peace, for their support for the Olympic Truce work.
The Secretary-General joined the British Foreign
Secretary on the eve of the opening ceremony of the
2012 London Games, on 27 July, where both recognized
the importance of the Olympic Truce.
The United Kingdom would also like to extend our
warm wishes to future Games hosts. This month, British
Government ministers visited both Moscow and Rio for
high-level meetings as part of my country’s Olympic
handover and commitment to a long-term legacy. We
welcome our agreements with Russia, Brazil and the
International Olympic Committee to support promotion
of the ideals of the Olympic Truce, and we remain ready
and willing to continue that work into the future. We
encourage all Member States to support and promote
the ideals of the Olympic Truce internationally and
domestically. Finally, we encourage all Member States
to support Mr. Lemke’s mandate and his work.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
The Russian Federation highly commends the work
of the United Nations in promoting international
sport cooperation and contributing to enhancing
mutual understanding among peoples and achieving
understanding among civilizations. We are witnessing
a difficult period in international relations in terms
of globalization and dealing with the consequences
of the global financial and economic crisis, along
with increasing social, intercultural and international
conflicts and bouts of extremism.
Given those issues, the international community
must, more than ever before, continue its efforts aimed
at ensuring that sport — with its massive potential to
promote unity — becomes a motor for comprehensive
economic and social development and a means for
achieving solidarity, tolerance and cultural diversity.

7

A/67/PV.42

We believe that sport is a powerful tool for
educating young people in mutual respect, tolerance,
and rejection of xenophobia. Of particular importance
today, it can protect young people from the influence
of destructive forces that provoke negative phenomena,
including terrorism.
The Russian Federation supports the idea that
sport should develop according to its own rules and
independently of the political situation. In particular, it
should not serve as a pretext for intrigues or blackmail.
In that regard, we welcome draft resolution A/67/L.26,
submitted by Monaco and Tunisia, the chairs of the
Group of Friends of Sport for Development and Peace,
on sport as a means to promote education, health,
development and peace. In our view, the document refers
to the efforts currently under way by Member States
and international entities aimed at developing sport and
enhancing its contribution in addressing many serious
contemporary problems. The Russian Federation is
pleased to have sponsored the draft resolution. The
integration of sports ties into development efforts is an
important priority in the Russian Federation’s foreign
policy and is constantly borne in mind by the Russian
Government.
As is well known, the Russian city of Sochi has
been selected as the site of the XXII Winter Olympic
Games and the XI Winter Paralympic Games in
2014. We consider that selection to be a very positive
assessment by the international community of the
achievements of Russian sport and recognition of the
Russian Federation’s successful social, economic and
political development efforts in recent years. We hope
that the Winter Olympic Games in Sochi will go down
in history as one of the most innovative ever.

environmental protection and in creating an inclusive
environment. We are convinced that the upcoming
Olympic Games will foster further economic growth
in the region and enable Sochi to become a worldclass resort and business centre. That, in turn, will
ensure the improvement of the living conditions of the
people throughout the entire region. The Olympic and
Paralympic Games will serve to further positive change
in Russian society. More attention will be provided to
protecting the environment and integrating people with
disabilities into the active life of society.
Sport is a universal language of communication.
Organized sport competitions bring together
representatives from various countries, cultures and
religions, which reveals the major unifying potential of
sport as an effective channel for advancing the culture
of peace and dialogue among civilizations, and we
should take full advantage of that potential.
Mr. Ovsyanko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): In
October 2011, the General Assembly unanimously
adopted resolution 66/5, “Building a peaceful and
better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”,
sponsored by 193 States. In adopting that resolution,
the Member States affirmed their commitment to
the Olympic ideals, one of the most important of
which is non-discrimination. As it is set out in the
Olympic Charter, any form of religious or political
discrimination is incompatible with belonging to the
Olympic Movement.

Many of the preparation efforts are being carried
out for the very first time, and whatever remains will
become part of the legacy of the Olympic Games. One
of the innovations is the close proximity of the sporting
and infrastructure sites, which will facilitate movement
and avoid transportation problems. We are building
modern sporting installations in Sochi, especially for
the 2014 Olympic Games, with the use of cutting-edge
technology and construction aimed at protecting the
environment.

The resolution called for reconciliation during the
Olympic Games through the establishment of peaceful
conditions and safe travel and participation for the
athletes and others taking part in the Games. In practice,
the experience of the most recent Olympiad showed
that not every State fulfilled its proper obligations as
laid down by the General Assembly and the Olympic
Movement. It is regrettable to note the trend, which
was vividly apparent during the Olympic Games in
London, of exploiting international sports events for
the purposes of putting pressure on sovereign States.
Such acts not only undermine the spirit and letter of the
Olympic Charter and General Assembly resolutions,
they also devalue the principles of the Olympics and of
sport as a whole.

We remain hopeful that the Sochi Olympic
Games will set new standards for the hosting of
major international sporting events and will help to
introduce cutting-edge technology in construction and

It is also disturbing to see the trend that turned sport
from being an expression of the great achievements
and triumphant potential of the human body, will
and mind to being a contest between sponsors and

8

12-61261

A/67/PV.42

pharmacological giants. Partial judges, doping scandals
and international Olympic officials who vote using
double standards — all of that conspires to prevent
sport’s greatest achievements from working for the
harmonious development of humankind and the creation
of a peaceful society concerned with preserving human
dignity. We are convinced that the combined efforts of
the international community, when it demonstrates the
necessary political will, are capable of putting an end to
such negative trends.
We call for strengthening the role of the General
Assembly and its leadership in the effort to develop
the international Olympic Movement, combat such
negative influences in sport and support initiatives to
expand human development through sport. We believe
that the time has come to create clear mechanisms
for cooperation between the leadership of the United
Nations, including the President of the General Assembly
and the Secretary-General, and the International
Olympic Committee, with the goal of working together
to observe the Olympic Truce among Member States
and enhancing international cooperation.
Mr. Milubi (South Africa): It is an honour and
privilege for South Africa to participate in this
important debate on sport as a means to promote
education, health, development and peace, and we
thank the Secretary-General for his latest report on
sport for development and peace (A/67/282). We have
noted the tremendous initiatives and national policies
and strategies that some Member States have developed
to enable sport to act as a catalyst for achieving many
positive aspects of development.
This debate comes just a few months after the
2012 London Olympic and Paralympic Games. As the
Secretary-General’s report clearly states, the London
Olympics, just as other sporting events have done,
“brought together diverse communities affected
by conflict to participate in sporting, cultural
and educational activities to promote conflict
prevention and peace” (A/67/282, para. 6).
We are also meeting on the eve of the African Cup of
Nations soccer tournament, to be held in South Africa
in January 2013. We hope it will be an opportunity
to foster greater understanding and tolerance among
different peoples in the spirit of nurturing peace.
It is worth mentioning that the legacy of the 2010
International Federation of Association Football World

12-61261

Cup stretches beyond the obvious tangibles such as
the stadiums, roads, airports, new equipment acquired
for the police, emergency medical services and
other Government services. In South Africa we have
experienced how sport can serve as an inspiring force
for unity and peaceful change. Sport also supports local
economic development and the creation of jobs through
the numerous income-generating activities linked to
its practice. Before the beginning of the World Cup,
President Jacob Zuma initiated the 1Goal campaign,
with a view to advancing efforts towards achieving
education for all.
South Africa views sport as an important part
of education, and the campaign is part of a range of
national activities aimed at achieving universal access
to education. In recognition of that initiative and South
Africa’s prioritization of education, Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon invited President Zuma to be one of the 10
inaugural Member State Champions for the Education
First Initiative, whose purpose is to provide support to
the Secretary-General in ensuring that the initiative
enjoys global visibility and success.
As is clearly highlighted in the Secretary-General’s
report, South Africa’s national sport and recreation
plan emphasizes the health benefits of an active nation.
Within the plan there is a special focus on youth, with
the understanding that increased physical fitness can
improve children’s resistance to some diseases and that
sport can help reduce the rate of adolescent pregnancies,
which bring with them higher risks. The programmes
proposed in the plan can also be used to reduce stigma
and increase the social and economic integration of
people living with HIV and AIDS.
In implementing our mass participation programme,
Sport and Recreation South Africa, our experience has
been that using sport to promote peace is extremely
effective in programmes at the community level, since
they directly involve those affected by conflict and
social tension. Sport also offers a sense of normality,
especially to young people, in times of instability. As
an example, the programme Peace Players International
used basketball to help with the positive development
of the young people of KwaZulu-Natal. Trained
coaches served as mentors, as well as educators, and
used interactive games to reach children in discussing
sensitive topics, such as HIV and AIDS prevention,
gender roles and drugs and alcohol awareness.
The South African Department of Sport and
Recreation and the German Development Bank have
9

A/67/PV.42

begun to roll out the South Africa Sport for Change
programme. It showcases sport as a catalyst for change
with great potential for youth development, using sport
as a medium to create positive behaviour and attitudes
and to reduce the factors conducive to the social ills that
afflict young people and society. Sport is an important
tool for bringing people around the world together to
share their talents, regardless of race. It has the power
to help get young people and others off the streets
and at the same time to promote health, education,
development and peace.
Sport has been recognized as a powerful tool
through its contributions to the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals. The SecretaryGeneral has said that sport has a crucial role to play in
the efforts of the United Nations to improve the lives
of people around the world; it builds bridges between
individuals and across communities, providing fertile
ground for sowing the seeds of development and peace.
In South Africa, sport has played a crucial role in the
demise of the apartheid system and the creation of a
new society since 1994.
In conclusion, South Africa supports the adoption
of the draft resolution entitled “Sport as a means to
promote education, health, development and peace”
(A/67/L.26) by the General Assembly.
Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): It is indeed an honour for
me speak on agenda item 12, “Sport for peace and
development”. Jamaica has, in spite of its relatively
small size, enjoyed a long tradition of excellence in
sport, which predates the 1948 Olympics and the
Helsinki Games of 1952, when our sprint relay team
struck gold. The magnificent world-class performance
of our athletes in 2008, which was repeated at this year’s
London Olympics, truly showed the power of sport
to unite the world and its potential for development.
That significant achievement by our athletes takes
on added significance as this year marks the fiftieth
anniversary of our independence. It is with that history
and tradition in mind that Jamaica decided to become,
once again, a sponsor of the draft resolution on this
agenda item (A/67/L.26). In that connection we have
also become a member of the Group of Friends of Sport
for Development and Peace.
In spite of the limited resources in our region and
the relatively small population groups, there is an
urgent need to develop strategies throughout the region
to maximize resources and ensure the greatest positive

10

impact among the population. Notwithstanding those
circumstances, it is critical that sport become the
focal point around which to stage our development
programme. It has tremendous potential for all members
of society, in particular the youth. It is also important
to ensure that Government policies are aligned with
that objective and that the potential for the development
benefits of sports is duly recognized.
Sport has transcended the borders of the race tracks
and indoor facilities. The reality is that it involves
issues of health, tourism, social development and
economic advancement, which are of common interest
to us all. More importantly, sport provides a vehicle and
a strategy, not only for Government but also for various
other sectors of society, to systematically reduce
poverty, build peace, reduce conflict and create wealth
within communities.
Much has been done to institutionalize and
formalize successful initiatives in Jamaica over the
years. To that end, sport for development has become a
national priority, as demonstrated by the urgency being
given by the Government in finalizing the revised
National Sports Policy. The National Sports Policy for
Jamaica highlights the critical importance of sport in
the achievement of Jamaica’s development goals and
national growth. Sport is viewed by the Government of
Jamaica as a cross-cutting vehicle that will contribute
to achieving national development and a healthy
society. Sport is also considered a sustainable process
that builds leadership and supports healthy behaviour
and lifestyles as well as peaceful coexistence among
communities.
Women continue, of course, to excel in most
sporting events. They are integrally involved in the
decision-making process relating to sport policies
and are included in a number of executive boards and
coaching staffs. At the community level, sport has been
used as a major vehicle for mobilizing residents for
various community development programmes, and, in
Jamaica, sport has become an ingrained component of
our daily lives.
Sport is included in the school curriculums in
Jamaica, from the elementary level to the tertiary level.
The University of the West Indies offers post-graduate
programmes in sports medicine and other critical areas.
The University of Technology now hosts the Caribbean
School of Sport Sciences, which offers three bachelor of
science electives, namely, coaching, sports management

12-61261

A/67/PV.42

and athletic training, which focuses on physiology and
physiotherapy. Our specialist institution, the G. C. Foster
College of Physical Education and Sport, maintains a
high standard of excellence in a wide-ranging set of
programmes that seek to address the gaps that now
exist in sport-related professions.
It is clear that in order to maximize the potential
of sport being used as a means to promote education,
health, development and peace, there is a need to
redesign the image and understanding of the term
“sport”. It must address the means by which initiatives
can be implemented through the provision of the
necessary resources. That may be achieved through
public- and private-sector partnership. In realization
of the important role that sport plays in society, it is
also imperative that its integrity be preserved. It is for
that reason that the Jamaica Anti-Doping Commission
promotes the development and maintenance of a
dope-free environment. Finally, Jamaica fully endorses
the recommendation to strengthen the work in each
State in the area of sport as a vehicle for the promotion
of education, development and peace and pledges to
work collaboratively with other countries in that regard.
Mr. Berger (Germany): The report of the SecretaryGeneral entitled “Sport for development and peace:
mainstreaming a versatile instrument” (A/67/282)
underlines once again the important role that sport
can play in the different areas of development and
peacebuilding.
Sport activities bring together people from different
regional, cultural and religious backgrounds and help
to overcome cultural, linguistic and other barriers.
Sport plays a valuable role in contributing to social
cohesiveness and rapprochement between cultures and
peoples. Moreover, sport programmes can foster social
inclusion and help overcome discrimination against,
and the marginalization of, women and disabled
persons. Sport can also help to promote the achievement
of the internationally agreed development goals. Sport
programmes can support social integration, especially
after periods of conflict, and such programmes can,
for example, play a major role in the rehabilitation
and reintegration of child soldiers and other youths,
an aspect that Germany follows closely as Chair of
the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.
We are grateful to the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Sport for Development and

12-61261

Peace, Mr. Wilfried Lemke, for bringing together
and coordinating the various actors in the field of
sport and development — multilateral actors such as
the United Nations entities, national Governments,
non-governmental organizations and civil society
organizations. The Office on Sport for Development
and Peace plays a key role in connecting people,
promoting peace and mutual understanding and driving
the Millennium Development Goals through sport.
As a member of the Group of Friends for Sport
for Development and Peace, we clearly see the added
value of the Office’s work. That is the reason why the
German Government decided to support the Special
Adviser and the United Nations Office on Sport for
Development and Peace. As we know, the Special
Adviser covers sport in all its dimensions, from major
world sport events, such as the Olympic and Paralympic
games in London, to the grass-roots activities and
non-governmental organizations in many developing
countries. The Youth Leadership Camps developed by
the Office are, in our view, a showcase of what such
cooperation between the various actors in achieving the
common goal can look like, and it shows how important
the work of the Office and the Special Adviser is for the
development of programmes as well as the coordination
of the various actors. Germany is proud to be one of the
hosts of the Youth Leadership Camps in 2012.
We have also been, as I said, one of the main
supporters of the Office’s activities since 2008, and
our clear intention is to continue with our support in
the future. However, the predictability of funding is
of utmost importance, and we would therefore like to
take the opportunity of this debate to express our full
support for Mr. Lemke’s approach, which he outlined
in the main lines of action in the report, in order to
broaden financial support for his Office. I think it is
very important that many Member States, as we have
seen in today’s debate, are very much interested in this
topic and support sport. They also support the Office
and the work of the Special Adviser.
In May 2013 in Berlin Germany will organize a
World Sport Minister Conference, where we would like
to welcome all Member States. I would like to encourage
Member States that share the same objectives as the
Office for Sport for Development and Peace to consider
becoming a member of the Group of Friends. I am
convinced that a large and active group can contribute
significantly to achieving our common goals.

11

A/67/PV.42

Let me finish by thanking the co-facilitators,
Monaco and Tunisia, for preparing the draft resolution
we will adopt today.
Mrs. Davidovich (Israel): The State of Israel
strongly supports promoting sport to advance
education, health, development and peace, and we are
a proud sponsor of the draft resolution to be adopted
today. My delegation appreciates the report of the
Secretary-General on this important subject (A/67/282)
and welcomes the new Action Plan on Sport for
Development and Peace proposed therein.
Throughout history, sport has played a vital role
in the lives of people around the world. Sport acts
as a platform for engaging youth, women and people
with disabilities, promoting dialogue and coexistence
and fostering development. Sport promotes universal
values such as honour, teamwork and tolerance. It helps
us transcend our differences and reminds us of our
commonalities.
Sport has also been a powerful tool for progress
and development. It has played an important role
in advancing the Millennium Development Goals,
including the promotion of gender equality. Sport
fosters empowerment and self-esteem; it provides
women with a chance to come together, learn new
skills and develop leadership abilities. Israel welcomes
the Thematic Working Group on Sport and Gender,
of the Sport for Development and Peace International
Working Group, which highlights best practices and
contributes to advancing gender equality around the
world.
Israel deeply recognizes the value of sport. In
2009, the Israeli Government created the Culture
and Sports Ministry in order to better harness the
benefits of sport for Israeli society. In 2011, Israel,
together with the Government of Germany, hosted the
first international conference on “Sport as a mediator
between Cultures”, with the support of UNESCO and
other organizing partners, including Football for Peace
International. The United Nations Special Adviser
on Sport for Development and Peace, Mr. Wilfried
Lemke, attended, as did ministers, academics, and
representatives of civil society and the private sector
from around the world. It was an important platform to
develop an understanding of how sport can contribute
to education, social development, peacebuilding and
cross-culture reconciliation. It was also an important
opportunity to bring and devise strategies for using
sport in those fields.
12

The Sports Authority within the Culture and Sports
Ministry operates multicultural sport activities in line
with the Ministry’s vision, which regards sport as an
important cultural stimulus that minimizes differences
while stressing commonalties. In that spirit, the Office
regularly organizes activities that bring together
Israelis, Palestinians and Jordanians. Two successful
programmes are Football 4 Peace and Ultimate Peace
Frisbee.
Israeli civil society also prides itself on its sportfor-peace accomplishments. The Twinned Peace Sport
Schools programme at the Peres Center for Peace in Tel
Aviv is the longest-running coexistence sport project
in the Middle East. Every year, it hosts sports leagues
for nearly 2,000 children from twinned communities
across Israel and the Palestinian Authority to foster
coexistence and mutual respect.
The Israeli non-governmental organization Mifalot
oversees more than 300 programmes that use football to
foster peace and tolerance across our region. Mifalot’s
annual sporting event brings together 20,000 youths
from Israel, the Palestinian Authority and Jordan as
part of an effort to change perceptions and stereotypes.
On the heels of its remarkable success in Israel, the
programme has expanded to Cameroon, Rwanda, Haiti
and many other countries.
In Israel, Mifalot also promotes gender equality in
minority communities. For example, in Bedouin villages
in southern Israel, initiatives aimed at empowering
young girls have enjoyed significant success. Maryam
Abu-Ghanem, a resident of Tel Sheva, became Israel’s
first female Bedouin sports coach this year.
Finally, on behalf of my country, I would like to
thank the Special Adviser on Sport, Mr. Wilfried
Lemke, for his continuing dedication to the noble
ideal of using sport to promote tolerance and mutual
understanding. Israel continues to value the importance
of sport in promoting awareness, mutual understanding
and a culture of peace. As our President, Shimon Peres,
once said, “You do not wait for peace in order to use
sport for peace; you can use sport to achieve peace”.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 12.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/67/L.26, entitled “Sports as a means to
promote education, health, development and peace”.

12-61261

A/67/PV.42

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, the
following countries have also become sponsors of the
draft resolution: Andorra, Argentina, the Bahamas, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, China, Croatia,
Egypt, Eritrea, Granada, Guinea, Haiti, Jamaica,
Japan, Lithuania, Madagascar, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Norway, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, the Republic
of Moldova, the Russian Federation, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia, South Africa, Switzerland, Thailand,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt A/67/L.26?
Draft resolution A/67/L.26 was adopted (resolution
67/17).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 12?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of
and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
(a) Notes by the Secretary-General (A/67/82
and A/67/270)
(b) Draft resolution (A/67/L.25)
Agenda items 113 and 119
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
(a) Reports of the Secretary-General (A/67/201
and A/67/257)
(b) Note by the Secretary-General (A/67/373)
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mongolia to introduce draft resolution
A/67/L.25.
Mr. Badral (Mongolia): It is my honour to present
to the General Assembly draft resolution A/67/L.25,

12-61261

entitled “Education for Democracy”. The list of
sponsors is long, but let me quickly read out all of them.
Their names are worthy of being announced loudly and
proudly, as if we were still at the unforgettable and
grandiose opening of the outstanding Olympic Games
in Beijing and London. They are Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, India, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico,
Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands,
Nigeria, Norway, Peru, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Serbia,
Slovenia, Sweden, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, the
United States of America, Uruguay and, of course, my
own country, Mongolia.
Mongolia extends its sincere thanks to all
the sponsors for their unwavering support. I am
also grateful to China, Cuba, Egypt, Iran, South
Africa, Venezuela and other Member States for their
strong interest, active participation and substantive
contributions to disseminating and improving the draft
during consultations.
As the former Chair of the International Conference
of New or Restored Democracies and as the current
Chair of the Community of Democracies, Mongolia
has made education for democracy the top priority
during its chairmanship. In line with that priority,
we have submitted the draft resolution on the subject
and conducted numerous informal consultations with
Member Governments in order to seek their views and
improve the text so that it could become a consensus
resolution. All delegations that took part in those
consultations expressed their support.
The text before us is not ideal, and I know that the
sponsors and other participating countries are not fully
satisfied. Nevertheless, a flexible reading of the current
text should reveal that all concepts and interpretations
with respect to education for democracy that Members
wanted to include from their perspective are present,
although some explicit language may be missing. We
therefore consider that the text is balanced and meets
the basic needs of all countries. We have substantially
scaled back our own initial ambitions in order to
accommodate the interests of all.
The importance of the subject under consideration
is well known. As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has
noted, developing a culture of democracy and fostering
global citizenship are becoming part of the most
13

A/67/PV.42

pressing priorities of the international community. All
that embraces education for democracy. The sponsors
strongly believe that the main outcome of the draft
resolution will be to launch a focused discussion on
how to help educate our people in the culture of peace
and democracy and a culture of tolerance of and respect
for different civilizations and religions, as well as in
upholding the values of freedom and human rights.
The draft resolution, once adopted, will contribute to
fostering global citizenship, with all Members equally
playing a proactive role and globally sharing their own
national best practices in education for democracy
through a common platform.
On behalf of the sponsors, I ask the General
Assembly to adopt the draft resolution without a vote.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Beviglia Zampetti (European Union): I will
address the follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit, and then I will add a few words on the note by
the Secretary-General in A/67/373.
With regard to the Millennium Summit outcome,
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The acceding
country Croatia; the candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland
and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as the Republic of
Moldova, Georgia and Ukraine, align themselves with
this declaration.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
entitled “Accelerating progress towards the Millennium
Development Goals: options for sustained and inclusive
growth and issues for advancing the United Nations
development agenda beyond 2015” (A/67/257) and are
grateful for the opportunity to exchange views on the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
We believe that our first priority must be to increase
the impact of our development cooperation in order to
make as much progress as possible on the MDGs before
2015. There has been encouraging progress. However,
it has varied significantly both among MDG targets and
among regions. With developing countries in the lead,
we must continue our common efforts towards that end,
focusing on the MDGs that are the most off-track and
the most vulnerable.

14

The MDGs are central to EU development
efforts. The €1 billion EU MDG Initiative, designed
specifically to increase impact and boost tangible
progress on the most off-track MDG targets, has now
been implemented. The new EU Agenda for Change
development framework aims to ensure the most
effective and long-lasting impact by concentrating
our actions where they bring added value and can be
a catalyst for more sustainable and inclusive growth in
developing countries.
Secondly, looking beyond 2015, we recognize the
power that the MDG framework has had in catalysing
worldwide action on development. We should build on
that achievement. A solid assessment of the current
MDGs needs to be undertaken in view of the September
2013 special event to follow up on efforts made towards
achieving the MDGs.
We believe that the Millennium Declaration
(resolution 55/2) and the set of related United Nations
documents, as well as the outcome document of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(resolution 66/288, annex), provide a comprehensive
and ambitious foundation for the post-2015 period.
The post-2015 development agenda could build on
and improve the MDG framework, modernizing it and
strengthening weak or missing issues.
In that context, without diverting efforts from the
achievement of the MDGs, we would like to stress
the importance of developing SDGs — sustainable
development goals — that are coherent with and
integrated into the United Nations development
agenda beyond 2015, with a view to an overarching
framework for the post-2015 period. They need to
address the key global challenges in the years to
come and fully encompass the three dimensions of
sustainable development in a balanced and synergistic
way. They should be linked to possible concrete
targets and indicators and be universal and applicable
to all countries, while allowing for differentiated
approaches among countries. We also consider it
very important that the upcoming process to design
the sustainable development goals be inclusive, with
the full contribution and engagement of all relevant
stakeholders.
Improving the current framework while keeping it
simple will be our common challenge. I think that we
can all agree that goals are useful only if limited in
number, action-oriented and easily communicable, and

12-61261

A/67/PV.42

if they can operationalize agreed principles and shared
objectives on the ground.
Let me close my statement by saying that the
European Union and its member States look forward
to continued and constructive discussions and dialogue
with all partners in the run-up to September 2013.
I would also like to say a few words with regard to the
note by the Secretary-General in A/67/373. The EU and
its member States thank the Secretary-General for the
note, which transmits the report of the Director-General
of the World Health Organization (WHO) on options
for strengthening and facilitating multisectoral action
for the prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases through effective partnership.
We believe that, before being considered in the
General Assembly plenary in New York, those options
should be discussed further in Geneva in the context
of the development of the WHO global action plan on
non-communicable diseases. In addition, that is where
the relevant public-health expertise resides.
The Director-General’s report presents six
necessary functions relating to collaboration and
partnerships. However, rather than an analysis of them,
we are presented with a number of questions that have
a wider scope. Furthermore, those functions seem to
be based on a vertical, disease- or treatment-based
approach. We think that more emphasis should be put
on health determinants and preventive public policy
measures, which can be developed in consultation
with targeted stakeholders, including civil society.
We also wish to stress the need for a broader scope of
research for public health interventions, policies and
capacities — not only research and development efforts
for specific products.
However, we appreciate that the report addresses
the necessity of coordination. We could not agree more.
We would like to see the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases taking a more strategic,
systemic and global approach, driven by policies
across all relevant sectors, under WHO leadership and
guidance and as articulated through the global action
plan to be adopted at the World Health Assembly in
May next year.
Finally, we would like to acknowledge the role of
the WHO as the directing and coordinating authority
for health within the United Nations system. The
challenges posed by non-communicable diseases are

12-61261

complex and multifaceted. The key is to strengthen both
international and multi-stakeholder collaboration and
to ensure a coordinated, system-wide response through
a health-in-all-policies approach. We believe that
that response should be delivered within the existing
resources, and we consider that WHO is uniquely
placed to provide leadership on that critical challenge
for global health and development.
Mr. Goddard (Barbados): On behalf of the
14 member States of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), I wish to deliver this statement on agenda
item 113, “Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit”.
At the outset, the Caribbean Community expresses
its appreciation for the note by the Secretary-General
(A/67/373), which transmitted, in a timely manner,
the report of the Director-General of the World
Health Organization on options for strengthening and
facilitating multisectoral action for the prevention
and control of non-communicable diseases through
effective partnership. While the Caribbean Community
notes that the report does not emphasize the importance
of regional coordination mechanisms and the efforts
to address the fundamental challenges posed by
non-communicable diseases (NCDs), we are of the view
that the report is a good analysis of the experiences of
using multisectoral mechanisms to address other health
issues.
The Caribbean Community strongly agrees that
coordinating mechanisms are important at all levels
for the effective implementation of national, regional
and global multisectoral plans to address NCDs. In
our subregion, for example, thus far two States have
established national commissions and another has
developed a partners forum with a view to addressing
the incidence and prevalence of those diseases.
CARICOM also avails itself of this opportunity to
commend the World Health Organization (WHO) on
the creation of the Global Non-communicable Disease
Network, NCDnet. It recognizes that that mechanism
is an excellent starting point for bringing together
actors to raise awareness about, begin action towards
and assist the implementation of the Global Action Plan
for the Prevention and Control of Non-Communicable
Diseases.
With particular reference to the five options put
forward in the report, the Caribbean Community
is especially supportive of option 3, which relates

15

A/67/PV.42

to forming a coordinated network. We believe that
that option is both the most appropriate and the most
feasible in the short term, given the scope, scale and,
most important, the urgency of the rising prevalence
of NCDs. The option presents many features necessary
for a successful partnership to promote multisectoral
approaches to addressing the issue of NCDs.
In that regard, CARICOM supports the key role
that the WHO could and should play in such a global
partnership as the technical lead on health. We also hold
the view, however, that the technology of partnership
requires resources, innovation and creativity in order
to facilitate its effective functioning. Therefore, both
resources and technical assistance would be required
to ensure the effectiveness and desired impact of
any partnership. Should adequate resources become
available to support the required partnership, the
Caribbean Community could also consider a centralized
and formalized partnership, as presented as option 5 in
the aforementioned report.
The Caribbean Community also wishes to
commend the WHO for the timely development of
the second global action plan, for 2013 to 2020, as it
will serve, along with the Political Declaration of the
High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the
Prevention and Control of Non-communicable Diseases
(resolution 66/2, annex), as the principal multisectoral
compass for the global coordinating mechanism. We
also applaud the WHO for identifying and promoting
the “25 by 25” target — to reduce non-communicable
diseases by 25 per cent by 2025 — and for the extensive
process completed to develop a global monitoring
framework. The Caribbean Community looks forward
to the presentation of the elements of that framework
to the General Assembly in the not-too-distant future.
The Caribbean Community agrees that there
is a need for multisectoral plans and policies, to be
developed and implemented at the national level, and
for a partnership to assist in that regard. We also share
the view that they should be tailored in keeping with
national settings as well as with political, technical
and operational needs. At the same time, those efforts
are to be complemented by a global partnership
that will support and enhance the development and
implementation of such policies nationally, regionally
and globally.
The Caribbean Community also wishes to recall the
General Assembly’s request, in the previously mentioned

16

Political Declaration, for a report to be submitted at its
sixty-eighth session, in preparation for a comprehensive
review and assessment in 2014 of the progress achieved
in the prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases. In that connection, CARICOM expresses its
preference to receive the report during the sixty-eighth
session, at the end of December 2013, in order to ensure
that it contains the most current information and that
there is sufficient time for its consideration and so that
it can contribute to preparations for the comprehensive
review of the progress achieved in the prevention and
control of NCDs.
We are aware that further discussions are required
on this issue. CARICOM is therefore of the view that all
Member States should have the opportunity to participate
in discussions to determine the scope of, and further
details related to, the partnership. Within this context,
however, should there be overwhelming support for
option 3, the Caribbean Community would encourage
international solidarity with respect to obtaining the
initial resources necessary for the commencement of
the process by the WHO, in collaboration with other
relevant United Nations agencies.
As we conclude, the Caribbean Community
urges delegations to recall that 60 per cent of deaths
worldwide — 80 per cent of which are in developing
countries — are due to non-communicable diseases.
The percentage of deaths due to NCDs is also expected
to increase in some parts of the world in the near future.
NCDs can therefore be seen as a critical challenge to
development and to health in general. Consequently,
the Caribbean Community supports the inclusion of
NCDs as one of the issues to be discussed in relation
to the post-2015 development agenda in the context of
global health challenges.
Ms. Saban (United States of America): We realize
that there are a number of important items being
discussed today. Our comments will pertain only to
agenda item 113 and the report of the World Health
Organization Director-General on non-communicable
diseases, transmitted in the note by the SecretaryGeneral (A/67/373).
The United States strongly believes that
multisectoral action is critical to both preventing
non-communicable diseases (NCDs) and managing
their long-term consequences. The United States is
currently implementing its first multisectoral national
prevention strategy. The National Prevention Council,

12-61261

A/67/PV.42

led by our Surgeon General, works across the United
States Government and with private and public
partners to actively engage all sectors and levels of
society in improving the health and well-being of our
communities.
The High-level Meeting of the General Assembly
on the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable
Diseases and associated meetings were important
opportunities for Member States to consider best
practices for multisectoral action and to convene and
collaborate with civil society and the private sector.
Energy and momentum to follow through on the spirit
of the Political Declaration of that meeting (resolution
66/2, annex) and to deliver on its major outcomes have
been sustained through the engagement of the many
stakeholders.
The Political Declaration requested that the
Secretary-General, in close collaboration with the
World Health Organization (WHO), develop options
to strengthen and facilitate multisectoral action. The
United States welcomes the report’s exploration of
those options, appropriately focused on national-level
action and the leadership role of Governments in
partnerships with civil society, the private sector and
other stakeholders.
Country-level implementation of evidence-based,
cost-effective interventions will be central to reducing
premature deaths from NCDs by 25 per cent by 2025,
in concert with other voluntary global targets. To reach
those targets, there is a need for greater dissemination
among Member States of guidelines, best practices and
lessons learned on practical, effective, sustainable and
widely applicable approaches to multisectoral action
at the national level. At all levels, partnerships should
serve to foster an environment conducive to public
health and to healthy choices.
The United States fully endorses the leadership
role of the WHO, as the primary specialized United
Nations agency on health, in facilitating coordinated
action among United Nations agencies, development
banks and other regional or international organizations.
The United States notes the various options for global
collaboration to promote and accelerate country action.
We agree with the report’s statement that a single,
stand-alone partnership would not be sufficient to
cover the scope and scale of NCDs. Rather, multiple
innovative partnerships, collaborations and coordinated
independent efforts are needed to address diverse

12-61261

aspects of the challenge and engage the landscape of
actors inside and outside the health sector. Additionally,
flexible options that allow for the evolution of the global
response to NCDs should be pursued.
Along with the recently finalized global monitoring
framework, the updated WHO Global Action Plan on
the Prevention and Control of Non-Communicable
Diseases 2013-2020, to be adopted at the World Health
Assembly in May 2013, is expected to provide guidance
on key activities and to help elaborate how the global
community can put into motion the multisectoral
approaches highlighted by the Political Declaration. The
WHO Action Plan will increase the impact and efficacy
of existing global partnerships, alliances and resultsoriented collaborative arrangements. More information
is needed on the proposal for an inter-agency task force
on NCDs, which would report to the Economic and Social
Council, including the proposed terms of reference,
function, role and responsibilities, and associated costs.
We would again like to stress our support for WHO as
the overall lead on NCDs, and would like to understand
how the work of that inter-agency group would be
harmonized under the auspices of WHO leadership.
Again, the United States is committed to multisectoral
action as an integral part of the prevention and control
of non-communicable diseases, and we appreciate the
report of the Secretary-General.
Mr. Versegi (Australia): Australia is committed to
advancing the work on all agenda items discussed here
this morning, and we thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive reports and notes on those items. As
the Secretary-General’s report in document A/67/257
clearly emphasizes, a comprehensive and coherent
development effort is needed if we are make further
progress towards the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) by 2015.
Australia understands that aid is an important part
of that effort, but we also know that policies to promote
open trade and market access for developing countries,
investment and private-sector growth, as well as
opportunities for the sharing of ideas and experience
through South-South and triangular cooperation, also
play a vital role in helping to eradicate poverty and
achieve sustainable growth.
As a co-chair of the MDG Advocacy Group and
a champion of the Secretary-General’s Education
First initiative, Australia’s Prime Minister is seized
of the importance of ensuring continued international

17

A/67/PV.42

attention to the achievement of the current set of goals.
As an international community, we cannot afford to
take our eyes off that unfinished work while we also
give attention to the development agenda that will
follow.
As we said during the debate a year ago (see
A/66/PV.72), we must take the knowledge gained from
the MDG successes in many countries and apply those
lessons to support the countries and communities that
still face a long and difficult road ahead in achieving
the targets. Let us not lose sight of the fact that we have
come a long way and made considerable progress at the
global level on several of the MDGs, but let us learn
from that progress and harness the knowledge for the
benefit of all.
For example, important gains in primary school
enrolments and improvements in the enrolment of
girls are to be celebrated, but we still have more to
do to improve enrolments and focus on the quality of
education to ensure that children are actually learning.
We commend the Secretary-General’s Education First
initiative for putting a clear focus on the need to put
every child into school and to ensure that they are able to
complete their education with strong learning outcomes.
We must now focus on effectively implementing that
initiative effectively.
Commitments on HIV prevention and treatment, as
well as on malaria, have yielded impressive results. But
as important as those gains are, we cannot afford to be
complacent on the health MDGs.
As the Executive Director of the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities highlighted during his
visit to Australia earlier this week, promoting women’s
and girls’ rights and empowerment, including through
access to family planning, remains central to achieving
the MDGs.
As we prepare to mark World AIDS Day, we are
reminded of the need to do more to reach the targets of
zero new infections, zero AIDS-related deaths and zero
discrimination by 2015. And we need to keep working
to reduce the number of malaria cases, including by
addressing the emergence of drug-resistant malaria
in the Mekong region. That is why Australia recently
convened a major international conference on malaria
in Sydney.
The MDGs provide the international community
with a clear and vital development framework for the

18

next three years. We urge Member States, the United
Nations and international organizations, regional
organizations, civil society and the private sector to
work together to address inequalities and inequities
in access to services and development opportunities.
We must do more to accelerate progress on the MDGs
in conflict-affected and fragile States, and we must
increase and sustain a focus on the peacebuilding,
security and development needs of those countries.
And now, in the development of the post-2015
development agenda, we must do more to recognize
the needs of women, girls and persons with disabilities.
We would highlight the important work of UN-Women
in strengthening the role of the United Nations in
promoting gender equality and women’s empowerment,
and the role of women in peace and security. We look
forward to continuing our close engagement with
UN-Women over the coming year, including as a
member of the Executive Board.
Australia is fully committed to making a strong
contribution to the formulation of the post-2015
development agenda, but we will not deviate from our
firm resolve to help accelerate efforts towards attaining
the current MDGs over the next three years. We look
forward to the special event in 2013, which will be a key
opportunity for the international community to assess
progress on the MDGs and to commit to strategies and
actions that will help in the final push to 2015.
We appreciate the ideas provided by the SecretaryGeneral on the way forward with the post-2015
development agenda and we commend the steps already
underway to ensure a strong consultative process with
a wide range of stakeholders. It will be important for
the process towards the development of the post-2015
agenda to be clear and coherent, and we welcome steps
to ensure that the relevant processes converge onto a
common track.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I wish to thank President
Vuk Jeremić for convening this joint debate on the
implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of
the major United Nations conferences and summits in
the economic and social fields and to the Millennium
Summit, as well as on United Nations reform. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for submitting
all his reports and notes, which provide very useful
inputs for our debate.
The hard-won progress achieved in some of the
targets of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)

12-61261

A/67/PV.42

is heartening, especially if we consider the difficulties
created by the financial and economic crisis. The
decline in the number of people living in extreme
poverty, the improvement in access to drinking water
and in conditions for those living in slums, along with
the advances in gender equality and the empowerment
of women, should encourage us to move quickly and
more decisively towards the achievement of all the
MDGs and other internationally agreed development
goals in the final stretch to 2015.
As a Member State champion of the SecretaryGeneral’s Global Education initiative, we believe that by
raising education to the highest level on the international
agenda we will be contributing to progress in virtually
all other items and challenges we face in the twentyfirst century. Universal access to quality education is
key if we are to overcome poverty and inequality.
The international community has the responsibility
to make good on its commitments. Although we
recognize the efforts made by some donor countries
to meet their official development assistance (ODA)
commitments, we note with concern that current overall
ODA levels are well below half of 0.7 per cent of the
gross national income of developed countries.
We must take concrete steps to revamp the
development-oriented Doha Round of trade negotiations
and to promote the transfer of technology and the
sharing of good practices, knowledge and experiences to
support national capacity-building, especially for those
that are lagging behind. We must also ensure access
to affordable, effective, safe and quality medicine,
including through the full use of the flexibilities of the
World Trade Organization Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), as
recognized in the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS
Agreement and Public Health.
In facing the dire consequences of the current
crisis and struggling to make progress on our collective
development goals, developing countries need policy
space and flexibility to make use of macroeconomic
tools, especially countercyclical fiscal policies and
other stimulus measures. It is fundamental that we focus
our economic recovery efforts on the promotion of a
job-centred, socially inclusive economic model. The
United Nations system must give particular attention to
supporting the Global Jobs Pact and to the creation and
strengthening of social protection floors, as called for

12-61261

in this year’s Ministerial Declaration of the Economic
and Social Council.
Based on our national experience and as indicated
in report A/67/257, we believe that universal health
systems can play an important role as an effective
social protection policy by ensuring access to health
services and medicine and reducing economic and
social inequalities.
Although limited in scope, the MDG framework
represents a successful experience in mobilizing
resources and focusing the international community’s
attention on a number of key areas for human
development. It has also helped to strengthen the
relevant role of the United Nations as a priority partner
in development cooperation.
The unequivocal message from the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development is that we must
incorporate and place the sustainability paradigm at the
centre of our analysis when looking at the development
agenda for the twenty-first century. Economic
development, social inclusion and the rational use and
conservation of natural resources have to be considered
on an equal footing and cannot be disassociated from
each other.
The goals to be considered in the negotiations for
the post-2015 development agenda must build on and
be improved and enriched by the current MDGs. They
should also aim at consolidating the achievements
made under the MDGs by broadening the scope of the
implementation to integrate the three pillars, with a
view to fostering sustainable development.
An inclusive, open and transparent Member
State-driven process of consultations must be held in
order to define which goals will be included in the post2015 agenda, how progress will be measured and what
the means of implementation will be. We are following
with interest the initiatives of the Secretary-General to
launch preparations for the process of defining the post2015 agenda, especially the work of the task force led
by the Department of Economic Affairs and the United
Nations Development Programme, and the SecretaryGeneral’s High-level Panel of Eminent Persons.
We are of the view that all those initiatives must
converge in the intergovernmental process, so as to
allow for the adoption of a legitimate development
agenda that embraces different views and priorities,
but represents shared expectations and common

19

A/67/PV.42

aspirations. We need tools that provide a sense of
direction to our common efforts while preserving the
necessary flexibility for each country to pursue its
own development path. Building on the success of the
MDGs, we also believe that they can provide guidance
to all relevant actors within and outside the United
Nations system.

With regard to non-communicable diseases (NCDs),
as projected by the World Health Organization,
NCD-related deaths will increase by 17 per cent over
the next decade. Three in five deaths in South-East Asia
are caused by NCDs. An estimated 8 million people die
of NCDs each year in the region, accounting for 22 per
cent of global deaths caused by those diseases.

Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): In contributing to the
join debate, the delegation of Indonesia wishes to
particularly focus on agenda item 113, “Follow-up
to the outcome of the Millennium Summit”. We also
thank the Secretary-General for the reports before us.

Indonesia is grappling with the double threat of
communicable and non-communicable diseases. We
have given priority to minimizing the common risk
factors: tobacco use, alcohol abuse, an unhealthy
diet and physical inactivity. We established in 2006 a
special unit in the Ministry of Health with the task of
strengthening the legal framework and implementing
our policy on NCDs. Indonesia also is committed
to implementing the 2008-2013 Action Plan for the
Global Strategy for the Prevention and Control of
Non-communicable Diseases.

The international community is committed to
achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
by 2015, to addressing existing obstacles, gaps and
challenges, and to taking advantage of opportunities.
Indonesia is fully committed to meeting all its MDG
targets. Indonesia recognizes that a concerted national
effort is critical to ensuring the attainment of the MDG
targets at the national and global levels.
The MDGs framework, however, has been viewed as
having certain constraints, including being too focused
on human development while not giving adequate
attention to the need to generate general economic
growth and development. Today, it is increasingly
recognized that countries that have not experienced
sustained or inclusive growth will have difficulties in
meeting their poverty reduction targets and the other
MDGs by 2015.
It is in this context that resolution 65/10 stressed
that the promotion of sustained, inclusive and equitable
economic growth is necessary for accelerating
progress towards achieving the MDGs, as well as
promoting sustainable development. Greater emphasis
on growth will help to create more jobs and provide
social protection aimed at protecting and empowering
people and communities, the most vulnerable groups in
particular.
The world will not stop in 2015, however. We must
undertake further steps to advance the United Nations
development agenda beyond 2015. Incorporating
the development concept of sustained, inclusive and
equitable economic growth and development as an
integral part of a post-2015 development framework
could greatly contribute to achieving not only existing
development goals, but also new goals that could be set
post-2015.

20

The scale and virulence of non-communicable
diseases require unprecedented political commitment
at the highest political levels to address that global
issue. That commitment must therefore be incorporated
into the global agenda of the international community.
The convening of the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Prevention and Control of
Non-communicable Diseases in September last year
and the adoption of the Political Declaration on NCDs
(resolution 66/2, annex) highlighted that commitment.
The mobilization of resources and the building of a
genuine global partnership with civil society, private
sectors, philanthropies and even influential individuals
are therefore essential. We also call on the international
community to include progress in the fight against
NCDs as a component of the post-2015 development
agenda.
Turning to women’s issues, Indonesia commends
the efforts that UN-Women has made in Indonesia to
date. Indonesia would like to reiterate its commitment
to and support for the work of UN-Women, including
its strategic plan 2011-2013. We urge UN-Women to
continue providing appropriate and strategic support
to middle-income countries, which, despite their recent
economic achievements, still face challenges in the
area of gender equality and women’s empowerment.
As a member of the Executive Board of UNWomen, Indonesia will continue its core contributions.
At the same time, efforts to identify a sustainable
predictable and innovative financing path for the

12-61261

A/67/PV.42

entity are vital for the long term. We look forward to
the result of the UN-Women’s comprehensive resource
mobilization strategy to deepen and broaden the donor
base. We urge UN-Women to continue to improve its
role and contribution at the country level by developing
its tool for the comprehensive assessment of the overall
capacity of United Nations country teams.
Indonesia appreciates and supports UN-Women’s
new regional architecture initiative which is a
reflection of the entity’s efforts aimed at carrying out its
mandates and at making further progress in achieving
gender equality and women’s empowerment. We are
of the view that any proposal on regional architecture
should include an impact assessment to help strengthen
operational activities at the regional and country levels.
Finally, Indonesia emphasizes the importance of a
strong oversight and monitoring mechanism to sustain
the coordination of and normative and operational
linkages among all levels in order to strengthen unity
within UN-Women.
Mr. Maksimychev (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the Secretary-General for
his informative report on the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals and recommendations
for advancing the United Nations development agenda
beyond 2015 (A/67/257).
The report stresses support for gradual and
comprehensive economic growth and job creation. The
experience of recent years shows that the consequences
of the global financial and economic crisis can be
overcome at the lowest cost by those countries that
implement development strategies aimed at ensuring
social equality, full and productive employment, and
dignified work for all. Unemployment, as is rightly
pointed out by the Secretary-General, often becomes
a key factor in political instability and armed conflict.
We are convinced that the task of job creation and
ensuring decent work environments should be one of
the central elements of the global social and economic
agenda for post-2015.
Russia has significant practical experience in
developing social and employment institutions. Much
has been done in such areas as improving labour laws,
regulating the labour market, reforming pension systems,
and professional training and retraining, particularly
for vulnerable population groups. We are ready to share
our best practices with the international community, as
they have clearly proven their effectiveness. On 11 and

12-61261

12 December, upon the initiative of President Putin,
an international high-level conference on the issue of
decent work will be held in Moscow. We are convinced
that this important event will give a powerful impulse
to coordinating multilateral efforts to implement
the International Labour Organization’s concepts of
decent work and sustainable development based on
wide-ranging and equitable economic growth.
Russia ascribes particular importance to the
global efforts to combat non-communicable diseases
(NCDs). A key role in advancing international dialogue
in that area was played by the first global ministerial
conference on healthy lifestyles and non-communicable
disease control held in Moscow, the High-level Meeting
of the General Assembly on the Prevention and Control
of Non-communicable Diseases, and the World
Health Organization (WHO) Global Strategy for the
Prevention and Control of NCDs. We hope that there
will be an agreement within WHO this year on common
obligations on non-communicable diseases and that a
new plan of action in that area will be drawn up for the
2014-2020 period.
Russia continues to step up its participation
in global health. Our contribution to the WHO
non-communicable diseases project for 2012-2013
exceeds $7 million. We plan to contribute more
than $36 million to programmes to help developing
countries to combat non-communicable diseases. Our
future plans include the opening in our country of a
local WHO office on non-communicable diseases. We
believe that the Russian national system being set up
to monitor those diseases and related risk factors will
in time become part of the global information system
under WHO auspices.
We welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General
to pay consistent attention to the issue of reforming
the management mechanisms of the United Nations
in order to increase their effectiveness. At the same
time, we note that reform is not an end in itself. Its
implementation should be based on close consultation
with Member States and meet their interests and those
of the United Nations as a universal Organization.
We are concerned to note the conclusions of
the Board of Auditors that a number of substantive
management reforms currently being implemented
suffer from major shortcomings. I would refer to the
introduction of the enterprise resource planning project
(Umoja), the transition to the International Public

21

A/67/PV.42

Sector Accounting Standards, the global field support
strategy and human resource reform. All of those
projects suffer from the absence of a well-designed,
long-term strategy, a vision of the final outcome and a
deficit of any internal oversight.

inequity remain present within its membership and
voting patterns. Yet we have to understand that global
governance goes beyond the United Nations to other
institutions and agencies, including the World Trade
Organization and the Bretton Woods institutions.

As we know, the Secretariat is preparing a series
of other proposals for significant internal reforms.
We are ready to consider proposals that we receive,
in particular those that fully take into account the
views and priorities of Member States on management
processes at the United Nations, as well as the need not
to allow any interruption in its effective work.

My delegation believes that, in addition to
regional groups, a particular emphasis needs to be
given to non-State actors that have been ever-present
in development and policy dialogues. The global
governance system should be more capable of dealing
with interconnected socioeconomic challenges, more
coherent and coordinated, and supported by institutions
that are representative, inclusive and effective.

Mr. Waheed (Maldives): The Republic of Maldives
gives sincere thanks for the work of the Secretariat and
to the Secretary-General for his reports on the followup to the outcome of the Millennium Summit (A/67/257)
and on strengthening the institutional arrangements for
support of gender equality and the empowerment of
women (A/67/201).
Maldives believes that the United Nations holds an
unquestionable and unique position in the multilateral
system. There is no doubt that the world has in recent
years entered a new era, with new challenges facing
the global community. Economic instability, climate
change, food and nutrition security are all issues that
have gained a new-found prominence in today’s world.
In the light of our growing interdependence, a
collective and holistic approach is required and, whether
the solution is political or socioeconomic, isolationism
is no longer an option. Finding multilateral solutions
to the aforementioned emerging challenges lies at the
heart of global governance. The multilateral system
should be inclusive, transparent and effective. It must
have the capacity to respond and remain relevant and
responsive to emerging challenges.
Maldives believes that governance institutions
should tackle global economic imbalances, promote
sustained, inclusive and equitable growth, advance
multilateral trade agreements, enhance food and
energy security, provide social protection for the poor
and the vulnerable, and strengthen mechanisms aimed
at reducing inequalities. Effective global governance
is essential for the implementation of the Millennium
Development Goals and the formulation and
implementation of the post-2015 development agenda.
Maldives notes with concern the infrastructure
of global governance. Both decentralization and

22

In view of the principle of common but differentiated
treatment, Maldives believes that the multilateral
framework should capture and respond to specific
regional needs and demands, especially those of small
vulnerable States. Smaller and poorer countries are
often the most affected by global rules, yet we have
the least amount of say in their design. Regional
arrangements can help to provide better representation
for smaller and least developed countries, promoting
greater ownership and engagement with global policy.
Maldives recognizes the universality of the United
Nations and reaffirms its support and commitment to
the ongoing efforts to strengthen the Assembly. In this
regard, Maldives notes with satisfaction the continuing
interaction of the General Assembly with international,
regional and subregional forums, including groups
dealing with global matters, to achieve and promote
broader consensus. It is our hope that these interactions
will ultimately lead to identifying and addressing the
present deficiencies in global governance. It is our hope
that the leadership of the United Nations shall be able
to bring inclusive and effective responses to matters
of global concern. It is through strengthened global
governance that our visions for the future, including for
the Millennium Development Goals and the post-2015
process, will be realized.
As a nation, Maldives has had much success in
meeting the Millennium Development Goal targets,
having eradicated extreme poverty, achieved universal
primary education, reduced child mortality and fought
deadly diseases. We are now pioneering aggressive
campaigns for equity, sustainability and development.
It is with these existing frameworks that Maldives looks
to the future — to both the framing and the eventual
implementation of the sustainable development goals.

12-61261

A/67/PV.42

As a member of the Executive Board of UN-Women
for the upcoming term, Maldives looks forward to more
efficient gender mainstreaming across United Nations
entities. We also want to stress the importance of
addressing women’s underrepresentation in governance
structures and political participation. Maldives believes
that the Entity’s presence in the field and coordination
with Member States must be given priority, and that
capacity and operations in the field must be increased
to meet the ever-prevalent demand.
Although the global community is faced with an
era of new challenges, the United Nations has cultivated
a global atmosphere for enhanced development,
security and human rights, and these have coalesced
into tangible results for more of the world’s population
than ever before. Democracy and good governance are
spreading. Commitments to reducing conflict, poverty,
discrimination, economic isolation and economic
vulnerability endure in the psyche of the larger
community of nations.
Yet the strides that have been made to bring
forward the development situations of many countries
cannot be allowed to be reversed. Though we face one
of the worst financial crises of our time, principles
of equitable globalization, with economic growth
and sustained legal empowerment for vulnerable
populations, including the poor, should be promoted
while ensuring that there is greater coherence in
achieving different but interrelated goals. Gone are the
days when we could consider economic development

12-61261

as separate from social development, and gone are the
days when national policies could be developed outside
of global prerogatives.
With the restructuring of our global governance
systems through a focus on sustained and equitable
betterment, we shall overcome the challenges we face
today and those we will face in the future. Though the
road is long, this is a journey worth making, and the
principles of betterment and equity will be fructified
on the tree of our common destiny.
Programme of work
The Acting President: I should like to consult
members regarding an extension of the work of the
Second Committee. Members will recall that, at its
second plenary meeting, on 21 September, the General
Assembly approved the recommendation of the General
Committee that the Second Committee should complete
its work by Friday, 30 November. However, I have
been informed by the Chair of the Second Committee
that the Committee requests an extension of its work
to Thursday, 13 December, which would facilitate
reaching consensus on the draft resolutions pending
before the Committee. May I therefore take it that the
General Assembly agrees to extend the work of the
Second Committee until Thursday, 13 December?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

23
