II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

agencies, where appropriate, with the efforts of the Organization of African Unity to promote social and
economic development and to advance intra-African cooperation in this vital field;
8. Reaffirms the determination of the United
Nations to work closely with the Organization of African
Unity towards the establishment of the new international economic order in accordance with the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and, in that regard, to take full account of the Lagos Plan of Action
for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the
Economic Development of Africa in the implementation of the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade; 27
9. Reiterates its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts, on behalf of the international
community, to organize and mobilize special economic
assistance programmes for African States experiencing
grave economic difficulties, in particular fot newly independent African States and the front-line States, to
help them to cope with the situation caused by the acts
of aggression committed against their territories by the
apartheid regime of South Africa;
10. Calls upon all Member States, regional and international organizations and organizations within the
United Nations system to participate actively in the implementation of those special economic assistance programmes;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the
Organization of African Unity informed periodically of
the response of the international community to those
programmes and to co-ordinate efforts with all similar
programmes initiated by the Organization of African
Unity;
12. Requests the Secretary-General and the organizations within the United Nations system to ensure that
adequate facilities continue to be made available for the
provision of technical assistance to the General Secretariat of the Organization of African Unity as required;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
take the necessary measures to strengthen co-operation
at the political, economic, cultural and administrative
levels between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly, particularly with
regard to the provision of assistance to the victims of
colonialism and apartheid in southern Africa, and in this
connexion draws once again the attention of the international community to the need to contribute to the Assistance Fund for the Struggle against Colonialism and
Apartheid established by the Organization of African
Unity;
14. Calls upon all Member States and organizations
within the United Nations system to increase their assistance to the ·African States affected by natural or
other disasters by mobilizing special economic and
emergency assistance programmes;
15. Further calls upon all Member States and regional and international organizations, in particular the
specialized agencies, and non-governmental organizations to increase their aid to refugees in Africa;
16. Requests the Department of Public Information
of the Secretariat and all the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system to
generate publicity and intensify the dissemination of information on social and economic development matters
concerning Africa;
"See sect. V, resolution 35/56, annex.

21

17. Calls upon United Nations bodies, in particular
the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council,
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the
Special Committee against Apartheid and the United
Nations Council for Namibia, to continue to associate
closely the Organization of African Unity with all their
work concerning Africa:
18. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations concerned within the United Nations system to
continue and expand their co-operation with the Organization of African Unity and, through it, their assistance to the liberation movements recognized by the
Organization of African Unity:
19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution and on the
development of co-operation between the Organization
of African Unity and the organizations concerned within the United Nations system.

90th plenary meeting
JO December 1980

35/118.

Plan of Action for the Full Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples

The General Assembly,
Having decided to hold a special commemorative
meeting'' on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Convinced that the Declaration has played and will
continue to play an important role in assisting the peoples under colonial domination in their struggle for freedom and independence, and in mobilizing world public
opinion for the complete elimination of colonialism in
all its forms and manifestations,
Reaffirming that all peoples have the right to selfdetermination and independence and that the subjection of peoples to alien domination constitutes a
denial of fundamental human rights and is a serious impediment to the maintenance of international peace and
security and the development of peaceful relations
among nations,
Reaffirming also the relevant provisions of the
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.'"
Deeply conscious of the fact that twenty years after the
adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples the system of
colonialism continues to exist in several areas of the
world.
Mindful of the courageous struggle being carried out
by the peoples of southern Africa for freedom, selfdetermination, independence and equal rights,
Noting with satisfaction the achievement of independence in the last twenty years by a number of Trust
'"Official Records of the General Assemb/_1·, Thirty-fifth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 93rd meeting.
"Resolution 262'i (XXV) annex.

(;eneral Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

22

Territories and Non-Self-Governing Territories, most
recently Zimbabwe and Vanuatu,
Bearing in mind the important work accomplished by
the United Nations and the international community
with a view to securing the effective and complete implementation of the Declaration and other resolutions
of the United Nations on the question of decolonization,
Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrument for furthering the aims and purposes of the
Declaration and of the role played in this connexion by
a number of non-governmental organizations having a
special interest in the field of decolonization,
Recalling its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October
1970, containing the programme of action for the full
implementation of the Declaration,
Determined to take all necessary measures leading to
the complete elimination of colonialism in all its forms
and manifestations without further delay,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of all peoples under colonial domination to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples;
2. Declares that the continuation of colonialism in
all its forms and manifestations, including racism,
apartheid and the exploitation by foreign and other interests of economic and human resources, is incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations, the Declaration a, d the principles of international law;
3. Reaffirms that the policy of apartheid of the South
African regime and its illegal occupation of Namibia
violate the principles enshrined in the Charter and constitute a threat to international peace and security;
4. Reaffirms the inherent right of peoples under
colonialism in all its forms and manifestations to
struggle by all means at their disposal against those
colonial and racist regimes which suppress their aspirations for freedom, self-determination and independence;
5. Categorically rejects any agreement, arrangement or unilateral action by colonial and racist Powers
which ignores, violates, denies or conflicts with the inalienable right of peoples under colonial domination to
self-determination and independence;
6. Adopts the Plan of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples set
forth in the annex to the present resolution.

92nd plenary meeting
I I December I 980
ANNEX
Plan of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples

I. Member States shall do their utmost to promote. in the linited
Nations and the specialized agencies and other organizations within
the United Nations system, effective measures for the full implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960. in all Trust Territories and
Non-Self-Governing Territories and other colonial Territories. irrespective of their size, including the adoption by the Security Council of
necessary measures against Governments and regimes that engage in
any form of repression of colonial peoples which would seriously impede the maintenance of international peace and security.

1
Member States shall render all necessary moral and material assistance to the peoples under colonial domination in their struggle to
exercise their right to self-determination and independence.

J. Member States shall intensify their efforts to promote the implementation of the resolutions of the General Assembly and of the
Security Council relating to Territories and countries under colonial
domination.
4. Member States shall intensify their efforts to end all political,
military. economic and other forms of collaboration with South
Africa. particularly in the nuclear field, including the supply of nuclear material and equipment or components thereof, the transfer of
nuclear technology and financial, technical or other assistance to the
nuclear programme of South Africa. the sale of uranium enrichment
facilities to, and the purchase of uranium from, South Africa, and
shall take measures to prevent such collaboration and purchases by
corporations. institutions and other bodies or individuals within their
jurisdiction.
.\ Member States shall endeavour to adopt, both individually and
collectively. measures to achieve the cessation of all new foreign investments in and financial loans to South Africa.
6. Member States shall continue to wage a vigorous and sustained
campaign against activities and practices of foreign economic, financial and other interests operating in colonial Territories which are
detrimental to the interests of the population of those Territories and
shall adopt legislative, administrative or other measures to bring about
the discontinuance of such activities and practices on the part of their
nationals and companies within their jurisdiction.
7. Member States. as well as the organizations within the United
Nations system. having regard to the relevant provisions of the
Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order. contained in General Assembly resolution 3201 (S-Vl) of
I May 1974, and the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States.
contained in Assembly resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974,
shall ensure that the permanent sovereignty of the countries and
Territories under colonial, racist and alien domination over their
natural resources shall be fully respected and safeguarded.
8. Member States shall adopt the necessary measures to discourage or prevent the systematic innux of outside immigrants and
settlers into Territories under colonial domination, which disrupts the
demographic composition of those Territories and may constitute
a major obstacle to the genuine exercise of the right to selfdetermination and independence by the people of those Territories.
9. Member States shall oppose all military activities and arrangements by colonial and occupying Powers in the Territories under
colonial and racist domination. as such activities and arrangements
constitute an obstacle to the full implementation of the Declaration,
and shall intensify their efforts with a view to securing the immediate
and unconditional withdrawal from colonial Territories of military
bases and installations of colonial Powers.
I0. Member States shall also adopt the necessary measures to prevent the recruitment, financing and training of mercenaries in their territories for use against the national liberation movements struggling
for their freedom and independence from the yoke of colonialism,
racism and apartheid.
I I. Member States shall recognize that armed conflicts in which
peoples are fighting against colonial and racist domination and
occupation in exercise of their right to self-determination are international armed conflicts as provided for by Additional Protocol I"' to the
Ueneva Conventions of 1949." The legal status envisaged to apply to
the combatants in the 1949 Geneva Conventions shall apply to persons
engaged in armed struggle against colonial and alien domination and
racist regimes. Those persons captured as prisoners shall be accorded
the status of prisoners of war and their treatment shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Treatment of Prisoners of War. of 12 August 1949.'-'
12. Member States and the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system shall intensify their moral and
material assistance to the national liberation movements recognized
by the Organization of African Unity.
1.1. All States shall undertake measures aimed at enhancing public awareness of the need for active assistance to bring about the com"'A/32/ 144, annex I
'' Lnited Nations, Treatr Series. vol. 75. Nos. 970-973.
''/hid .. No. 972. p. 11'-.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committ,,,,

plete eradication of colonialism in all its forms and manifestations,
including racism and apartheid. through the exercise of the right to selfdetermination. In particular, States shall endeavour to create satisfactory conditions for activities by national and international nongovernmental organizations in support of the peoples under colonial
domination.
14. All States shall co-operate fully with the United Nations
Council for Namibia, the legal Administering Authority of the Territory until independence, in discharging the mandate entrusted to it under the terms of General Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May
1967 and subsequent resolutions of the Assembly.
15. All States shall also co-operate fully with the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples in the performance of its mandate.

2J

hie moral and material assistance to the peoples of the colonial Territories and to their national liberation movements.

20. Those non-governmental organizations with a special interest
in the field of decolonization and actively opposed to colonialism in all
its forms and manifestations are requested to intensify their activities
in co-operation with the Secretary-General and the relevant organs nf
the United Nations.

35/119.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples

18. The United Nations shall intensify its efforts in disseminating
information by all available means, including publications, radio and
television, on the struggle of peoples for self-determination, independence and equal rights and against colonial domination, 011 the
activities of the United Nations in the field of decoloni1.ation and on
the role of the national liberation movements.

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,"
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the
Declaration,
Recalling all its previous resolutions concerning the
implementation of the Declaration, in particular resolution 34/94 of 13 December 1979, as well as the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council,
Condemning the continued colonialist and racist repression of millions of Africans, particularly in
Namibia, by the Government of South Africa through
its persistent, illegal occupation of the international Territory and its intransigent attitude towards all efforts being made to bring about an internationally acceptable
solution to the situation obtaining in the Territory,
Deeply conscious of the urgent need to take all necessary measures to eliminate forthwith the remaining
vestiges of colonialism, particularly in respect of
Namibia where desperate attempts by South Africa to
perpetuate its illegal occupation have brought untold
suffering and bloodshed to the people,
Strongly deprecating the policies of those States
which, in defiance of the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, have continued to collaborate with the
Government of South Africa in its domination of the
people of Namibia,
Conscious that the su,cess of the national liberation
struggle and the resultant international situation have
provided the international community with a unique
opportunity to make a decisive contribution towards the
total elimination of colonialism in all its forms and
manifestations in Africa.
Welcoming warmly the achievement of independence
by the people of Zimbabwe and Vanuatu and mindful of
the imperative need to assist the Governments of the
two countries in their respective efforts to achieve
national reconstruction and economic development.
Noting with satisfaction the work accomplished by the
Special Committee with a view to securing the effective
and complete implementation of the Declaration and
the other relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
Noting also with satisfaction the co-operation and active participation of the administering Powers concerned in the relevant work of the Special Committee, as
well as the continued readiness of the Governments con-

19. The specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nation~ system shall render, or cont111uc to render. all poss,-

"Official Records of the General Assemhly, "/hirt_1•)ifih Ses.,ion ,·,,,-,
plemenr Vo. 23 (A/.15/2:1/Rev I).

16. The General Assembly draws the attention of the Security
Council to the need to continue to give special attention to those situations where the denial of the right of peoples to self-determination, as
defined in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), poses a threat to
international peace and security and, in particular, the need:
(a) To consider imposing mandatory economic sanctions against
South Africa, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
including in particular a mandatory embargo on the supply of petroleum and petroleum products to South Africa;
(b) To reinforce the arms embargo against South Africa by adopting comprehensive mandatory measures to end all military and nuclear collaboration with the apartheid regime of South Africa.

17. The Special Committee shall continue to examine the full compliance of all States with the Declaration and with other relevant resolutions on the question of decolonization. Questions of territorial
size, geographical isolation and limited resources should in no way
delay the implementation of the Declaration. Where General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) has not been fully implemented with regard
to a given Territory, the Assembly shall continue to bear responsibility for that Territory until all powers are transferred to the people of
the Territory without any conditions or reservations and the people
concerned have had an opportunity to exercise freely their right to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with the Declaration.
The Special Committee is hereby directed:
(a) To continue to seek the most suitable ways for the speedy and
total application of the Declaration to all Territories which have not
yet attained independence and to propose to the General Assembly
specific measures for the complete implementation of the Declaration;
(b) To undertake a thorough review of the list of Trust and NonSelf-Governing and other Territories which have not yet attained independence to which the Declaration applies and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session:

(c) To continue to send visiting missions to the colonial Territories at periodic intervals in order to enable the Special Committee to
obtain first-hand information on conditions in those Territories;
(d) To continue to examine the views expressed, orally or in writ;ng, by the peoples of the colonial Territories as well as by representatives of non-governmental organizations and individuals with knowledge of conditions in those Territories. Particular consideration shall
be given to oral petitions and written communications regarding the
Territories on which information is not being transmitted as provided
for by Article 73e of the Charter or to which the Special Committee is
denied access;
(e) To assist the General Assembly in making arrangements, in cooperation with the administering Powers. to secure a United Nations
presence in the colonial Territories to enable it to participate in the
elaboration of the procedural arrangements for the implementation of
the Declaration and to observe or supervise the final stages of the process of decolonization in those Territories.
