H

of the progress achieved in the Non-Self-Governing
Territories since the establishment of the United Nations,
based on the information received from the Administering Members under Article 73 e of the Charter of
the United Nations, would be highly desirable and
should make it possible to ascertain the extent to which
the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories are
advancing towards the attainment of the goals set in
Chapter XI of the Charter,
Further recalling its resolution 1053 (XI) of 20 February 1957, in which it invited the Secretary-General,
in collaboration with the specialized agencies concerned,
to prepare a report on the progress that has taken
place in the Non-Self-Governing Territories in those
fields on which information has been transmitted, in
accordance with the objectives set forth in Chapter XI
of the Charter, since the establishment of the United
Nations,
I. Expresses its appreciation oi the work of the
Secretary-General and of the specialized agencies in
preparing the report on the progress achieved hy the
Non-Self-Governing Territories ?3
2. Requests the Committee on I nfnrmation from
Non-Self-Governing Territories to examine the abovementioned report at its next session, in addition to its
regular programme of work, with a view to ascertaining
the pro~ress made by the inhabitants of the NonSe!f-Governing Territories in the light of the objectives
set forth in Chapter XI of the Charter of tht' Unitt'd
Nations;
3. Further requests the Committee to submit its
observations and conclusions on the report to the
General Assembly at its fifteenth st:s~ion, in order to
assist the Assembly in its consideration of the report;
4. Requests tht' Committee, in so doing, to be guided
by the terms of all relevant resolutions nf the General
Assembly, in particular resolutions 9.12 ( X) and 1053
(XI), as well as by the provisions nf Chapter XI of
the Oiarter.
855th plenary meeting.

7:.! Dercmher 19_5()_
1462 (XIV). Report on educational conditions in
Non-Self-Governing TerritoriPs

The General Assembly,
Considering that, by resolution 445 ( V) of 12 December 1950, it approved the special report on educational conditions prepared in l 950 by the Committee
on Information from Non-Self-Caverning Territories 24
as a brief hut considered indication of the importance
of educational advanct'mrnt and of the problems of
education still to be faced in the Non-Self-Caverning
Territories,
Considering that, by resolution 743 (VIII) of
27 November 1953, it approved a further report on
education 25 as a supplement to the report approved in
1950,
23 A/4105-A/4109,

A/4114,

A/4124,

A/4128 and Corr.I,

A/4129, A/4131, A/4134, A/4136, A/4137, A/4142, A/4144,
A/4152, A/4162 and Corr.I, A/4165-A/4167, A/4178, A/4181,

A/4192-A/4195.
24 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session,
Supplement No. 17 (A/1.303/Rev.1), part two.
2G Ibid., Ei_qhth Srrsion, Su/'J>lnn,,,. :\'o . ], (A/2465), part
two.

Considering that, by resolution 1048 (XI) of 20 February 1957, it approved another report on education
drawn up in 1956, 28
Noting the report on educational conditions prepared
in 1959 by the Committee on Information from Non·Self-Governing Territories? 7
1. Appnwes the report on educational conditions
prepared in 1959 Ly the Committee on Informatiun
from Non-Self-Governing Territories, and considers
that it should be studied in conjunction with the reports
approved in 1950, 1953 and 1957;
2. Invitl's the Secretary-General to communicate the
J959 rt'port to 1\1 embt'r States responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories, to the
Economic and Social Council, to the regional economic
commissions, to the Trusteeship Council and to the
specialized agencies concerned, for their consideration;
3. E.rtresses its confidence that the Members responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing
Territories will bring the report to the attention of
the authorities rrsponsible for education in those
Territories.
855th plenary meeting,
72 December 1059.
1463 (XIV). Development of primary education
in Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling the obligations which, under Article 73 of
1he Charter of the United Nations, are incumbent upon
Members administering Territories whose peoples have
not yet attained a full measure of self-government to
ensure, with due respect for the culture of the peoples
conct'rned, their political, economic, social, and educational advancement, their just treatment. and their
protection against abuses,
C onsiaering in the spirit of those principles that, in
order to develop primary education and to combat
illiteracy among the peoples of Non-Self-Governing
Territories, the Administering Members should endeavour to create in those Territories conditions which
arc not less favourable than those enjoyed hy the
1woples of the advanced countries,
Rrnffinning its resolutions 743 (VIII) of 27 November 1953 and 1049 (XI) of 20 February 1957, by
which it recommended. inter alia, the establishment or
<'xtrnsion of universal. free and compulsory primary
<'dncation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Na ting, ten years aftt'r the adoption of resolution 330
(TV) of 2 December 1949 in which the (;rneral
Assembly recognized that one of the fundamental problems in Non-Self-Governing Territories is illiteracy,
tl1at the progress made in this field has been vrry slow,
Having noted that, in its report on educational conditions, the Committee on Information from Non-Selfc;overning Territories was obliged to reiterak the view
t•xpressed in 1950 that the eradication of illiteracy is a
proh!t"m of the utmost urgency in the majority of the
\Jon-Self-Governing Territories, 28
I. Recommends that the Administering Members
take all necessary steps to develop the primary education
26 fbid., E/e1•enth Session, SupPlrmmt No. 15 (A/3127),
part two.
27 Ibid., Fourteenth Session. Supplement No. 15 (A/4111),
part two.
28 Jbid., part two, para. 44.

Reeolutious adopted oa the report.a of the Fourth Con1mittee

of the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories, to the
end that such education may be raised as soon as possible to the level enjoyed by the peoples of the advanced
countries;
2. Invites the Administering Members to communicate to the Secretary-General, for the seventeenth
session of the General Assembly, information on the
measures taken and the progress achieved towards the
establishment of universal, free and compulsory primary
education, with the aim of eradicating illiteracy among
the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
which they administer.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

1464 (XIV). Equal treatment in matters relating
to education in Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General, Assembly,
RecaUing its resolution 328 (IV) of 2 December
1949 on equal treatment in matters relating to education
in Non-Self-Governing Territories, and all other relevant resolutions,
Having regard to the fundamental importance of race
relations, particularly under modern conditions, for the
attainment of the objectives of Chapter XI of the Charter
of the United Nations,
Having considered the special report submitted by the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories, 29
Recognizing that some progress has been achieved in
equal treatment in matters relating to education in
Non-Self-Governing Territories,
1. Reaffirms its resolution 328 (IV) ;
2. Urges the Administering Members to intensify
their efforts to fulfil the basic objectives of the abovementioned resolution ;
3. Endorses the view expressed by the Committee
on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
that on no ground whatsoever can education on a racial
basis be justified ;30
4. Requests the Committee to pay special attention
to this matter and to continue to bring out the salient
facts in its annual report on conditions in the NonSelf-Governing Territories.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

1465 (XIV). Dissemination of information on
the United Nations in the Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling the obligations of Member States, enumerated in Chapter XI of the Charter of the United
Nations, which have or assume responsibilities for
the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories
towards the inhabitants of these Territories,
Reiterating the principle that the interests of the
inhabitants of these Territories are paramount,
C onsi.dering it necessary that the political, economic,
social and educational advancement of these inhabitants,
as envisaged in the Charter, should he accelerated,
211 Ibid., paras. 30-38.
ao Ibid., para. 37.

SS

Re.caUing the principle uaderlying the public information activities of the United Nations that the Organization cannot achieve the purposes for which it has been
created unless the pe.oples of the world are informed
of its aims and activities,
Considering therefore that it is important that the
peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories be widely
informed concerning the United Nations,
1. Requests the Administering Members to adopt
necessarv measures for the dissemination of information
concerning the United Nations among the inhabitants
of Non-Self-Governing Territories and for this purpose
to seek the active support and participation of the
organizations representative of these inhabitants;
2. Invites the attention of Administering Members
to the recommendations contained in paragraph 54 of
part two of the 1959 report of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories, 31 and
requests them to furnish the Secretary-General with
information concerning the implementation of the
recommendations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare for the
fifteenth session of the General Assembly a special
report on the present state of the dissemination of
information concerning the United Nations in NonSdf-Coverning Territories, and un further measures
necessary to this end.
855th p!roary mel'tinr,,
12 December 1959.

1466 (XIV). Participation of the Non-Self-Gov•
erning Territories in the work of the United
Nations and of the specialized agencies
The General Assembly,
Rcralling its resolution 5(i6 (VI) of 18 January 1952,
and in JJarticular:
(a) The first preambular paragraph, in which it noted
the Secretary-General's proposal concerning the use of
the Cnited Nations to promote by peaceful mean, the
progress of dependent peoples to a position of equality
with Member States of the lJnited Nations,
( b) The fourth prean1bular paragraph, in which it
stated that the direct association of the N 011-SelfGoverning Territories in the work of the United
Nations and of the specialized agencies is an effective
means of promoting the progress of the peoples of
those Territories towards a position of equality with
Member States of the United Nations,
( c) Operative paragraph 2, in whic-h it commended
the use of the spec-ial provisions in the constitutions of
some of the specialized agencies and of the regional
t·con,nnic commissions of the United \'ations permitting
1he admission of the No11-Self-Govcrni11g Territories
to those agencies and commissions as assoriate memh~rs,
1111 tht' proposal of the Administering Member concerned,
Rerallin_q its rt'solutions 647 (\"IT) of 10 Dect>mbcr
1G5:.? and 7•+~ ! V f I I ) of :.?7 N ovcmber 1953, in whic-h
1t re:iffirnwcl the provisions of the above-mentioned
resolution Jll(] expressly im·ite<l the Member States
administering Non-Self-Governing Territories progressively to increase the participation of indigenous representatives from those Territories in the work of the
technical organs of the United Nations, including the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories and the specialized agencies,
81 fbid., Supflletn-ent No. 15

(A/4111).
