Reaolutiona adopted on the reporta oí the Third Committee

C ommending the encouraging results achieve.d in the
field of ip.ter-agency co-operation with the support of
the Governments concerned and the other members
of the United Nations system and noting with appreciation the untiring activities of the non-governmental
organizations working on behalf of refugees,
Noting that the Executive Committee of the High
Commissioner's Programme has approved an increased
programme to cover additional needs of refugees, particularly in Africa,
Noting with appreciation the sizable increase in
contributions from certain countries, and also the increase in the number of contributing countries,
Expressing concern, however, about the difficulties
still facing the High Commissioner in financing bis
programme,
l. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue to provide international protection and assistance to refugees who are his concern,
while giving special attention to new groups of refugees,
particularly in Africa, in conformity with the relevant
General Assembly resolutions and the directives of the
Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme;
2. Urges States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencies to continue to lend
their support to the High Commissioner's humanitarian
task by:
(a) Facilitating the voluntary repatriation, local integration or resettlement of re.fugees who are the High
Commissioner's concern;
( b.) lmproving the legal status of refugees residing
in their territory, inter alia, by acceding to the international instrume.nts relating to refugees and by treating
new refugee situations in accordance with the principies and spirit of the Declaration on Territorial
Asylum and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights;
(e) Providing the High Commissioner with the
necessary means of accomplishing the. task incumbent
upon him and, in particular, by enabling him to reach
the financia! targets established with the approval of the
Executive Committee ;
( d) Drawing the attention of the governing bodies
of other organs in the United Nations system to the
need to support the High Commissioner in his efforts
to ensure that the requirements of refugees, including
education and training, are taken into full account.
1735th plenary meeting,
6 December 1968.

2432 (XXIII), United Nations Children's Fund
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter XIII, section B, of the
report of the Economic and Social Council,11 dealing
with the United Nations Children's Fund,
W elcoming the emphasis placed by the U nited N ations
Children's Fund upon considering the needs of the
child as a whole and, tú that end, aiding programmes
to improve the health, nutrition, education and general
well-being of the younger generation in developing
countries,

Recognieing that the.se programmes are essential in
achieving the goals of the United Nations in promoting
development,
11 lbid., TWfflt,-third Session, Supplement No. 3

(A/7203).

43

Noting that the Executive Board of the United
Nations Children's Fund at its June 1968 session,
continuing its practice of periodic reviews of programmes of the Fund, considered an assessment of
education projects jointly assisted by the Fund and the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization,
Noting further with satisfaction the prominence given
by the United Nations Children's Fund to supporting
national training schemes in many fields which contribute directly to the preparation of human resources
essential for social as well as economic development,
Observing with approval that the United Nations
Children's Fund continues to respond to the emergency
needs of mothers and children,
Deeply concerned, however, at the magnitude of the
unfulfilled needs of children in the developing countries
and at the increasing demands on the United Nations
Children's Fund for long-range aid and, more recently,
for emergencies,
l. Endorses the policies and programmes of the
United Nations Children's Fund to aid countries to
protect and prepare the young,r generation within the
larger context of national development ;
2. Commends the United Nations Children's Fund
for its continued close co-operation with other members of the United N ations system of organizations;
3. Appeals to Governments and other donors to
increase substantially their contributions to the United
Nations Children's Fund so that its present goal of an
annual income of $50 million can be attained no later
than the end of the present United Nations Development Decade ;
4. W elcoines the appeal of the Executive Board of
the United Nations Children's Fund for special contributions to mee.t the emergency needs of mothers
and children ;
5. Calls upon national and international bodies with
responsibility for multilateral and bilateral aid to consider how their programmes might take account of
the needs of children and youth to the fullest possible
extent.
1748tli plenar·y meeting,
19 Decen1,ber 1968.

2433 (XXIII). lnternational control of
psychotropic subl!ltancel!I
Tire General Assembly,
Concerned at the epidemic spread of the abuse of
psychotropic substances not yet under international
control and considering the responsibilities exercised
by the United Nations in that field under Chapter IX
of the Charter of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind the reports of the Economic and
Social Council and of the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs issued in 1966, 12 196713 and 196814 and the work
of the World Health Organization,
12 Official Records Qf the General Assembly, Twtnty-first
Session, Supplemtnt No. 3 (A/6303); Official Rccords of th,
Economic ,md Soci11l Council, Portieth Sessio,i, Sup¡,/cment
No. 2 (E/4140).
1s O fficial Records o/ the General Assembly, Twenty-s,c"""
Se ssion, Suppltmfflt No. 3 ( A/6703) ; O fficial RecMds of IM
Economic and Social Council, Forry-stcond Session, Sll,tllment No. 2 (E/4294).
14 Official Records of the General Assembl}•, Twnty-thirtl
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/7203); Official Rtc/Jf'ds of th,
Economic and Social Council, Forty-third Sessio11, Supplement No. 2 (E/4455).

44

General Asscmb)y-Twenty-third Session

Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1293 (XLIV) and 1294 (XLIV) oí 23 May 1968 and
World Health Assembly resolutions WHA18.47 oí 20
May 1965, WHA20.42 and WHA20.43 oí 25 May 1%7
and WHA21.42 oí 23 May 1968 urging controls on
psychotropic substances not yet under international
control,
N oting the progress made under the aegis oí the
Economic and Social Council to develop international
control of psychotropic substances not yet under such
control,
Requests the Economic and Social Council to call
u pon the Commission on N arcotic Drugs to give urge~t
attention to the problem of the abuse oí the psychotroptc
substances not yet under international control, including
the possibility oí placing such substances under international control.
1748th plenary meetin_q,
19 December 1968.

2434 (XXIII). Technical assistance in the field of
na reo tics
The General Assembly,
Considering the responsibility that the United Nations
exercises in the field oí narcotic drugs under Chapter
IX of the Charter of the United Nations and under the
international narcotics treaties,
Conscious of the fact that narcotic drug abuse cannot be efficiently combated ií the sources of the illicit
traffic in narcot1c drugs are not suppressed,
Recoqnizi11g that countries in which the narcotic raw
materiais are grown may not be able, by their own
effort alone, to put an end to illicit cultivation,
Bearing in mind the recent reports to the Economic
and Social Council on the work of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs and oí the Permanent Central Narcotics Board,
Recalling its resolution 1395 (XIV) of 20 November
1959 which established a continuing programrne of
technical assistance far narcotics control,
Co11sidering that drug addiction, where it is widespread, constitutes an obstacle to the economic and
social development of the countries concerned and requires urgent and concerted efforts for its solution,
which would have far-reaching and salutary effects on
the ever-growing problem of drug abuse,
l. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Commission on N arcotic Drugs and the International Narcotics Control Board and in consultation
with interested Governments, to develop plans for putting an end to the illegal or uncontrolled production
of narcotic raw materials and to submit these plans,
through the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session;
2. Invites the specialized agencies, in particular the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, as well as the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, to participate fully in
the preparation of these plans;
3. Recommends that the Governments concerned
develop plans to seek assistance from these agencies,
from the United Nations Development Programme and
from bilateral sources in their efforts to develop alternative economic programmes and activities, sucl1 as the
substitution of crops, as one .of the most constructive

means of ending the illegal or uncontrolled cultivation
of narcotic raw materials.
1748th plenary meetin_q,
19 December 1968.

2435 (XXIII). Assistance in cases of natural
disaster
The General Assembly,
Recallin_q its resolution 2034 (XX) of 7 December
1965 on assistance to Governments in cases of natural
disaster and its decision to review at its twenty-third
session the experimental arrangements provided for in
paragraph 5 of that resolution,
H aving noted the views of the Economic and Social
Council on the report oí the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations family of organizations
in connexion with natural disasters, 15
N oting with satisfactÍoll that the arrangements providecl for in General Assembly resolution 2034 (XX)
and the assistance extended to Governments by the
Secretary-General under that resolution have contrihuted towards relieving ·the distress and hardships
which follow natural disasters,
N oting with apprcciation the co-operation and assistance offered by certain Governments and provided by
various United Nations bodies and the specialized
agencies, as well as hy the League of Red Cross
Societies and other voluntary organizations. in the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 2034
(XX),
H aving considered the view of the Secretary-General
that United Nations assistance under General Assemhly
resolution 2034 (XX) would be of considerably wider
use and benefit to the developing countries suhject to
natural disasters if its conditions were broadened,
Recognizing the importance of scientific research and
modern technology in reducing the impact 0f natural
disasters on man and society,
Reiterating the importance it attaches to adequate
pre-disaster planning by Member States, 111 order to
mitigate the effects of natural disasters,
l. Invites Governments which have not alreadv done
so to make national preparations to meet naturaf disasters, including administrative arrangements and such
measures as training of relief personnel, stockpiling of
supplies needed for disaster relief, earmarking of means
of transportation and the development of warning systems and of means of speedy comnmnication ;
2. Invites Governments and organizations of the
United Nations system, as well as other organizations
concerned, to give full recognition to the need to
promote scientific research regarding the causes and
early manifestations of impending disasters, to ascertain
and assess areas and places of high vulnerability, all() to
encourage preventive and protective measures, sucl1 as
the construction of disaster-resistant housing;
3. Urges the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the organizations of the United Nations system
as well as the League of Red Cross Societies and other
organizations concerned, to consider ways of expanding
assistance to Governments in the fielcls referred to in
paragraphs 1 and 2 above;
15 O fficial Records of the Economic and Socia! C ouncil,
Resumed Forty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item 1, docu-

ment E/4544.
