S/PV.9104

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9104th meeting

Friday, 29 July 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Costa Filho/Mr. De Almeida Filho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Syed
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-44207 (E)
*2244207*

S/PV.9104

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of gratitude to the Permanent
Representative of Ireland to the United Nations
The President: Before proceeding, I would like
to say a word concerning the end of the tenure of
our distinguished and dear colleague Ambassador
Geraldine Byrne Nason. I have been informed that this
is her last meeting in the Security Council.
I am certain that I speak for all of us around this
table when I express my gratitude to Ambassador Byrne
Nason for our valuable cooperation and relationship in
the United Nations. Particularly here at the Security
Council, it has been an honour to work side by side with
her to promote peace and security and to defend our
shared deep belief in the Charter of the United Nations.
With Ambassador Byrne Nason’s competent
leadership, Ireland has successfully promoted the
core values of empathy, partnership and independence
here in the Security Council and time again played an
important role in building bridges, closing gaps and
reaching consensus.
Since we held a meeting on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace this very week (see S/PV.9101), I
would like to highlight that, during Ireland’s presidency
last September, Ambassador Byrne Nason worked
to bridge the critical gap between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding in leading the Council’s first-even
resolution on United Nations transitions (resolution
2594 (2021)).
Ambassador Byrne Nason has also been a champion
of women’s voices at the United Nations, not only at
the Security Council, where we share commitments to
make women and peace and security a top priority, but
also in other forums — for instance, as Chair of the
Commission on the Status of Women for two years.
The Council, and indeed the entire United Nations,
will miss her top-notch skills and negotiating prowess.
We look forward to continuing to work with her, her
team and her successor, hoping our paths cross again
shortly. I wish her and her family all the very best in
Washington, D.C.
As one would say in Irish — and please excuse my
pronunciation — Go n-éirí an bóthar leat, that is, may
the road rise to meet you.
2/30

29/07/2022

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Germany, Italy, Latvia, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Ukraine to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Thibault
Camelli, Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: The war triggered by the Russian
invasion of Ukraine is more than five months old
and shows no sign of ending. Instead, the fighting is
intensifying. In the face of such a grim prospect, the
agreement signed on 22 July in Istanbul to facilitate
the safe transportation of grain and foodstuffs from the
Ukrainian ports of Odesa, Chernomorsk and Yuzhny
constitutes a beacon of hope for humankind, as the
Secretary-General put it. The humanitarian agreement,
together with the understanding between the Russian
Federation and the Secretariat on promoting access of
Russian food products and fertilizers to world markets,
will help bridge the global food-supply gap and reduce
high prices.
Member States received a virtual briefing on
those efforts yesterday from Martin Griffiths, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Vera Songwe,
Under-Secretary-General and Executive Secretary
of the Economic Commission for Africa. The grain
agreement is a sign that dialogue between the parties
is possible in the quest to ease human suffering. The
United Nations is currently making every effort to
support the parties in operationalizing the initiative,
starting with the inauguration of a Joint Coordination
22-44207

29/07/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Centre two days ago. As the Secretary-General has
stated, all the parties made clear commitments to
ensure the safe movement of grain and related products
to global markets. Avoiding incidents such as the recent
strikes on Odesa and creating enabling conditions will
be key to the success of the initiative. It is therefore
imperative that the Russian Federation, Ukraine and
Türkiye work in partnership to effectively implement
the agreement.
Since I last briefed this Council, on 28 June (see
S/PV.9080), the number of civilians killed, wounded
or maimed by fighting has continued to grow. The
deadly missile, air and artillery attacks by Russian
armed forces have continued unabated, reducing many
Ukrainian cities and towns to rubble. The streets of
Kharkiv, Dnipro and Mykolayiv have been repeatedly
targeted. The port city of Odesa and the surrounding
region have also suffered multiple attacks. The capital
of the Kirovohrad region was reportedly struck
yesterday, as was the town of Liutizh, just north of
Kyiv. Cities in the Donbas, including Donetsk and
Bakhmut, are also reported to be under fire. Renewed
heavy fighting is now anticipated in the Kherson and
Zaporizhzhya regions.
At the same time, reported efforts to alter
administrative structures on the ground, including
attempts to introduce local governing bodies in
Russian-controlled areas, raise serious concerns about
the political implications of the war. As the conflict
enters a more protracted phase, attention is increasingly
turning to its longer-term humanitarian, recovery,
reconstruction and socioeconomic impact. As summer
wanes, the need for winterization planning is also
becoming pressing. Regrettably, political dialogue has
virtually ground to a halt.
The war has taken an unacceptable toll on Ukrainian
civilians. As of 27 July, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) had
recorded 12,272 civilian casualties in the country,
with 5,237 killed and 7,035 injured. That represents at
least 1,641 new civilian casualties since my previous
briefing. Those figures are based on verified incidents;
the actual numbers are considerably higher. As we have
reported, most of the civilian casualties recorded were
caused by explosive weapons with a wide-impact area.
Many of those weapons are inherently indiscriminate
when used in populated areas, where they invariably
have devastating humanitarian consequences. OHCHR,
the World Health Organization and UNESCO continue

S/PV.9104

to document the damage and destruction of civilian
housing, educational and health-care facilities and
places of worship. The impact of the war on Ukraine’s
health sector is particularly alarming. As of 25 July,
there have been 414 attacks on health care in Ukraine,
resulting in 85 deaths and 100 injuries. That includes
350 attacks on facilities in areas of conflict, where on
average around 316,000 patients have been treated per
month. In addition, since 24 February UNESCO has
verified conflict-related damage to 168 cultural sites,
including 73 religious buildings and 13 museums, while
2,129 educational institutions have also reportedly
suffered from bombing and shelling. Indiscriminate
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure are a
clear violation of international humanitarian law and
human rights law. We reiterate our urgent call to all
the parties to respect them, including the rules of
distinction, proportionality and precaution, and to
avoid the use of heavy weapons in populated areas.
As of 20 July, the humanitarian community has
provided aid to 11 million people. Some 9 million have
received food and livelihood assistance, and more than
4.5 million have benefited from protection services,
including legal assistance, mine clearance and mine risk
reduction. More than 4.2 million people have also been
able to access safe water and proper sanitation, while
nearly 2.3 million people have received cash assistance.
Despite difficulties in reaching people in need in the
non-Government-controlled areas of Donetsk and
Luhansk, humanitarian partners have provided aid to
as many as 125,000 people and to more than 30 health,
education, and social institutions in the area.
As of 19 July, 5,984,263 refugees from Ukraine
were recorded across Europe. Border crossings
from Ukraine since 24 February totalled more than
9.5 million. Crossings to Ukraine numbered 3.8 million.
We are concerned that winter will make it harder for the
displaced and the returnee community to have access to
shelter and health care. In order to address those risks,
the humanitarian community is focusing on supporting
the national and local systems to respond with housing
solutions, social protection and economic inclusion.
We cannot ignore the specific way the war is
affecting women and girls. While access to food has
significantly declined throughout Ukraine, womenheaded households in Ukraine are twice as likely to
experience food insecurity as those headed by men.
Women’s access to health services, including sexual and
reproductive health, is rapidly deteriorating, as is access

22-442073/30

S/PV.9104

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

to health care for newborns and children. With access to
education also largely hindered, women are taking on
the primary responsibility of homeschooling children.
Furthermore, women in Ukraine face significantly
increased safety and protection risks. Incidents of
gender-based violence, including allegations of sexual
violence in conflict, have grown, but services for
survivors are not provided in full. It is also likely that
many victims and survivors are currently unable to
report their cases.
Especially for those reasons, women must
meaningfully participate in discussions and initiatives
to shape the future of the country, including peace
negotiations, recovery efforts, peacebuilding and
accountability efforts.
The impact of the war globally is glaringly clear.
The consequences will only become more pronounced
the longer the conflict lasts, in particular with the
onset of winter. Despite the encouraging developments
on grain and fertilizers, we remain deeply concerned
about the lack of prospects for a shift towards a
meaningful resumption of diplomatic efforts to end
the war. Escalatory rhetoric from any side, including
about expanding the conflict geographically or
denying Ukraine’s statehood, is not consistent with the
constructive spirit demonstrated in Istanbul.
Let me state once again the commitment of the
United Nations to Ukraine’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence, within its internationally
recognized borders.
We are all aware of the horrors of this war. In
both Government- and non-Government-controlled
areas, ordinary people bear the brunt of attacks and
counter-attacks. Two weeks ago, the city of Vinnytsia
became the scene of another atrocious attack. Missiles
fired from the Black Sea killed more than 20 people,
including three children. Among those brutally cut
down in the attack was a 4-year-old girl, Liza, who had
been strolling through a park with her mother. We know
the heartbreaking story of her killing, and yet there
are many other children, fathers and mothers who are
dying in similar circumstances every day in Ukraine.
That incident and the long list of attacks devastating
Ukraine will stand as the ultimate indictment of the
utter senselessness and brutality of this war.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
4/30

29/07/2022

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me start by thanking
you, Mr. President, for your thoughtful remarks on
behalf of the Security Council about Geraldine Byrne
Nason. I echo those words and would like to reiterate my
personal pleasure and honour to have had the chance to
work with a seasoned diplomat. I wish her all the best.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for today’s update on Ukraine.
The Russian aggression has entered its sixth
month. It constitutes a blatant breach of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations, as it aims
to wipe Ukraine from the map. It is destroying cities,
railroads, bridges, Government offices, hospitals,
schools, cultural monuments, industry, farms and
ports. Everything is under attack. Because the war is
an attack on the quintessence of Ukraine’s economy, it
assaults the backbone of the country.
Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations
prohibits the use of force against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of another State. Russia violates that
Article. Last month, the International Court of Justice
issued an order calling on Russia to immediately halt
its military operations in Ukraine. Russia disregards
that order. On 2 March, the General Assembly called
on Russia to stop the war. Russia ignores it.
Russia continues to claim that there is no war in
Ukraine, and as recently as last month, the Foreign
Minister told the BBC News that his country had not
invaded Ukraine, despite the more than 12,000 civilian
victims, whose numbers continue to increase; the
uninterrupted shelling, with widespread and deliberate
destruction of civilian infrastructure and vast areas of
Ukrainian land temporarily occupied through massive
bombardments; and the scorched-earth campaign,
which amounts to nearly 20 per cent of Ukraine’s
territory that is not under the control of the legitimate
Government that was elected by the people of Ukraine,
not chosen by the Kremlin.
Just because we are used to that mantra, here and
elsewhere, that does not make it any less outrageous.
Whatever Russia may say, there are no legal grounds,
no moral justification and no other possible excuse for
this unprovoked war of aggression — it is a pure act of
aggression.
22-44207

29/07/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We remain concerned about the steps Russia is
taking to institutionalize and perpetuate control in
the occupied territories in Ukraine through a policy of
social engineering. The Moscow-imposed authorities
in Kherson say that they plan to ask the Kremlin to
formally annex the region to Russia. The response
comes in the form of the rationale that locals should
decide their own fate, which credits reports that Russia
may be planning to hold a referendum in the city.
Russia is already introducing its own currency,
media and Internet services to Kherson and other
occupied parts of Ukraine, as it has done in Crimea. It is
the same old playbook. There is no need to reinvent the
wheel for a territory grab. By doing so, Russia has again
outdone itself in its assembly line for manufacturing
artificial entities, which has become its modus operandi,
as we have seen before — staging fake referendums or
other such forms of sham legal simulation in order to
mushroom pseudo-republics at will. Annexation by
force will remain a violation of the United Nations
Charter. It will bear consequences for those responsible
in the framework of the accountability process and will
not be accepted. Any purported annexation, whatever
its cover, is premeditated, illegal and illegitimate.
We remain equally concerned about the reports
of forced population transfers, including of hundreds
of thousands of children, via the so-called filtration
process. As described in detail in the report of the
Moscow Mechanism of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe that was released earlier
this month, more than 1.4 million Ukrainians have been
transferred to Russia having passed through so-called
filtration centres.
Let us recall that the mass forcible transfer of
civilians during a conflict to the territory of the
occupying party is prohibited under the 1949 Geneva
Conventions. It constitutes a war crime. We reiterate our
call on Russia to stop the war and withdraw its forces
from Ukraine’s internationally recognized borders and
territorial waters.
We do not need to be reminded that the war in
Ukraine is having a devastating global impact. By
deliberately destroying Ukraine’s agricultural and
transport infrastructure and equipment and blocking
its ports, Russia has endangered food security for
millions of people across the world. That is now a fact.
Russia has weaponized grain, just as it has done with its
natural gas. The war has threatened European security.

S/PV.9104

By weaponizing gas and asserting energy coercion,
Russia is also testing European resolve and resilience
as winter approaches.
Albania welcomes the progress achieved in the talks
held last week in Istanbul, with mediation by Türkiye
and the United Nations, to open up the Black Sea for
Ukrainian exports of grains. That news brought a sense
of relief for many in the world as, for the first time in
five months of war, something positive was in sight. We
wanted to believe, as we still do, that diplomacy and
dialogue are always better than war. Unfortunately, it
took less than 24 hours after the deal was brokered to
see a cynical attack on the port of Odesa. The message
that those missiles brought home was clear — we are
bound by nothing, we can strike anywhere, anytime.
It is therefore difficult to blame those who say
that promises made by Russia, oral or written, are
worthless. Ukraine has learned that the hard way. In
1994, Ukrainians gave up the world’s third-largest
arsenal of nuclear weapons on Russia’s promise to
guarantee Ukrainian security. Documents were signed
but they turned out to be only papers. In 2014 and again
this year, Russia invaded the same country.
Nonetheless, we hope that the grain deal will be
honoured and quickly implemented in full, for the sake
of millions of people. Most of them live in developing
countries that have seen what it is like when Russia
enters their dining room and are now unsure that they
will have food on the table when they wake up the next
day.
Ukraine is the most serious stress-test of the rulesbased international order. It is the boiling point between
tyranny and the free world — a struggle between
strategic corruption and democracy, a battle between
the right to choose and the might to impose. Its outcome
will be paramount not only for Ukraine but for all of us.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
for her briefing.
I, too, would like to take a moment to express my
sincere appreciation to Ambassador Geraldine Byrne
Nason for her contributions to the Security Council.
During the year and then some that we have worked
together, I have admired her steadfast approach and her
commitment to finding a way forward for peace and
security. I wish her the best of luck in the future and
look forward to seeing her in Washington.

22-442075/30

S/PV.9104

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The Charter of the United Nations is the
Organization’s most sacred document. It is more than
a small blue booklet or noble words on a page. It is a
commitment that we have all freely signed as States
Members of the United Nations. It is the embodiment
of our ideals and the most powerful tool we have, in
its own opening words, to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. Today, we are here to discuss
how one country, Russia, has effectively set the
Charter of the United Nations on fire. Since Russia’s
full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February, the world
has witnessed its flagrant violations of international
law and complete disregard for the Charter and the
principles of peace, sovereignty and the protection of
civilians that the Charter holds dear.
The International Court of Justice has ordered
Russia to immediately suspend its military operations.
With overwhelming support from the international
community, the General Assembly has adopted
resolutions that have condemned Russia’s aggression. It
has demanded an end to the invasion and the withdrawal
of Russian troops and has suspended Russia from the
Human Rights Council.
Instead of following those demands and feeling
shamed by these clear condemnations, Russia has in fact
publicly expanded its war aims. As we warned earlier
this year, there should no longer be any doubt that
Russia intends to dismantle Ukraine as a geopolitical
entity and wipe it off the world map entirely. We
are seeing growing signs that Russia is laying the
groundwork to yet again attempt to annex more of
Ukraine’s territories. That includes the installation
of illegitimate proxy officials in Russian-held areas
with the goal of holding sham referendums or issuing
decrees on joining Russia. Foreign Minister Lavrov has
even stated that this is Russia’s war aim. Specifically,
Russia is currently reviewing plans to attempt to annex
the regions of Kherson and Zaporizhzhia, and all
of the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts. That is galling.
The acquisition of territory by force is about as clear
a violation of the Charter of the United Nations as
you can get. We cannot and will not stand by and let it
happen in silence.
So while we welcomed the progress made in Istanbul
last week on the export of grain and food and commend
the Secretary-General and the Government of Türkiye
for their efforts to facilitate that much-needed progress,
we also saw Russia’s true character a few hours later
when it launched a missile attack on the port of Odesa.
6/30

29/07/2022

Bombing a port does not make it easier for grain to get
out. Russia should allow grain and food to leave Odesa
unharmed in order to feed a hungry world. Those cruel
acts should come as no surprise. As we have said many
times, we assess that members of Russia’s forces have
committed horrific war crimes in Ukraine. Those who
perpetrated and ordered those crimes must be held to
account for their actions.
For those countries saying that one country’s
security should not come at the expense of another’s,
what exactly do they call Russia’s armed invasion — an
armed invasion of its neighbour that disdains attempts
to reach a peaceful resolution by silencing its guns,
withdrawing its forces and embracing diplomacy? To
countries that call for all parties to embrace diplomacy
without naming Russia, we should make it clear that
Russia’s ongoing actions are the sole obstacle to a
resolution to the crisis. The evidence of the scale of
atrocities continues to mount. We have seen credible
reports of bombings of schools and hospitals, as we
heard in Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo’s comments
today, as well as of the killing of aid workers and
journalists, the targeting of civilians attempting to flee
and the brutal execution-style murder of those going
about their daily business in Bucha.
We have also seen the violent abuse and forced
deportations of Ukrainian civilians through so-called
filtration operations. To date, there is evidence that
Russia’s forces have interrogated, detained and forcibly
deported what are estimated to be hundreds of thousands
of Ukrainian citizens, including children — tearing
them from their homes and sending them to remote
regions in the East. As of May, in one location within
a Russian-controlled area of Ukraine, more than
20,000 people were in line for filtration. The process
of filtration is slow, with some Ukrainians waiting up
to three weeks to be processed. Given the long wait,
reports indicate that filtration-centre employees and
people awaiting filtration were selling places in line.
The United States has information that officials from
Russia’s presidential Administration are overseeing
and coordinating filtration operations. Russia is also
using advanced technology to facilitate filtration
processes, including for the purpose of collecting
data on Ukrainians undergoing filtration. In 2021,
officials within a Russian-controlled area of Ukraine
formulated a draft list of more than a dozen proposed
locations for filtration operations, including reinforced
police stations.
22-44207

29/07/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Let me put this in plain terms. Russia is tearing
families apart. It is sending children to remote regions
far from their homes. It is forcibly replacing people’s
passports and attempting to impose its own identity
over the national identity of Ukrainian citizens. It is
expanding this horrific operation with blatant disregard
for the principles of national sovereignty.
Despite the disinformation that Russia peddles
in this very Chamber, no one believes Ukraine is
doing any of that to itself. Every member here has
borne witness to the atrocities, and we will not forget.
Each and every atrocity deserves accountability. The
awful consequences of the conflict — the millions of
Ukrainians who have been forced to flee their homes
for neighbouring countries or other parts of Ukraine,
the disruptions to food and other essential supplies,
the war crimes and atrocities against civilians and the
resulting trauma — will end only when Russia ends the
war. Until that fateful day, the rest of us have a duty to
stand up, to say that enough is enough and to defend
the Charter of the United Nations, which we have all
pledged to support.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): At
the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo for her informative briefing. I also welcome
the participation of the representative of Ukraine in
this meeting.
More than five months into the war, United Nations
figures reveal a staggering humanitarian crisis. Nearly
16 million people need assistance and more than
12 million have been forcibly displaced, including
approximately two thirds of Ukraine’s children. As the
battlefield expands, a growing number of people whose
movement is limited due to age, illness or disability are
caught in the midst of the heaviest fighting. The war’s
devastating toll continues to be felt outside Ukraine,
as it exacerbates food shortages and commodityprice increases, and thereby threatens the lives and
livelihoods of people around the world.
Against this difficult backdrop, we would like to
express three key points. First, the protection of civilians
remains paramount. Recent fighting in urban areas
risks homes, schools and hospitals with damage and
destruction. The last several weeks witnessed numerous
examples of the destruction of civilian infrastructure,
often with reports of heavy civilian casualties. There
are increasingly worrying reports that this trend will
escalate. Parties must heed their obligations under

S/PV.9104

international law, including international humanitarian
law, and refrain from targeting civilians and civilian
objects and avoid placing military objectives in or near
civilian areas.
Secondly, the war’s impact on global food security
only adds to the urgency of confidence-building
measures that could pave the path towards broader
agreements. In this context, while we welcome the deal
agreed in Istanbul on exports of grain, foodstuffs and
fertilizers and praise the invaluable role played by the
Secretary-General and the Republic of Türkiye, we are
disappointed that the Security Council could not unify
behind an endorsement of the deal. Unfortunately,
positive developments in this conflict have been
exceedingly rare. It is all the more critical, therefore,
that when progress does occur, this body should find a
way to respond with a single voice.
For its part, the United Arab Emirates believes that
the agreement is a step in the right direction. But the
measure of its success will be its full implementation
and its utilization for further constructive international
engagement, including by the United Nations.
Thirdly, this crisis has put this institution and
its Charter under strain. While the prospects of
meaningful Security Council action on Ukraine appear
limited, it remains crucial that we defend the principles
of the Charter and seize every opportunity to bring
about a peaceful resolution. It is also critical that we
recognize that upholding the United Nations Charter
means ensuring that the Council continues to work to
fulfil its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security in Ukraine and on
every file on its agenda.
As we have said before, only an end to the war will
put a stop to the devastation it has wrought. This means a
negotiated resolution that produces a sustainable peace.
And as we have frequently said, achieving that requires
women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in all
peace efforts. It is essential that women’s leadership
and involvement take place not only at the end of a
conflict, but also in the design and implementation of
conflict-resolution processes.
As the fighting unfortunately continues, the parties
and the international community must work to limit
the suffering inflicted in Ukraine and its ramifications
beyond. Still, we know that important progress can be
made through dedicated and pragmatic diplomacy. It is

22-442077/30

S/PV.9104

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

vital that we encourage, nurture and facilitate dialogue
and de-escalation whenever and wherever possible.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank the Ambassador of Ireland
for her contribution to the work of the Security Council
since the beginning of last year and wish her all the best
for her next mission with great warmth and friendship.
We are entering the sixth month of the conflict.
Russia continues its unjustifiable and devastating
war. It is concentrating its efforts on eastern Ukraine,
subjecting such cities as Poltava, Kremenchuk and
Bakhmut to indiscriminate artillery shelling. Attacks on
schools and hospitals continue. The conflict has already
killed nearly 350 children and injured 560 others.
Russia is responsible for this devastation. It has
premeditated its aggression against a sovereign State
in flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter.
As demanded by the International Court of Justice
in its order of 16 March, Russia is legally obliged
to immediately suspend its military operations. By
acting aggressively against Ukraine, not only is Russia
undermining the security of Europe, but it is also
calling into question the fundamental principles of
international law.
France denounces the forced Russification of the
zones occupied by the Russian army. The substitution
of Russian names for Ukrainian names in cities and
neighbourhoods, the granting of Russian citizenship
to newborns, the introduction of the ruble and the
modification of school curricula are all clear signals
of Russia’s intentions. France will never recognize
Russia’s control or annexation of Ukrainian territories.
This war of aggression runs the risk of an
unprecedented world food crisis. Russia is solely
responsible for the worsening of the world food
situation. In this context, the progress made in Istanbul
on 22 July is a first step. France thanks the SecretaryGeneral and Türkiye for the key role they played in
those negotiations. The commitments that have been
made must be kept and implemented without delay.
What the world needs now is for ships to circulate in
the Black Sea and for grain to reach those who need
it. No sooner had the ink dried on these agreements
than Russia launched an attack on the port of Odesa,
followed a few days later by new strikes on Mykolayiv.
To claim that these bombings do not undermine the
effective launch of the mechanism agreed in Istanbul
is a further lie.
8/30

29/07/2022

The French position is very clear: it is necessary
to continue to support Ukraine by all means, be they
military, humanitarian or financial. France is devoting
$2 billion to economic and humanitarian support
for Ukraine. It welcomes the Lugano conference on
reconstruction. It is ready to provide this support in the
long term.
France remains resolutely committed to supporting
the efforts of the Ukrainian authorities and the
international courts to bring those responsible for
the large-scale abuses to justice. In this regard, it
has provided technical assistance to the Prosecutor
General’s Office of Ukraine and actively supports the
activities of the International Criminal Court.
France once again calls on Russia to immediately
cease hostilities, withdraw its troops from Ukrainian
territory and fully respect international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. It will continue
to stand by the sovereign Ukrainian nation in its
courageous and unrelenting action to defend itself.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, like other speakers, I would also like to
bid farewell to Ambassador Byrne Nason, Permanent
Representative of Ireland, and thank her for her
contribution to the work of the Security Council. I wish
her all the best in her new post.
The Ukraine crisis has been dragging on for more
than five months now. The crisis has not only had a
serious impact on Europe, but its negative spillover
effect is also reverberating globally. In a world
affected by wars and sanctions, the impediment to
the exportation of food and fertilizer from Ukraine
and Russia is not only posing a challenge to global
food security and aggravating the plight of vulnerable
developing countries, but it is also making it more
difficult for the international community to achieve the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and promote
a stable recovery in the world’s economy.
We are pleased to see that last week in Istanbul,
with the joint efforts of the relevant parties concerned,
Russia, Ukraine, Türkiye and the United Nations signed
an agreement on shipping grain out of Ukraine and that
Russia and the United Nations signed an agreement on
the export of Russian food and fertilizers. Currently, a
Joint Coordination Centre, with the participation of the
four parties, has been established, and the preparation
is progressing smoothly for the first shipment of grain
out of Ukraine. That brings hope for easing the food
22-44207

29/07/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

shortage and the suffering of the poor in developing
countries and for alleviating the global food crisis.
China welcomes that. China commends SecretaryGeneral Guterres and all the parties concerned for the
positive role they played.
The signing of the two agreements shows that, as
long as we do not relent in our efforts, there is still room
for the parties to resolve problems through consultation.
We are encouraged by the efforts of Russia and Ukraine
to transcend their political differences for constructive
engagement. We also hope that the two parties will
continue to maintain dialogue and communication,
strive for an early return to diplomatic negotiations and
achieve a ceasefire as soon as possible.
The issue of grain shipping is very complex. It is
quite common to encounter difficulties of one kind or
another in implementing an agreement. The parties
concerned should adhere to their political will, uphold
the spirit of cooperation, strengthen communication
and coordination and properly address the challenges
so that they can jointly promote the implementation
of the agreements, get it off to a good start and push
it forward continuously. The international community
should see the signing and implementation of the two
agreements from the humanitarian perspective, reject
politicization, create a favourable environment for
the follow-up implementation of the agreements and
provide solid guarantees.
Since the outbreak of the Ukraine crisis last
February, China has been taking an objective and
impartial approach and proceeding from a historical
perspective and the merit of the issue itself. China has
been standing on the side of peace and of humanitarian
efforts, calling for a ceasefire to stop the fighting,
facilitating a cool-off period, actively promoting peace
talks and providing humanitarian assistance. China has
put forward a six-point initiative and the international
food security cooperation initiative to ease the
humanitarian crisis in Ukraine. China provided two
batches of humanitarian assistance to Ukraine, totalling
15 million yuan, with an additional 20 million yuan in
emergency humanitarian aid to be provided in the near
future. We undertook our efforts in a responsible way
to mitigate the spillover effect of the crisis and alleviate
its impact on the global industrial chain and supply
chain. We will continue to play an active, constructive
role in stabilizing international trade and the world
economic order.

S/PV.9104

China’s position on the Ukraine issue is consistent
and clear and will stand the test of history. We have
always maintained that the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all countries should be respected, the
legitimate security concerns of all countries be taken
seriously, and the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations must be abided by. All
efforts conducive to the peaceful settlement of the crisis
should be supported. We have stated China’s position
many times in the Council recently, and I would like to
emphasize three points today.
First, the Ukraine crisis shows that the security of all
countries is indivisible. Only by attaching importance
to the security of others and safeguarding the security
of everyone can our own security be truly realized. All
countries should uphold a common, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security concept, attach
importance to each other’s legitimate security concerns,
build a balanced, effective and sustainable global and
regional security architecture and jointly safeguard
world peace. Putting one’s own security above that
of others, attempting to strengthen military blocs,
establishing absolute superiority and even shaping the
surrounding environment of other countries according
to their own standards will lead only to conflict and
confrontation, divide the international community and
make themselves less secure.
Secondly, the Ukraine crisis shows that the evolution
of changes not seen in a century is accelerating and our
world is facing increasing instability and uncertainty
under the intertwined impact of war and the pandemic.
In an era of changes and challenges, no country can
deal with them alone and no country is insulated. At a
time when the international community is in dire need
of unity and cooperation to overcome the difficulties
together, it is extremely irresponsible and dangerous
to cling to the Cold War mentality and bloc politics,
promote decoupling, erect barriers and politicize,
instrumentalize and weaponize economic and trade
exchanges in order to coerce other countries to take
sides and deliberately create division and confrontation.
The international community should be highly alert to
that counter-current and resist it together. We must not
let the crisis of Ukraine trigger a new Cold War. We
must not repeat the mistakes of history. We must not
let humankind experience once again the unbearable
scourge of war.
Thirdly, the crisis in Ukraine shows that only by
adhering to the purposes and principles of the United

22-442079/30

S/PV.9104

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Nations Charter can we enjoy peace and development,
and any deviation from that will bring about only
conflict and anxiety. As the legal cornerstone of
today’s international order, the United Nations Charter
is irreplaceable in its role and unshakable in its status.
Compliance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter should be consistent, with
words matching deeds, instead of saying one thing
while doing another, not to mention double standards
or selective application. While a certain country has
repeatedly emphasized the principle of sovereignty
over the issue of Ukraine, it has incessantly challenged
the sovereignty of China over Taiwan and even
deliberately created tensions in the Taiwan Strait. That
is a disregard for, and an infringement of, the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter. China has
always respected the sovereignty of other countries,
and certainly hopes that its own sovereignty will be
respected by other countries. China is resolute and firm
as rock in its will to safeguard national sovereignty. No
one should underestimate the determination and ability
of more than 1.4 billion Chinese people to defend its
national sovereignty and territorial integrity. I hope
that the country concerned will clearly see that and not
play with fire.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by joining
you, Mr. President, in expressing our appreciation to
our colleague Ambassador Geraldine Byrne Nason for
her impactful work in the Security Council, including
on the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, which we worked on together. I wish her the
very best in her next endeavours. I also thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for the timely
updates on the security and the humanitarian situation
in Ukraine. I warmly welcome to this meeting all rule
37 and rule 39 participants.
Ghana deeply regrets the unrelenting hostilities
several months into the start of this needless conflict in
spite of the mounting civilian death toll and the extensive
destruction caused to economic infrastructure, cultural
sites, monuments and livelihoods.
We also continue to worry deeply about the
expanding humanitarian threat as more civilians,
particularly children, women, the elderly and persons
with disabilities, come under the barrage of crossfire
and are forced to flee their homes or to shelter in
bunkers with limited access to food, clean water and
basic services.
10/30

29/07/2022

As we have forcefully stated previously,
infrastructure and livelihoods could potentially be
rebuilt after the war, but the tragic reality is that the
human lives lost to this senseless conflict cannot
be recovered.
It is for that reason that we wish to use this
opportunity to renew our call on the Russian
Federation to stop this war and to heed the international
community’s call to unconditionally withdraw all its
invading troops from the internationally recognized
borders of Ukraine.
In making that genuine call on the Russian
Federation, we are mindful of, and acknowledge, the
stated security concerns, which, we believe, could be
effectively addressed by a pacific settlement, as provided
for by the Charter of the United Nations, through intense
diplomacy, underpinned by unconditional dialogue and
a commitment to cooperation. The solution required
is certainly not a military one, but a consensual
political settlement that takes into account the security
concerns of the parties and assures the stability of the
entire region.
We are concerned about the persisting inability
of the Council to support the parties’ engagement in
substantial discussions about urgent ceasefire and
peace initiatives despite its obligation under the
Charter to shoulder the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. The
current situation affects the Council’s reputation and
undermines its credibility as an effective arbiter in
other conflict theatres.
In the light of the Council’s handicap, Ghana
encourages and affirms its steadfast support for the
continued deployment of the good offices of the
Secretary-General in the international endeavour to
bring an end to the war and facilitate a diplomatic
solution to the crisis in Ukraine.
Ghana commends the Secretary-General and other
leaders, especially those of Türkiye, for the positive
engagement of the parties to the Ukrainian conflict,
culminating in the landmark agreement on the initiative
on the safe transportation of grain and foodstuffs from
Ukrainian ports, signed in Istanbul on 22 July. We also
welcome the memorandum of understanding between
the Russian Federation and the Secretariat on promoting
the access of Russian food products and fertilizers to
world markets.
22-44207

29/07/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Ghana takes note the official inauguration of the Joint
Coordination Centre in Istanbul and remains confident
of the prospect of a swift and effective implementation
of the agreements in order for commercial operations
to resume in the Black Sea and contribute substantially
in helping to stabilize the international prices of food
and fertilizers, which are currently priced beyond the
capacity of many consumers and users.
These are difficult times for Ukraine, and we are
pained by the traumatic circumstances that the people
of Ukraine have been forced into by the war. The
mental impact, especially on children, is likely to have
devastating consequences for several years to come. In
that connection, humanitarian efforts should focus not
only on the physical needs of the affected civilians, but
also on their psychological needs and emotional health,
as the damage of the war will result in long-lasting
psychological trauma.
In conclusion, I would like to remind all actors,
including the parties to the conflict, that the protection
and safety of civilians should drive our efforts to
facilitate a peaceful settlement of the conflict. As a
Council, we have an urgent and collective responsibility
to invest in the peace of Ukraine and avoid actions that
reinforce the security concerns of the parties and serve
only to perpetuate a needless war.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I also join others
in extending our best wishes to the Permanent
Representative of Ireland, Ambassador Geraldine
Byrne Nason, for her future endeavours. I thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing
on the situation in Ukraine.
India remains concerned about the situation in
Ukraine. The conflict has resulted in lives lost and
untold misery for its peoples, particularly women,
children and the elderly, with millions becoming
homeless and forced to take shelter in neighbouring
countries. Reports of deaths of civilians in the ongoing
conflict are deeply disturbing. We reiterate our grave
concerns in that regard.
Since the beginning of the conflict in Ukraine,
India has consistently called for the immediate
cessation of hostilities and an end to the violence.
India has called upon both sides to return to the path of
diplomacy and dialogue and has expressed its support
for all diplomatic efforts to end the conflict. We believe
that no solution can be reached at the cost of innocent
lives. Our Prime Minister has spoken to the Presidents

S/PV.9104

of Ukraine and Russia on multiple occasions and
reiterated India’s position.
The impact of the Ukraine conflict is not limited
just to Europe. The conflict is exacerbating concerns
about food, fertilizer and fuel security, particularly
in developing countries. It is necessary for all of us
to adequately appreciate the importance of equity,
affordability and accessibility when it comes to food
grains. Open markets must not become an argument to
perpetuate inequity and promote discrimination.
In that context, we welcome the recent development
towards ensuring the safe and secure export of grains
and fertilizers. We hope that those agreed measures
will be implemented by all parties earnestly, even
if they may not be sufficient to address the food
insecurity concerns.
India is committed to working constructively
to mitigate the adverse impact of the conflict on
food security. India has been providing financial
assistance and supplying food grains to countries in
order to meet their food security needs, at the request
of their Governments. India has exported more than
1.8 million tons of wheat to countries in need, including
Afghanistan, Myanmar, the Sudan and Yemen in the
past three months. The United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has also
acknowledged that the export of wheat from India has
emerged as a key supply line for Yemen in the wake
of the Ukraine conflict. We are continuing to help our
neighbour Sri Lanka to ensure its food security.
We are trying to increase the production of
fertilizers in India. There is also a need to focus on the
availability of fertilizers and keep the supply chains of
fertilizers smooth at a global scale. Similarly, efforts
should be made to ensure stability in the global supply
of fuel, commensurate with the demand.
We reiterate the importance of the United Nations
guiding principles for humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian action must always be guided by the
principles of humanitarian assistance — humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence. Those
measures should never be politicized.
We continue to reiterate that the global order is
anchored to international law, the Charter of the United
Nations and respect for territorial integrity and the
sovereignty of States.

22-4420711/30

S/PV.9104

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Ms. Syed (Norway): Let me also, on behalf of
the Norwegian delegation, join others in thanking
Ambassador Geraldine Byrne Nason for her excellent
companionship — both in running for and in the
Security Council itself over the past years. I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
for her updates on the ongoing Russian invasion of
Ukraine, and in particular its impact on the lives of the
Ukrainian people.
The Charter of the United Nations prohibits
aggression and the acquisition of territory by force.
As this war on Ukraine continues, it inflicts a
terrible, cumulative harm on the civilian population,
undermining prospects for peace and security. More
than five months of Russian invasion and violence
has created wounds that will take generations to
heal. Russian attacks against civilians and civilian
infrastructure have continued to intensify in many
areas across Ukraine. Recent attacks in Chasiv Yar,
Kharkiv, Kramatorsk and Vinnytsia, have left scores
of civilians injured or killed. And people all over
Ukraine, including in Kyiv, continue to live in daily
fear of the next attack. We reiterate our demand that
civilians be protected and international humanitarian
law and international human rights law fully respected
and implemented.
The Russian aggressors’ disregard for human
rights continues to shock the international community.
We are deeply concerned about reports that Russian
forces have tortured prisoners of war and unlawfully
detained, tortured and forcibly disappeared civilians
in occupied territories. There are ample indications
of war crimes being committed. Those crimes cannot
be forgotten. Perpetrators — at all levels — must be
held accountable.
We have seen some hope amid the bleak outlook.
Norway commends the Secretary-General for his
contribution to the essential initiative on the safe
transportation of grain and foodstuffs from Ukrainian
ports. We also commend the Republic of Türkiye for
facilitating the negotiations and subsequent signing
ceremony on 22 July. That initiative will be essential
to easing global food insecurity and building trust
between the parties — but it must be implemented.
The entire world was shocked by the Russian
missile attack against the Ukrainian port of Odesa the
very next day after the signing of the initiative. Norway
stands together with Ukraine and echoes the clear
12/30

29/07/2022

condemnation by the Secretary-General of Russia’s
attacks against Odesa.
The war in Ukraine is a human crisis purposefully
created by Russian leaders. They bear the responsibility
to end this war. They must end the suffering, both for
the Ukrainian people and for all people around the
world impacted by the consequences of Russia’s actions.
We demand the immediate cessation of hostilities by
the Russian Federation against Ukraine and the full
and immediate withdrawal of the Russian forces and
military equipment from Ukraine’s internationally
recognized borders and territorial waters. We also
support all sincere efforts towards political dialogue,
negotiations and mediation.
In May, the Council expressed its unified support
for the efforts of the Secretary-General in the search for
a peaceful solution. Those efforts are more important
than ever as the accumulated effects of the war are felt
by the people of Ukraine and beyond. We therefore
encourage the Secretary-General to continue his efforts
to support dialogue between the parties in the search for
a peaceful solution and peace for the people of Ukraine.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to wish our friend
the Ambassador of Ireland every success in undertaking
her new responsibilities in Washington, D.C. It has been
a pleasure working with her.
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
briefing, and we welcome those representatives present
at this meeting in accordance with rules 37 and 39 of
the rules of procedure.
For slightly more than five months, we have heard
various interpretations of a confusing narrative that
fails to justify the war in Ukraine. From the beginning,
my country’s position has been very clear with regard
to upholding Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter
of the United Nations, which states that all Members
shall refrain from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of
any State. What is happening in Ukraine is a flagrant
violation of the Charter. The free and self-serving
interpretations of the right to self-defence set out
in Article 51 of the Charter, which set a dangerous
precedent, are also very worrisome. My country has
systematically condemned such conduct in various
contexts for many years.
22-44207

29/07/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

In addition to the blatant affront made against
the Charter and my country’s own constitutional
principles of foreign policy, there have been recurrent
violations of international law, including the norms of
international humanitarian law. The attacks against
commercial and residential areas continue, and the
toll that has been exacted on the civilian population is
deplorable. On 14 July, an attack in Vinnytsia left more
than 20 civilians dead, including a number of children.
That was preceded by the 9 July attack on Chasiv Yar,
in which another 48 civilians were killed. A total of
5,000 civilian deaths have been verified, but the actual
number is undoubtedly greater.
As long as hostilities continue, the protection of
civilians and humanitarian aid must be prioritized.
The parties must observe the principles of distinction
and proportionality and take all the necessary
precautions to protect both the population and civilian
infrastructure. Specific priority measures that must be
taken include the accurate and timely dissemination of
information and warnings; the evacuation of civilians
to safe locations; building shelters; the enabling of, and
providing access for, civil protection organizations;
and the non-use of weapons with indiscriminate effects
in densely populated areas.
Our repeated call is unequivocal: international
humanitarian law must be respected, without
exceptions. The humanitarian dimension of this
conflict has reached tragic and regrettable proportions.
It is estimated that there are already close to 16 million
people with humanitarian needs of various kinds, many
of them very critical.
The world paid close attention to the agreements
signed in Istanbul on 22 July. Mexico recognizes the
commitment and effort made by both parties — Russia
and Ukraine — to reach those agreements, as well
as the diligent facilitation efforts of the Government
of Türkiye. We commend the vision, initiative and
impetus given by Secretary-General António Guterres,
as well as the outstanding work of his mediation team.
Just as we welcomed his good offices in presidential
statement S/PRST/2022/3 of 6 May, today we express
our appreciation and reiterate our support for him in
continuing the delicate work of seeking new pathways
to move forward in bringing peace to the region.
Moreover, it is regrettable that the Security Council
has not been able to welcome the so-called Black Sea
agreements, notwithstanding their extreme significance,

S/PV.9104

as they represent the first concrete measures to address
the global food crisis looming over, and posing a threat
to, many regions throughout the world and show that,
even in the middle of a war, dialogue is possible.
It is certainly also very regrettable that, a few hours
after the signing of the agreements, Odesa was targeted
by missile attacks. The agreements are nevertheless
in force and have begun to be implemented, which
is a very important step forward, the importance of
which cannot and must not be underestimated. The
safe passage of grain, fertilizer and related products to
global markets represents a lifeline for the millions of
people depending on it who are living in food insecurity
and could fall victim to starvation.
While Istanbul has sent us a sign of encouragement,
the complete cessation of hostilities must be our actual
goal. In the immediate future, openness, dialogue and
genuine commitment will be required from both the
parties concerned and the international community to
end the war. Mexico reiterates its belief that the only
way to achieve that outcome is through diplomatic
channels, which involves continuing the mediation work
provided for in the Charter of the United Nations. We
therefore urge the Secretary-General and his team to
ensure the continued implementation of the agreements
that were reached.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I join others in thanking Ambassador Byrne Nason
for her stalwart and eloquent defence of international
peace and security during her tenure on the Security
Council and elsewhere. We will miss her.
I would like to start by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing.
First, we joint others in welcoming the 22 July
deal agreed in Istanbul to export the grain trapped
by Russia’s blockade of Odesa and other ports. We
commend the role of the United Nations and Türkiye in
brokering that solution. The agreement is undoubtedly
important. Its implementation is now vital so that
Ukrainian farmers’ grain can once again be baked into
bread in markets and sent to tables around the world and
enable the World Food Programme to address pressing
famine conditions, including in Somalia and Ethiopia.
Secondly, we cannot forget the record of Russia’s
atrocities and crimes in the more than five months
since Russia invaded Ukraine. Before the ink had even
dried on the 22 July grain agreement, Russia brazenly

22-4420713/30

S/PV.9104

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

attacked the port of Odesa. That latest attack follows
others — breaches of international humanitarian law in
Bucha and Irpin, the attacks on civilians in the Mariupol
theatre, the Kramatorsk train station, the Kremenchuk
shopping mall, apartment buildings in Chasiv Yar and
Vinnytsia and the widespread torture and abuse of
detainees, including women and children, as identified
by Human Rights Watch and the Moscow Mechanism
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe. The video this week of the castration of a
Ukrainian prisoner of war by Russian soldiers is an
illustration of Russia’s barbarism and criminality.
Thirdly, Russia has violated the Charter of the
United Nations and breached its obligations under that
Charter. For five months, Russia has been engaged in
an illegal invasion of another Member State, in breach
of its Charter obligations and in complete disregard of
resolutions of the General Assembly and the orders of
the International Court of Justice. The preparations for
sham referendums in Kherson and Zaporizhzhia are the
most recent examples of Russia’s breaches of Ukrainian
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We therefore
continue to demand that Russia end its invasion,
withdraw from Ukraine and uphold its obligations
under the Charter.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In the month that has passed since the last
Security Council meeting on Ukraine (see S/PV.9080),
we have made significant progress in achieving the
objectives of the special military operation.
With the capture of Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk,
the Russian armed forces and formations of the Donetsk
and Luhansk people’s republics have completely
liberated the territory of the Luhansk people’s republic.
A systematic offensive in the Donetsk people’s republic
is continuing. A total of 255 settlements have been
liberated in both places, and it is only a matter of time
before the people of the Donbas regain control of the
entire region. There are videos all over the Internet
showing the people of liberated Lysychansk taking to
the streets to meet the Russian military and the people’s
militias with Saint George’s ribbons and Russian flags
in their hands. We suggest that everyone who in the past
few months has grown sick of Ukraine’s propagandistic
fairy stories about Russian troops allegedly terrorizing
the local population should watch that footage and
see the reactions of real people and their tears of joy
when they can at last leave their shelters and no longer
fear the Ukrainian nationalists. The restoration of the
14/30

29/07/2022

liberated areas is in full swing. Thanks to our efforts,
peace is returning to Mariupol, where centralized water
and electricity are being restored. Construction has
begun on a main water pipeline in the Luhansk people’s
republic, and on a multifunctional medical facility in
Luhansk itself.
The cruelty of the Ukrainian nationalists and
their indifference to the residents of southern and
eastern Ukraine have had a serious impact on the
mood of residents. In the Zaporizhzhia and Kherson
regions people are standing in line to apply for Russian
passports. Despite the Ukrainian authorities’ efforts
to do their utmost to intimidate their citizens by
committing acts of terror against civil administration
employees and launching criminal prosecutions against
those who switch to Russian citizenship, the people are
continuing to choose the country they trust and opting
for a normal future for themselves and their children.
Ukraine is losing those people by the minute, just as it
previously lost the people of the Donbas when the Kyiv
regime waged a war of annihilation on them in 2014.
The Kyiv regime is trying to exact vengeance
even on its own military personnel, who have realized
the futility of carrying out their criminal orders and
surrendered in order to have a chance at redemption and
a peaceful life. This morning a detention centre near
Olenivka in the Donbas was struck by missiles from
a United States-made High Mobility Artillery Rocket
System, killing more than 50 Ukrainian prisoners of
war. However, such scare tactics will only encourage
Ukrainian servicemen to surrender. We are seeing
multiple cases daily of soldiers of the Ukrainian armed
forces refusing to continue fighting.
The changing attitude of the people of southern
Ukraine that I have just described is largely attributed
to the fact that the Ukrainian armed forces have
continued to employ their favourite tactic of using
civilian infrastructure as cover and deployment sites
for heavy equipment. Dozens of eyewitnesses have
confirmed the reports of the Kyiv regime’s treatment
of its people, and unlike the so-called witnesses from
Ukrainian and Western investigations, they do not
conceal their names and addresses. They also confirm
that Ukrainian armed forces are targeting civilian
objects and shooting at civilians, actions they later try
to present as those of Russian troops. Staged incidents,
such as notoriously occurred in Bucha, are being
increasingly refuted, and that is almost impossible to
ignore. It is only our Western colleagues who appear
22-44207

29/07/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

not to notice, and that we have seen with our own eyes
even in today’s meeting. Our British colleague cited an
exhaustive list of such provocations, for which I thank
her very much.
In the past month there has been some progress
on exports of Ukrainian grain and access for Russian
foodstuffs and fertilizers to global markets. Two
separate documents, which together constitute a
package agreement, were signed in Istanbul on 22 July.
I should underscore that we were ready to settle those
issues as long ago as April after they were discussed by
President Putin and Secretary-General Guterres at their
meeting in Moscow. However, Kyiv and its Western
sponsors attempted to sabotage the package agreement,
emphasizing only the part about Ukrainian grain,
although, by our estimates, what is at issue is only
about 5 million tons, or less than 1 per cent of the total
volume of grain on the global market. We are grateful
to the Secretary-General and Türkiye, as they did not
agree to do the West’s bidding, which went a long way
to enabling the agreement to be reached. The signing of
a memorandum between Russia and the United Nations
on facilitating access for Russian foodstuffs to global
markets once again proves how completely unfounded
the attempts are to blame our country for the global
food crisis, which was artificially created by the actions
of Western States, and the signs of which we are seeing
more and more clearly.
On 26 July, the Joint Coordination Centre began
working to facilitate the safe transportation of grain
from Ukrainian ports, with the participation of
representatives of Russia, Türkiye and Ukraine and
with the coordination of our United Nations colleagues.
We hope that the Istanbul agreements will soon begin to
be implemented in full and that the Secretary-General,
in accordance with his obligations, will do everything
possible to remove the obstacles created by the United
States and the European Union with regard to the
payment, insurance and logistics for Russian cargoes.
Incidentally, the deployment of military equipment and
facilities in the port of Odesa is hardly conducive to
the successful implementation of the grain deal. We
will continue to destroy such cargo and equipment,
as we did on 23 July, when we destroyed a Ukrainian
military ship and a depot of Harpoon anti-ship missiles
sent by the United States. Nothing in the memorandum
we signed prevents us from continuing to ensure the
demilitarization of Ukraine.

S/PV.9104

Over the past month, the proxy war waged by
the West against Russia, which is being fought to the
very last Ukrainian, has escalated to new levels. With
the initiation of active deliveries to the Ukrainian
regime of modern multiple-launch rocket systems,
which are being controlled by and used upon Western
instruction, Western countries have come close to
direct involvement in the conflict. Private Western
companies are purported to be willingly providing Kyiv
with their satellite imagery for strikes. We have already
repeatedly seen how those images are being used for all
kinds of staging and provocation. Of course, we cannot
ignore that.
As for the weapons supplied to Kyiv and the
mercenaries who remain on Ukrainian territory, they
will continue to be destroyed by the Russian armed
forces as legitimate military targets. The thoughtless
pumping of heavy weapons, artillery systems and
firearms into Ukraine means that, due to the corruption
flourishing among Ukraine’s political and military
leadership, those weapons are spilling over into Europe.
It is well known that a significant proportion of such
weapons fall into the hands of smugglers directly from
storehouses, with established channels for supplying
the global weapons black market.
Information on available weapons is being
published almost publicly on certain online sites. The
problem has reached such proportions that the leading
Western media can no longer gloss over it, and even
the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement
Cooperation (EUROPOL) has been forced to admit it.
Last week, its spokesperson, Mr. Jan op gen Oorth, told
the German Press Agency that EUROPOL was aware
of reports of heavy arms trafficking and that European
law enforcement agencies had information about people
leaving Ukraine with firearms. He also stressed that
there remains a risk of all such weapons falling into the
hands of organized criminal groups or terrorists.
A number of media outlets have been circulating
leaked information from the confidential part of
EUROPOL’s report submitted to the European Council.
It notes that criminal networks are involved in smuggling
a significant number of firearms and ammunition from
Ukraine to European Union (EU) countries. EUROPOL
estimates that weapons caches have been set up along
the EU’s Ukrainian border.
A clear illustration of those conclusions is the
result of a joint operation by Hungarian and Slovak law

22-4420715/30

S/PV.9104

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

enforcement agencies to apprehend a criminal group
engaged in smuggling weapons supplied to Ukraine.
An entire arsenal, including sniper rifles, machine
guns and explosives, was found in the Hungarian town
of Rajka — an hour’s drive from the main international
disarmament platform in Vienna. According to one
of the detainees, the weapons found were supplied to
Ukraine and destined for Ukrainian armed groups,
including the Azov Battalion, and were then sold and
delivered to EU territory.
I should like to ask our Western colleagues whether
they are aware of the consequences of their actions, as
we are beginning to doubt it. After all, they are creating
a regional — and possibly global — hub for illegal
arms deliveries in the centre of Europe with their own
hands, thereby creating real risks for their populations
at the expense of their own taxpayers. They cannot say
we did not warn them about what would happen when
the weapons they supplied to Ukraine surfaced, for
example, in a conflict zone in a country in another part
of the world, impacting United Nations peacekeepers,
or in the hands of extremists in Europe itself to carry
out a terrorist attack.
All attempts to pump the Ukrainian regime full of
weapons will only prolong its agony and increase the
suffering of the Ukrainian people, who are being used
as cannon fodder by the country’s current irresponsible
leaders. The objectives of our special military operation
will be achieved, no matter how much fuel is poured on
the fire in the form of weapons.
In July, our Western colleagues tried to pass over
in silence the fact that Ukrainian armed forces were
actively using foreign unmanned aerial vehicles laden
with explosives to attack the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant. As a result of the attack on 20 July, a
fire broke out on the site of the plant — only by happy
coincidence was it possible to avoid a major accident,
the consequences of which would have been felt by all
Europeans. I would like to stress that we are talking
about an intentional, targeted attack by the Ukrainian
armed forces against a nuclear facility — the largest
nuclear power plant in Europe. The problem was
resolved, and the plant continues to operate normally
under the control of the Russian military.
What shocks us most about that entire incident
is the monstrous hypocrisy demonstrated by Western
countries, which did not deign to even comment on that
reckless provocation by the Kyiv regime. Yet, at Security
16/30

29/07/2022

Council meetings back in March, they were whipping
up hysteria around the alleged radiological threat
supposedly created by the Russian military’s shelling of
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, despite the fact
that the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency had publicly denied its existence.
Frankly, that is highly reminiscent of the criminal
blindness shown by Western countries when they
were covering up Kyiv’s failure to implement the
Minsk agreements for seven years. It is tragic that the
same blindness and double standards are now being
demonstrated by the leadership of the United Nations.
Such an irresponsible approach only encourages the
Kyiv regime to take further steps that undermine
nuclear security on the continent.
I would like to draw the attention of Western
delegations to the fact that their long-range artillery
is allowing the Ukrainian armed forces to reach
areas far into Donbas and killing civilians without
any military logic, purely for the purposes of revenge
and intimidation. Schools, hospitals and residential
buildings in Donetsk, Kherson, Stakhanov and Horlivka
are being deliberately targeted by the Kyiv regime.
Almost every day in Donbas, 5 to 10 people die and
dozens more are injured as a result of shelling by the
long-range systems supplied by NATO countries. The
Western and Ukrainian media are the only ones that do
not see any of that, but it does not make those crimes
any less horrific. By supplying Ukraine with longrange artillery, the West is becoming directly complicit
in the war crimes committed by the Kyiv regime.
It is especially painful when children are killed by
Ukrainian shelling. In the Donbas region, children have
been buried regularly for eight years now — ever since
the start of the Ukrainian punitive military operation
in the region. The day before yesterday, on 27 July, the
Donetsk People’s Republic held a day of remembrance
for child victims of the war in Donbas. On that day,
Donetsk residents laid flowers and brought toys to the
memorial in the Alley of Angels. During a moment
of silence, one could hear a pin drop in the city. That
silence was not broken even by the sound of artillery,
despite the fact that shelling from the Ukrainian armed
forces had been taking place since that very morning.
The date was not chosen at random: on 27 July
2014, Kira Zhuk, who was not even 1 year old, and her
mother were killed in Horlivka, near Donetsk, during
shelling by Ukrainian troops. I am holding up her
22-44207

29/07/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

photograph right now. Four other children also died that
day. They were all among the first victims of Kyiv’s
war against Donbas, which has been going on for eight
years. The Alley of Angels was built in Donetsk in their
memory, with a monument bearing the names of the
children killed by Ukraine. There are now 130 names
there, including, for example, 13-year-old Anastasia
Konopleva, whose photograph I am holding up now.
She, along with her brother and sister, died in a shelling
attack at their home in 2015. Sadly, that horrific list of
names is regularly extended.
Since February, 249 civilians, including 16 children,
have died in the Donetsk people’s republic alone. I want
members to look at the photographs of 10-year-old
Veronika Badina, who was killed by Ukrainian shelling
in Donetsk on 5 July, and 7-year-old Masha Evtukhova,
who was killed on 6 July in a playground with three
of her peers. I am deliberately showing the Council
these photographs, not only because Ukraine killed
them this month but because they, like the three other
children, were killed by shells launched from Western
artillery systems.
Until the Ukrainian armed forces received those
weapons systems, they were simply unable to reach
those areas — but now they can. After the Ukrainian
armed forces killed five children, one after another,
Ukrainian President Zelenskyy did not express his
condolences to the parents who lost their beloved
children. Instead, he said:
“We finally feel that the artillery we received from
our Western partners is working very powerfully.
They really are as accurate as they should be.”
I now turn to my American, British and French
colleagues sitting in this Chamber. I want them to
clearly understand the following. Children are being
killed with the weapons that their countries provided
to Ukraine, weapons paid for with money from their
taxpayers. The President of this country is openly
sneering at that and boasting about the accuracy
of those weapons. Is that what they were trying to
achieve? If not, where is their condemnation of this
unheard-of sacrilege? Some in this Chamber probably
thought that the Ukrainian regime was killing children
in Donbas unintentionally and that their deaths, to use
the terminology of our former American partners, was
the collateral damage of military activities. I am afraid
I must disappoint members on that front.

S/PV.9104

Here is another photograph. Do members know what
this is? This is a remotely activated “petal” landmine.
Ukrainian forces now plant lots of these mines in
Donbas with the help of cluster munition It is unique in
that it is the size of the palm of the hand. On the ground,
it is almost invisible. It looks a lot like a children’s toy.
It goes off if touched or stepped on. It would maim an
adult, but it would almost certainly kill a child. Please
answer this question: why drop these fatal toys deep
behind the lines in peaceful civilian towns? The answer
is obvious. It is to kill as many children as possible.
This cruelty might give one pause, but those who were
present at our two most recent informal Arria Formula
Security Council meetings on Ukraine will understand
fully that the roots of the hatred towards those living
in the south and east of Ukraine lie in the ideology of
Ukrainian nationalism and neo-Nazism. The world will
learn many more unpleasant truths about the horrible
phenomena that the Western backers of Ukraine prefer
to ignore. This is the clear result of their blindness.
Having shown these photos of children, I do not
think I need to say anything more. The de-Nazification
and the demilitarization of Ukraine will be carried
out in full. There must no longer be a threat from this
State to Donbas, Russia or to the liberated Ukrainian
territories, where for the first time in several years
people are finally able to feel that they can live as
they choose.
In conclusion, I would once again like to turn to
our Western colleagues and tell them that, by supplying
long-range artillery systems and multiple launch rocket
systems to Ukraine, they are essentially shifting the
provisional security line that is necessary for peaceful
development of the mentioned regions further west,
thereby adjusting the goals and objectives of our pecial
military operation. They should think about that and
know that, once it is over, in one way or another they
will have to live alongside and cooperate with us. They
are now in large part creating the conditions for that
stage themselves. Believe me when I say that their
readiness to help the Ukrainians kill the children of
Donetsk and Luhansk will hardly be forgotten, either
by the Ukrainian or the Russian people.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): The delegation of Kenya
wishes Ambassador Geraldine Byrne Nason great
success in her next assignment as Ireland’s chief
representative to the United States. Ms. Byrne Nason’s
determination and persistence in pursuit of the

22-4420717/30

S/PV.9104

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

29/07/2022

security of the most vulnerable will be missed in the
Security Council.

peninsula and the South China Sea, to mention just two
potential flashpoints.

I thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, for
sharing her assessment of the dire situation in Ukraine
and for the efforts that are under way to relieve the
humanitarian crisis.

The escalation of the present competition and
rivalry can easily escalate into conflict that will lay
waste to the world economy and lead to the proxy wars
of the Cold War. At a minimum, it will mean that the
sea lanes vital for the transportation of goods in our
globalized economy will not be open and secure, and
that globalization itself, which has been a great engine
for development, will grind to a halt or even be reversed.

Kenya applauds the leadership of the SecretaryGeneral in facilitating an agreement between Ukraine
and Russia to safely export Ukraine’s food products
using the Black Sea, and also in enabling food and
fertilizer exports from Russia. I am sure the entire
membership appreciates President Recep Erdoğan
and the Government of Türkiye for the key role they
played in the negotiations and as a guarantor. Increased
exports of food products and fertilizer will bring some
relief to the suffering millions across the world. It is
also a much-needed victory for the United Nations, at
a time when our collective faith in multilateralism is at
such a low ebb.
At the start of what we were told was a special
military operation in Ukraine, we believed that there
was still time for diplomacy to protect the territorial
integrity of Ukraine. More than five months have passed
since then, and we are now witness to a brutal war of
attrition that shows little inclination to a ceasefire in
favour of negotiations. We mourn the terrible suffering
it is causing to Ukrainians, and few countries, including
Kenya, have escaped its baleful effects.
Unfortunately, we must now additionally contend
with the increasingly clear fact that the militaristic
energies loosed by the war in Ukraine threaten a new era
of major global conflicts. It is right that we should use
this briefing and every available platform to sound this
warning to the Members of the United Nations, in the
hope that it will spur a united resistance to the present
course we are on. If we fail to inspire or pressure the
warring parties and their allies to the table, then I hope
that we shall use the regional and global instruments
available to us to find some degree of security.
It is time we also deliberated on responses to
the global threats of the situation in Ukraine. The
European security order is in ruins. It has been replaced
by military-political alliances preparing for war and
trying to deter and contain one another. The situation in
Europe today is a dire threat to international peace and
security. Its great-Power alliances and their projections
of power are endangering the stability of the Korean
18/30

The race for technological development is more
weaponized than ever and part of an emerging contest
between great Powers. There is now a great, if not
greater, chance of cutting-edge technologies like
artificial intelligence leading to even more destructive
wars than being engines for shared prosperity. Their
production and procurement, rather than responding
to the governance reforms that developing countries
have been asked to make for a generation, will now be
allocated along geopolitical lines. Meanwhile, a future
of extreme political and economic instability, leading
to the impoverishment and deaths of millions from the
effects of climate change, looms.
Sitting here in the Security Council, it is difficult
to argue that our briefings, debates and decisions
meaningfully respond to those profound threats to
international peace and security. That needs to change
so that the world does not turn its back on this hallowed
Chamber, which still has useful tools to help relieve,
and even solve, some of the challenges I have described.
It is not enough for Kenya to only sound the
alarm. We must use the urgency of this moment to
take more ambitious and courageous actions to rescue
multilateralism and our common peace. To that end,
allow me to make five recommendations.
First, the world will believe in the mandate of the
Security Council if it can assist in delivering a cessation
of hostilities in Ukraine and support a lasting settlement
that stabilizes the European security order. The Council
should do that while respecting the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of
Ukraine. As difficult as it is to achieve those goals, they
are the minimum required if the Security Council is to
be credible and able to take on the other challenges I
have outlined.
Secondly, the Security Council must stop being the
echo chamber for growing appeals for humanitarian aid
22-44207

29/07/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

as millions of lives around the world are threatened by
extreme food insecurity. The conflict in Ukraine, like
the coronavirus pandemic, has proved that distributed
production, particularly in Africa, and the developing
world, is a key safety net. If the great Powers want
to make their case to Africa, they should start by
partnering with us to deliver fertilizer independence
and gains in our agricultural productivity.
Thirdly, agreeing to meet, and even exceed, the
Paris climate commitments at the upcoming twentyseventh Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, to be held
in Egypt ,is a minimum deliverable by the industrialized
countries. In addition, climate adaptation and mitigation
should be a core operating system in the international
financial institutions and every Government, to the
point that there are fundamental changes to the global
financial system and its treatment of debt and investment
in the developing world. It should respond robustly to
regions suffering extreme climate change effects and
that are in need of strong and shared development.
Fourthly, we believe that the useful work that
the World Bank has done in situations of fragility,
conflict and violence is a promising foundation for
action. That work should be strongly coordinated with
climate change action, as I have described briefly, and
with the peacebuilding agenda of the United Nations.
The Bank’s development knowledge and resources,
coordinated with United Nations humanitarian aid,
peacebuilding and peacekeeping knowledge, plus its
ground presence, can make real inroads in delivering
peace and resilience.
Fifthly, and finally, it is an outcome of a great war
that the most powerful States in the United Nations
should also be among the greatest shareholders in
the Bretton Woods institutions. Even while needing
substantial reforms for inclusion, those institutions can
still offer ambitious solutions to the major challenges
we face. We believe that the Secretary-General’s
Global Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and
Finance offers a valuable platform for action in the
short term. Its recommendations and solutions should
receive sufficient financial and operational support
and be a bridge to longer-term ambitious reforms and
initiatives if we are to save multilateralism and protect
our common peace.

S/PV.9104

I thank you, Mr. President, and congratulate you
for Brazil’s responsible, professional and skilled
presidency for the month of July.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank you,
Mr. President, for your very generous tribute to me at
the start of what is my last meeting in this chair at this
table. Your remarks were very warm and touching. Go
raibh maith agat. I would also like to thank all of my
colleagues for their kind remarks. I will miss them and
will also miss working alongside them in this Chamber.
Working alongside them in defence of international
peace and security — most of the time, as we do — has
been the privilege of a lifetime and career. Again, Go
raibh maith agat.
On 22 July, Ireland warmly welcomed the signing of
the Black Sea grain initiative, which, once implemented,
will help reduce pressure on those countries suffering
as a result of food supply constraints and high prices.
We know that the agreement did not come easily. We
commend Ukraine and Russia for overcoming the
obstacles necessary to make it possible. We deeply
appreciate the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General
and his team. We also recognize the important
contribution of President Erdoğan and the Government
of Türkiye to bring the sides closer together. In the
words of the Secretary-General, the agreement is a ray
of hope in a world darkened by global crises.
In the past year, global food prices have risen by
nearly one third, and up to 95 million more people, many
of whom were already enduring hunger exacerbated by
the impacts of climate change, conflict, disease and the
global impacts of the coronavirus pandemic, could be
plunged into acute food insecurity as a result. We urge
the full and immediate implementation of the initiative.
Simply put, it could not be more urgent. That is why
the Russian attack on the port of Odesa less than 24
hours after the agreement was signed was particularly
cynical. We condemn that reprehensible act outright.
All parties made clear commitments to ensure the safe
movement of Ukrainian grain to global markets to help
address the global food crisis, reduce pressure on high
prices and ease the suffering of millions, including in
places already devastated by hunger, such as Somalia,
Ethiopia, Yemen and Lebanon. We urge all sides to
act in good faith and to implement their commitments
without delay.
Ireland has been crystal clear since joining the
Security Council on the irrefutable link between

22-4420719/30

S/PV.9104

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

conflict and hunger. We encourage those who have
been reluctant — I would say unwilling — to recognize
this link to think again, reconsider their position and
look at this global crisis.
While we welcome last Friday’s agreement, we
must not forget why this agreement was needed in the
first place. For more than five months, Russia has waged
an unprovoked and unjustified war against Ukraine in
violation of international law — a war that is an absolute
affront to the Charter of the United Nations. Most of
us here dedicate ourselves every day to protecting and
promoting the Charter. The Charter is our touchstone.
This war is a violation of that precious Charter. With
each passing day, new harrowing testimony emerges.
Innocent men and women are targeted by gunfire
while evacuating to save their own lives. Children are
condemned for life to relive the indiscriminate bombing
and shelling of their homes, schools and playgrounds.
Elderly Ukrainians speak of being brutalized and
starved in their own homes. Across the country,
civilians are being targeted, displaced and dying as a
consequence of a war not of their making in any way.
Just this month, a Russian cruise missile hit civilian
areas of Vinnytsia in central Ukraine, killing at least
22 people and injuring more than 100. Among those
reported to have been killed was a 4-year-old girl with
Down syndrome. That is absolute depravity. That is not
Russia’s first attack on Ukraine’s towns and cities, as
we know too well. However, it speaks to a worrisome
trend of attacks on civilian targets that appear to have
just one goal in mind: to intimidate and terrorize the
civilian population. Let me be clear: those responsible
for such attacks must be held to account.
Across Ukraine, attacks on civilian infrastructure
have also left millions without access to basic health
services, including water, electricity, gas and adequate
shelter. We have all seen the images, and we have read
the reports. Women are giving birth in bomb shelters and
hospital basements, with no electricity for incubators.
That is unconscionable. Children are at imminent risk
of being cut off from safe drinking water. Families are
forced to flee due to fear of bombardment and war or
because the lack of electricity and heat in their own
homes has made them unliveable. Needs are expected
to grow as long as hostilities continue, promising to
exacerbate an already dire humanitarian situation as
winter now soon approaches.
20/30

29/07/2022

We once again call on the Russian Federation to
comply with its obligations under international law.
Full stop. Parties to the conflict must comply with
international humanitarian law, including the obligation
to distinguish between civilians and combatants and
to attack only military objectives, the prohibitions
against indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks,
and the obligation to take all feasible precautions in
attack. I have said it before, and I will say it for the last
time: compliance is not optional. We urge the parties
to facilitate full, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access to those in need of life-saving assistance and
medical support.
Russia alone bears responsibility for this war.
Russia alone can end it. It is high time. I call on the
Russian Federation once again to put an end to this
needless suffering, comply with its obligations under
international law and to withdraw all its forces
unconditionally from the entire sovereign territory
of Ukraine.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
On behalf on Gabon, I would also like to extend to
departing Ambassador Geraldine Byrne Nason my
wishes for success in her new role. It was a real pleasure
to work together with her on the issues discussed in the
Security Council.
We listened very closely to Ms. DiCarlo’s update
on the situation in Ukraine, and I would also like to
make a few remarks.
As the war in Ukraine will soon enter its sixth
month, Gabon would like to welcome the Black Sea
grain initiative signed last Friday in Istanbul. The
agreement, signed under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral and facilitated by the Government of Türkiye,
will make it possible — we hope — to meet the
grain needs of many countries, particularly African
countries, that depend on grain supplies from Russia
and Ukraine. This unprecedented event is a testament
to what is possible when all parties manage to rise
above their differences for a common goal. The rapid
implementation of the agreement is essential and will
require just as much commitment from the parties to
produce the expected results.
The humanitarian consequences of war can and
must be stopped. The signing of this agreement is a
positive development, and we hope that it will allow
us to start new momentum. Gabon encourages the
parties to take advantage of this momentum to consider
22-44207

29/07/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

additional steps to resolve the crisis. The conclusion of
a ceasefire seems at once urgent, necessary and within
reach, provided that the parties agree to redouble their
commitment to achieve that objective.
I wish to conclude by once again expressing Gabon’s
support for initiatives aimed at a political resolution of
the war, in particular the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Brazil.
I thank the Permanent Missions of Albania and the
United States for proposing this meeting, and I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo.
This month, we all became aware of military
actions in Odesa, Chasiv Yar, Vinnytsia, Chuhuiv,
Kharkiv and other Ukrainian cities, which claimed the
lives of dozens of victims. Attacks against civilians
are unjustifiable under international humanitarian law.
We reiterate the call for the parties to act with restraint
and prevent further civilian casualties as a side effect
of the hostilities. Since the beginning of the conflict
five months ago, we have insisted on the need for
engagement in constructive and pragmatic dialogue
that will limit the immense losses imposed on Ukraine
and begin the process of re-establishing peace.
The conflict and its associated sanctions have
aggravated disturbing trends around the world. Rising
food and fuel prices, as well as the threat of a supply
crisis, are hitting developing countries the hardest.
The agreement announced last Friday brought with
it the hope that political solutions can be achieved.
Negotiations between the parties resulted in a concrete
response to an urgent problem. The two agreements in
Istanbul pave the way for the resumption of exports of
grains and fertilizers and the reintegration of the two
countries into international markets. We thank the
Secretary-General and the Government of Türkiye for
their decisive role in brokering the agreements.
Brazil shares the disappointment expressed by
other members at the incapacity of the Security Council
to reach consensus for the approval of a presidential
or press statement. We should, however, welcome the
parties’ active engagement in the negotiations. We urge
both sides to avoid actions that could jeopardize the
implementation of the agreements. The insistence on
the search for a decisive result on the battlefield will
result only in greater destruction.

S/PV.9104

Although the past few months seem to have
downplayed the role of diplomacy in dealing with the
crisis, it is precisely in the face of the greatest challenges
that we must remain committed to the spirit of the
United Nations and devote all our efforts to achieving
lasting peace. Let us not be carried away by the impulse
to close the doors to dialogue. The Istanbul accords
point to a viable path. The immediate resumption of
direct negotiations between the parties for the end of
hostilities must be the priority of the Council, in order
to stop the escalation of violence and avoid the loss of
thousands of human lives.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Before I begin my
intervention, I would like to join everyone who thanked
Ms. Geraldine Byrne Nason for being a good colleague
and doing an excellent job. Although she has, for
whatever reason, decided to move south, as if it were
not hot enough here, the Irish spirt will stay with us.
We greatly value the integrity of Ireland, and we look
forward to working with whoever replaces her. I thank
her very much.
I also recognize here the representatives of terrorist
Russia in the permanent seat of the Soviet Union.
There is plenty of evidence of the terrorist nature
of the current Russian regime, and the most horrifying
evidence continues to emerge. Yesterday a video
was posted in Russian Telegram channels to show
a Ukrainian prisoner of war being castrated by his
Russian captors — a group of men in Russian uniform,
which featured a “Z” patch. Some of the Russian
soldiers who appear in the footage were earlier filmed
on the front lines in Donbas back in June. After the
cruel and inhumane torture, the victim was killed. The
Prosecutor-General’s Office of Ukraine will investigate
the event, and we will inform the Security Council of
the outcome of the investigation.
Today Russia committed another petrifying war
crime by blasting a penitentiary in occupied Olenivka,

22-4420721/30

S/PV.9104

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Donetsk region, where it held Ukrainian prisoners of
war, mostly from the Azov Battalion. The Russian
occupiers pursued their criminal goals in order to
accuse Ukraine of committing war crimes, as well as
to cover up the torture and executions of prisoners that
they carried out there. It speaks volumes that so-called
“Donetsk People’s Republic ombudsperson”, Morozova,
informed that there were no casualties among the staff
of the colony.
I would like to express my gratitude to the Brazilian
presidency for organizing today’s meeting. The issue of
the Russian war against Ukraine remains as relevant
as ever because we observe no de-escalation on the
ground and Russia has not given up its aggressive and
neo-colonial plans with respect to Ukraine. Moreover,
Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs Lavrov went
even further, claiming recently that the “geographical
objective” of the so-called special operation had been
expanded to a number of other territories. Indeed, it
sounded like the base wish of a thief to keep possession
of what has been stolen.
One can hardly expect that Russian behaviour in the
Council will differ from its behaviour on the ground.
It took less than 24 hours for Russia to manifestly go
against the aforementioned initiative signed in Istanbul
on 22 July and to shell Odesa port with missiles. That
is one of three ports it has committed not to attack,
according to the document.
As always, Russia contradicted itself in its excuses.
Initially, as reported, Russia denied its responsibility
for the attack altogether. On the next day, realizing
that its outright lie is obvious to everyone, Russia was
compelled to change the story. It assumed responsibility;
however, by telling another lie that a missile store in
Odesa port was the target. That lie was easily refuted
by extensive footage from the site, which showed no
sign of secondary detonation of alleged Ukrainian
missiles. We are grateful to the Secretary-General
for his unequivocal condemnation of this attack. His
clear assessment made futile all Russian attempts to
create artificial caveats that the Istanbul documents
never contained.
Ukraine remains resolute with respect to
contributing to resolving the food crisis. We will
engage constructively with the activities of the
Joint Coordination Centre, officially inaugurated in
Istanbul on 27 July. Now it is the responsibility of
international partners to ensure Russia’s compliance
22/30

29/07/2022

with its obligations within the framework of the safe
functioning of the grain corridor. That is the only
prerequisite for unlocking more than 20 million tons
of grain from last year’s grain harvest in Ukraine.
Today President Zelenskyy visited the Chornomorsk
Sea Trade Port, where the first grain carrier since the
beginning of the war has been loaded with Ukrainian
grain. Now we are waiting for a green light from
partners — representatives of the United Nations and
Türkiye — regarding the start of grain transportation.
It is outrageous that Russia still tries to disseminate
fakes instead of fulfilling its obligations. To be
frank, a diplomatic note sent this week and signed
by the Russian chargé d’affaires should be subject
to consideration by medical specialists rather than
Security Council members. Let me quote just one
sentence from it: “the Russian armed force do not
target civilian infrastructure.” Seriously? Does the
Russian diplomat believe that the Security Council is
the studio of a Skabeyeva show? If it is an early sign of
an insanity defence, let it be remembered that the war
crimes and crimes against humanity committed by the
Nazis during the Second World War were not a result
of medical insanity or illness. They were committed
collectively by thousands of individuals. Hitler’s
henchmen, officers and diplomats, like Putin’s today,
worked hard to please and execute the leader’s wish
and orders, even if the orders were not easily traceable.
Luckily, in the case of that diplomatic note, it is clearly
signed in ink, and it will be preserved as evidence.
Since our previous meeting (see S/PV.9080), further
bloody and shameful pages have been added to the list
of Russian war crimes. They have been added daily,
if not hourly. To name just a few examples, on 1 July
Russian missiles hit a residential building and two
resorts in Serhiivka village, Odesa region, killing 19
people and injuring 34. Forty-eight civilian residents,
including a child, were killed following the targeting
by Russian missiles of a five-storey apartment building
in the city of Chasiv Yar, Donetsk region, on 9 July.
On 14 July, the world was shocked by the Russian
missile strike on the city centre of Vinnytsia. Twentysix civilians, including three children, were killed, and
almost 90 were wounded. Yesterday Russian terrorists
increased the number of casualties among Ukrainians
with missile shelling, including from the territory of
Belarus, of Kropyvnytskyi, Liutizh in Kyiv region
and Honcharivske, in Chernihiv region. Kharkiv and
Mykolayiv sustain heavy rocket and artillery shelling
22-44207

29/07/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

on an almost daily basis. This morning, Russians
shelled a bus stop area in Mykolayiv with cluster
munitions, killing five and wounding seven civilians.
Earlier, many Council members might have seen a
heartbreaking picture taken in Kharkiv on 20 July. The
picture is of a man praying while holding the hand of
his 13-year-old son, who was killed at a bus stop by
a Russian Uragan missile. Killing innocent children is
what Russian murderers call de-Nazification.
Another
declared
goal
—
so-called
demilitarization — means razing Ukrainian cities
to the ground. Civilian infrastructure is among the
primary targets. As of June, for instance, the Russian
war had led to the destruction or damage of 116,000
residential buildings, which were home for 3.5 million
Ukrainians. In 14 Ukrainian regions, 183 religious sites,
including 173 Christian, 5 Muslim and 5 Jewish sites,
were destroyed. Just visualize how Russian soldiers,
blessed by Orthodox Patriarch Kirill, have destroyed
almost 200 Orthodox churches in Ukraine. Pictures of
Ukrainian children lying on the ground of destroyed
Ukrainian cities and villages have been the reality of
the past five months of the war. That is a reality that we
will never get used to, never accept and never forgive.
Russia has resorted to terrorism to intimidate
and to undermine our resolve to resist. To that end,
cities and villages throughout Ukraine have shelled
with more than 3,000 missiles. The effect, however,
is quite the opposite, and Ukrainian society is united
in its aspiration to liberate our sovereign territories
and to bring all those responsible for the killing and
destruction to justice.
Let me quote a person who spent days, months and
years in this very Chamber. Despite having presided
over the Security Council, that person nevertheless said:

S/PV.9104

“You are here because we let you be here for
reasons that have proven to be wrong. We — all
of us — tolerate your presence, just because we
need to remind you daily that you will be held
accountable for war crimes and that the Soviet
seat in this Council will not help you escape the
punishment that you deserve, as a State and as
individuals in the Russian war cell in Manhattan.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Grünwald (Slovakia): Over the more than 150
days since beginning the senseless war of the Russian
Federation against Ukraine, and despite multiple
calls by the international community addressed to the
Russian Federation to immediately cease its hostilities,
severe bombardments of cities and rockets flying
over the heads of innocent civilians continue to be a
horrific daily reality for the Ukrainian population.
These attacks have resulted in a significant increase in
civilian casualties — over 12,000 so far, according to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, as a result of which over 5,000 have
been killed and 7,000 wounded. Needless to say, the
reality is much worse.
In that regard, we have to be reminded of the reason
why the Russian Federation started this unjustified and
unprovoked aggression against Ukraine, in blatant
violation of international law: simply to deny the right
of Ukraine to decide its own future, specifically its
right to decide to bring prosperity to the country and
well-being to its citizens, who are now forced to live
in fear and to see massive destruction of their homes
and such critical civilian infrastructure as health
and educational facilities. In response, respect for
international humanitarian law must be ensured.

There is no United Nations Charter for Russia.
There are no Geneva Conventions for Russia. There are
no more restraints on Mr. Lavrov.

We would also like to take this opportunity to once
again condemn the Russian propaganda and related
distortion of facts and promotion of an alternative
reality that the Russian Federation continued to put
forward today, including with respect to my country.
That is highly deplorable, and we totally reject
its allegations. Let me be clear: the identity of the
aggressor accountable for this situation is obvious; it
is the Russian Federation, which alone can decide to
stop this war at once, and we call on it to do so without
further delay.

It is time to say it loud and clear to the
Russian delegation:

Together with other States and stakeholders,
Slovakia already made a commitment to help Ukraine

“there is nothing in the obligations that Russia has
taken on — including within the framework of the
agreements signed on 22 July in Istanbul — that
would prohibit us from continuing the special
military operation.” That means, in fact, that there
is nothing that would deter Russia from killing
and destroying.

22-4420723/30

S/PV.9104

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

in its reconstruction and recovery as soon as this
nightmare is over. Ukraine will undoubtedly flourish
once again, but the blood of victims of this senseless
war will be forever dried on the palms of the hands of
the Russian Federation.
Speaking of civilians, we must also mention the
hundreds of millions of people experiencing acute food
insecurity throughout the world. Through its war in
Ukraine, the Russian Federation — and the Russian
Federation alone — is responsible for aggravating the
global food-security crisis.
Slovakia welcomes the agreement reached between
Ukraine and the Russian Federation to unblock the Black
Sea for the export of grain, which was signed last week,
and we praise Türkiye and the United Nations for their
efforts and crucial role in reaching this agreement. On
the other hand, we were horrified that only one day after
signing the agreement, Russian missiles hit the port of
Odesa, which can only be considered to be proof of the
Russian Federation’s total disregard for international
law. We urge the Russian Federation to refrain from
any additional action with the potential to hamper the
implementation of the agreement, which is an important
step in overcoming the global food insecurity caused
by the Russian aggression against Ukraine.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Camelli: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. At
the outset, allow me to join all the praise for Ambassador
Byrne Nason. It is very clear that she will be missed in
the Security Council Chamber. She will also be missed
by her friends in the European Union. We wish her luck
in Washington, D.C.
We welcome today’s discussions on Ukraine and
thank Brazil for organizing this meeting. It is essential
that the Security Council remain seized of Russia’s war
of aggression against Ukraine. I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing
and updates.
I would like to focus my statement on three points.
First, I wish to address the continued violations of the
United Nations Charter by the Russian Federation. The
European Union continues to condemn in the strongest
terms the unprovoked and illegal war of aggression
against Ukraine by Russia, aided by Belarus. This
24/30

29/07/2022

blatant violation of international law, and in particular
of the United Nations Charter, is having devastating
consequences in Ukraine and around the world. It
seriously undermines the international rules-based
system that underpins global peace and security and
forms the bedrock of the Organization.
As has the overwhelming majority of States
Members of the United Nations, we reiterate our
demand that Russia, as a permanent member of
the Security Council, immediately end its war,
unconditionally cease all hostilities and withdraw its
troops and military equipment from all of the territory
of Ukraine within its internationally recognized
borders. We also condemn the announced preparations
for a staged referendum in parts of the Kherson region
on joining the Russian Federation. The international
community will not recognize the result of such an
illegal referendum. In response to Russia’s aggression,
the EU, together with its partners, remains steadfast in
its support for Ukraine in its courageous defence of its
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Secondly, international humanitarian law must
be respected. We condemn the heinous and repeated
attacks by the Russian armed forces on civilians
and civilian infrastructure. In the past month alone,
Russian missile strikes have killed innocent civilians,
including children, across most regions of Ukraine. The
continued shelling of civilians and civilian objects is
unacceptable and amounts to war crimes. Russia bears
full responsibility for these crimes and will be held
accountable for them. We further urge Russia to allow
safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access without
delay, enabling aid to be delivered to those in need.
Thirdly, and lastly, I would like to highlight
the importance of efforts to alleviate global food
insecurity. The European Union welcomes the progress
announced last week in Istanbul towards ensuring the
safe and secure export of Ukrainian grains via the
Black Sea ports. We commend the role of Türkiye and
the United Nations in facilitating this positive outcome,
which has the potential to significantly ease global food
insecurity. The European Union has been consistently
supportive of these efforts, and we congratulate in
particular the Secretary-General, Rebeca Grynspan,
Martin Griffiths and their teams for their unrelenting
efforts. It is now essential that all parties swiftly and
in good faith implement the commitments made. The
initial indications that grain cargo ships can already
leave port in the coming days gives us hope.
22-44207

29/07/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

However, we strongly condemn the missile strikes
carried out by Russia on the port of Odesa less than a
day after the parties signed the agreement and in the
following days. This defies the deal reached to allow
grain exports from blockaded Ukrainian ports. These
attacks demonstrate once again Russia’s disregard for
international law and the commitments made.
The European Union is firmly committed to
supporting the food security of our partners worldwide
by increasing our humanitarian assistance, supporting
food production and getting Ukrainian grain to world
markets. The EU-Ukraine solidarity lanes action plan
has facilitated the export of 2,5 million tons in June
alone, up from 0.6 million tons in April. We also
strongly support the United Nations-led efforts to
promote a swift multilateral response in order to address
the global food-security crisis. In this context, we are
mobilizing over €7.7 billion until 2024 to support the
most affected partners around the world, and we are
working closely with our member States to further step
up these efforts.
I would emphasize, once again, that the EU has
no sanctions on the agricultural sector in Russia. EU
sanctions do not prevent Russian-flagged vessels from
carrying our grain, food or fertilizers to any third
country. We are ready to look into such issues as market
avoidance and overcompliance, and we will address
any concrete obstacles that are raised.
Finally, let us not forget that Russia itself is
aggravating the global food crisis with its war of
aggression against Ukraine and its repeated attacks
against Ukraine’s grain fields and storage and transport
facilities. If Russia is truly committed to alleviating the
situation all over the world, and in Africa in particular,
it must immediately stop its war.
In conclusion, let me reiterate the full solidarity of
the European Union with Ukraine and the Ukrainian
people. We will continue to provide strong support,
including humanitarian, economic, political and military
assistance, for as long as it takes. The EU is also firmly
committed to demonstrating global responsibility and
solidarity in addressing the international impacts of
Russia’s aggression, especially on the most vulnerable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.

S/PV.9104

Mr. Filipsons (Latvia): I would also like to begin
by thanking the Permanent Representative of Ireland
for her excellent service in the Security Council.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Baltic countries: Estonia, Lithuania, and my own
country, Latvia.
We welcome today’s meeting of the Security Council
to address the implications of Russia’s aggression
against Ukraine, including the consequences for the
United Nations Charter. We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her update today.
As is well known, the United Nations Charter
prohibits the use of force except in self-defence and
in cases when the Security Council has granted an
authorization. Russia’s unprovoked large-scale attack
on Ukraine does not qualify under either of these
exceptions and must therefore be considered as use of
force in blatant violation of the United Nations Charter.
Such actions by a permanent member of the Council
shake the foundation upon which the United Nations
was built. If Russia’s aggression is not stopped and
perpetrators are not held accountable, it may induce
other actors to follow its path and further erode the
international rules-based order. Unfortunately, in the
face of such violations, it will always be the civilian
population that will pay the highest price.
This week we have entered the sixth month of
Russian aggression against Ukraine, aided by Belarus.
The latter aid was vividly on display yesterday when
a barrage of 25 missiles was launched at northern
Ukraine from the territory of Belarus.
Every single day of Russia’s war has brought
devastation and suffering to the people of Ukraine.
Atrocity crimes in Bucha and Irpin, the bombing
of a maternity hospital in Mariupol, missile attacks
on a busy train station in Kramatorsk and a crowded
shopping centre in Kremenchuk have been but a few
of the most visible cases of Russia’s blatant disregard
for human life in its savage campaign against Ukraine’s
freedom, independence and statehood, as well as its
sovereignty and territorial integrity. According to the
most recent report of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, a total of more
than 5,200 civilian deaths have been documented in
Ukraine. The numbers are growing every day, since
new crimes against civilians are discovered and new
attacks on civilians are executed regularly by the
Russian military.

22-4420725/30

S/PV.9104

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Make no mistake: Russia’s warfare against the
civilian population of Ukraine is not a coincidence,
nor is it collateral damage. It has been a deliberate and
consistent approach in Russia’s war aimed at breaking
the resistance and spirit of Ukrainian people. Unable to
defeat Ukraine on the battlefield, the Russian military
seeks to achieve its aims by terrorizing Ukraine’s
civilian population.
One has the right to ask how it is possible that
such actions, which clearly amount to war crimes, are
permitted to be systematically carried out for months
in direct violation of international law, including
international humanitarian law. The answer lies in the
sense of impunity that characterizes Russia’s approach
to its international obligations. Russia must believe
that it can get away with its bloody crimes. It should be
recognized that this sense of impunity is emboldened
each time that members of the international community,
including those sitting around this table, fail to
condemn Russia’s actions and take steps to respond to
its aggression.
It is high time for the international community to
demonstrate that the norms that have been established
over decades to ensure peace and stability, as well as
the protection of civilians, including the United Nations
Charter, are not empty statements that can be trampled
down by dictators and bullies, but ironclad obligations
that we are collectively determined to uphold. The only
way to achieve this is by ensuring accountability at all
levels for atrocities committed against Ukraine and
its people.
In this regard, it is of utmost importance to provide
all necessary support for the work of the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine
mandated by the United Nations Human Rights Council
and the expert missions under the Moscow Mechanism
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe as well as in the investigation being undertaken
by the Office of the Prosecutor General of Ukraine.
Justice must prevail. The perpetrators must and will be
held accountable.
Last but not least, Russia has added a global
dimension to its campaign of terror by deliberately
blocking the export of Ukraine’s grain in order to
cause a global food crisis. This is done with the clear
aim to exert pressure on the international community
and Ukraine. We welcome the agreement reached in
26/30

29/07/2022

Istanbul on 22 July to unblock Ukraine’s Black Sea
grain exports. However, Russia’s missile attack on
Ukraine’s port city of Odesa the very next day after the
deal was signed once again proves that Russia cannot
be trusted. The international community must closely
follow Russia’s adherence to the deal and maintain
pressure to ensure its implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany) I would also like to
thank the Brazilian presidency for organizing this
meeting and for this opportunity to speak in the Security
Council today. I am grateful for Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo’s briefing, which was very insightful.
Further, I want to commend the Secretary-General and
the Republic of Türkiye for their good offices to ensure,
through the Black Sea initiative, the safe and secure
export of Ukrainian food.
Germany strongly supports all efforts aimed at
providing unhindered access of Ukrainian and Russian
grain, foodstuffs and fertilizers to global markets.
These products are vital to addressing a worsening
global food crisis.
The agreement brokered last Friday in Istanbul
by the United Nations and Türkiye offered a faint
glimmer of hope for those around the globe suffering
the most from the devastating consequences of the war.
Yet missile strikes by Russia on the Ukrainian port of
Odesa have impaired the full and swift implementation
of these agreements. As we have publicly expressed
in the strongest possible terms, Germany firmly
condemns these attacks, which resulted in at least 19
civilian casualties.
Despite these inhumane strikes, we are seeing
hopeful signs that the first batch of grain exports might
be able to leave Ukrainian ports soon. And while Russia
does not miss out on any given opportunity to distort
the facts and blame Western sanctions, there can be no
doubt ever that, since Russia invaded Ukraine, food and
energy prices around the world have increased, sowing
chaos in supply chains, worsening global inflation and
inflicting economic and humanitarian suffering on
millions of vulnerable people.
While humanitarian needs are at an all-time
high, Germany is continuously engaged with its
humanitarian assistance, especially through the World
Food Programme. The Berlin conference entitled
22-44207

29/07/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

“Uniting for Global Food Security”, held on 24 June,
highlighted the current challenges and the urgency to
provide additional assistance as quickly as possible. At
the summit in Elmau on 28 June, the Group of Seven
stood firm against Russia’s weaponization of grain and
provided an additional $4.5 billion, thereof $476 million
in new commitments from the German Government,
to protect the world’s most vulnerable from hunger
and malnutrition. My message to the countries and
people affected by the repercussions of Russia’s war of
aggression is, once and again, that they can count on
our full support and solidarity.
We once again call on Russia to stop its aggression
immediately. Let us join hands against Russia’s
unprovoked and illegal war of aggression, not only in
defence of the Charter of the United Nations, but also in
the interest of global food security and equitable energy
prices. In the end, it is about saving innocent lives in
Ukraine, as well as in other parts of the world.
Let me conclude by congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your successful presidency in the
month of July.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szcerski (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
informative briefing on the very difficult situation
brought upon Ukraine and the Ukrainian people by
the aggression of the Russian Federation. The brutal
war of attrition that Russia continues to wage against
Ukraine, in spite of the repeated appeals made by the
United Nations membership, affects us all and is felt
in most corners of the world. Poland is appalled by
the tragic human impact of the Russian aggression,
and will continue its support to Ukraine as long as it
is necessary.
Ukraine can count on the genuine and generous
support of Polish society, as well as the Polish
Government and local authorities. A recent report by
the Polish Economic Institute indicates that, just in the
first three months of the war, as many as 70 per cent
of Poles became involved in helping Ukraine. That is
26.6 million people who opened their hearts to those in
need. According to cautious estimates, my compatriots
spent close to $2.2 billion out of their own pockets for
that purpose. The total value of assistance for refugees
and victims of the war assigned by the Polish authorities
and provided by Polish citizens during just the first

S/PV.9104

90 days of the war amounted to almost 1 per cent of
Poland’s gross domestic product.
With its invasion of Ukraine, Russia has violated
the most fundamental principles of international law
and the obligations that it assumed on the adoption
of the Charter of the United Nations. We have heard
that simple statement of fact several times today and
hundreds of times since 24 February. However, it is
worth repeating as long as the Kremlin keeps spreading
its outlandish pseudolegal justifications for starting,
and persisting in, that aggression.
First, what Russia offers to the world today can by
no means be defined as an alternative to the rules-based
international order, as the Russian authorities claim.
Rather, what they are trying to do is to destroy the
multilateral system by demolishing the legal principles
safeguarding us all from the scourge of war. If Russia is
proposing anything, it is not an alternative, but a Russkij
mir — a model based on imperialism, colonialism,
anarchy, the law of force and spheres of influence. Let
us have no doubts: such reshuffling is no better deal for
the general membership of this Organization. Would
we really be better off in a world where there are no
laws but the law of force?
Secondly, when a country violates international
law, it is difficult for the international community to
treat it as trustworthy and dependable. Such a country
undermines itself as a genuine party to international
agreements and treaties. Just like the rest of the
international community, Poland is grateful for the
efforts of the Secretary-General and Türkiye, crowned
with the grain deal signed in Istanbul on 27 July. We
fully support all initiatives aimed at mitigating the food
crisis arising from the Russian aggression. However,
how can we trust the sincerity of Russia, which, being a
party to the agreement, one day signs a deal and, in less
than 24 hours, shells an area that is supposed to be a part
of it? Such behaviour by Russia amounts to nothing less
than an act of self-exclusion. Unfortunately, it speaks
volumes about the potential fate of any future peace
negotiations. That is why we call on all Security Council
Member States to help to secure the implementation of
that agreement.
I would like to recall the words of the Polish
Foreign Minister, Mr. Zbigniew Rau, who, during
the recent accountability for Ukraine conference in
The Hague, recalled the concept of civilized nations,
to which the Statute of the International Court of

22-4420727/30

S/PV.9104

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

29/07/2022

Justice refers. It used to be considered as an obsolete
and outdated concept. However, the ongoing barbaric
aggression of Russia against Ukraine seems to have
revived it and, at the same time, question it, together
with the laws and values that we have long considered
to be established ones.

to effectively channel diplomatic efforts, while also
hosting the Joint Coordination Centre in Istanbul,
which will oversee departures from three Ukrainian
ports and the implementation of the provisions of the
agreement. We hope that it will also be a positive step
towards a wider diplomatic engagement.

It is of paramount importance to ensure that
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law not go unpunished and
that justice be delivered to the victims. Poland fully
supports the investigations carried out by Ukrainian
prosecutors and those initiated by other States by
making use of universal jurisdiction or other concepts,
as well as the investigation of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court.

While reaffirming its unwavering support to
Ukraine and the Ukrainian people, Italy stands firm
in the strongest condemnation of the unjustified and
unprovoked aggression by the Russian Federation. We
are profoundly disturbed by the continuing attacks
on civilians, including women and children, as
underlined by Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, and
by the testimonies and reports of the war crimes, grave
breaches of international humanitarian law and serious
violations of international human rights law perpetrated
by the Russian armed forces.

In the name of the United Nations Charter and the
rules-based international order, we call on Russia to
immediately stop its military aggression, withdraw its
forces from the entire territory of Ukraine and fully
respect Ukraine’s territorial integrity, sovereignty and
independence within its internationally recognized
borders. We are saying niet to a Russkij mir.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): I would like to thank Brazil
for organizing this timely briefing. I also thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her insightful update of
the situation on the ground.
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer, and would like to add some remarks in its
national capacity.
Italy welcomes the agreement reached in Istanbul to
resume the crucial export of grain from Ukrainian Black
Sea ports. Its full, swift and effective implementation
is of the utmost importance to the entire international
community. It is a key mechanism to ensure access to
food and prevent a worse food crisis, especially in the
most exposed and vulnerable countries in Africa, the
Middle East and South-East Asia, which cannot afford
additional risks of famine.
Let me first commend the personal commitment
and leadership of the Secretary-General, as well as the
action and key tireless efforts of Mr. Martin Griffiths
and Ms. Rebeca Grynspan Mayufis and their teams,
which proved decisive in reaching the agreement. We
also thank Türkiye for its outstanding engagement
28/30

The global impacts of the Russian aggression are
also becoming increasingly evident by the day due to the
constraints on agricultural production and distribution.
Price rises are exposing developing and vulnerable
countries to multidimensional crises, as reported by the
United Nations Global Crisis Response Group on Food,
Energy and Finance. Since the beginning of the war,
millions of tons of grain have been stuck in Ukraine’s
Black Sea ports and even targeted by Russian shelling,
triggering enormous humanitarian consequences for
developing countries, condemning children, women and
men far from the front line of the conflict to starvation.
We will do everything in our capacity to mitigate, limit
and address all the effects that that aggression is having
on developing countries all over the world.
While we blame the Russian missile strikes in
Odesa the very same day after the signing of the Istanbul
agreement and again three days ago, we particularly
call on Russia to implement the agreement swiftly,
fully and in good faith in order to allow grain exports
to quickly resume with the safe and secure passage of
ships. Ultimately, to avoid further disruptions in food
distribution, we urge Russia to stop the war without
further delay.
Italy will continue to actively support global
food security, including by building on the effective
implementation of that agreement and as the host
country and a major partner of the United Nations
Rome-based agencies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
22-44207

29/07/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Ms. Mocanu (Romania): At the outset, allow me
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on steering the
work of the Security Council during the month of July,
including in deciding to remain focused on the topic
of peace and security in Ukraine. I would also like to
thank Ms. DiCarlo for her comprehensive and sobering
briefing on the latest developments regarding Ukraine.
Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of the European Union, in
its capacity as observer, in condemning in the strongest
terms the violation of the Charter of the United Nations
by a permanent member of the Security Council and the
blatant attack on the rules-based international order.
A neighbour to Ukraine, Romania has not only
“followed closely the ongoing event”, but set in
motion a wide range of concrete measures to tackle
the consequences of the unprovoked and unjustifiable
invasion of Ukraine by the Russian Federation. I would
like to take this opportunity to inform the members of
the Security Council of such actions taken in the areas
of refugees, food security and accountability.
While the war is entering its sixth month, we have
not forgotten our commitment to providing assistance
to Ukrainian refugees seeking shelter in Romania. In
order to provide predictability for the future of the
Ukrainian refugees who enjoy temporary protection
on our territory, this Tuesday a national plan for the
medium- and long-term integration of Ukrainian
refugees in Romania was released by my Government.
The plan was put together with the help of partners from
the United Nations agencies in Romania, civil society
and the relevant ministries.
The plan has the full support of our Prime Minister
and highlights Romania’s commitment to helping
Ukrainian refugees integrate smoothly in our country
and be able to acquire personal independence without
feeling all the effects of the war. The areas targeted
in the plan are education, health care, employment,
housing, childcare and vulnerable groups, while both
European and national funds will be employed to
implement it.
We commend the efforts of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, under
the direct and personal guidance of the SecretaryGeneral, as well as the efforts of Türkiye, throughout
the past months, which culminated in the signing of the

S/PV.9104

Istanbul agreements and the inauguration of the Joint
Coordination Centre in Istanbul two days ago.
Awaiting the meaningful implementation of the
Istanbul agreements, Romania will continue to lend
its support to ease food crisis pressures by continuing
to facilitate the export of grain via alternatives routes,
including land, rail, the Danube River and the Black Sea
port of Constanta. So far, 2.7 million tons of Ukrainian
cereals have already transited our territory.
Romania hopes that the transport of grain and
fertilizers from the Black Sea region to other countries
will not be jeopardized. Good faith is essential in
upholding and implementing what was agreed, as that
is the best way to alleviate the current food crisis,
increase humanitarian assistance and support food
production. The Russian missile strikes on Odesa’s
seaport, a crucial infrastructure for grain export,
which took place a day after the signing of the Istanbul
agreements, were strongly and widely condemned.
Another dimension of the consequences of the war
in Ukraine can be seen in the field of accountability.
Almost all available judicial avenues have been
activated to address the consequences of the unprovoked
and unjustifiable invasion of Ukraine by the Russian
Federation. A mobilization of that scale is extraordinary
and requires a creative approach to coordinate efforts
taking place at the international, regional and domestic
levels in order to maximize efficiency.
All initiatives aimed at ensuring accountability
must be well balanced so as to avoid duplication of
actions, make good use of resources and, not least,
protect the interests of the victims, who should not
be further traumatized by multiple interviews during
investigations and trials.
There is clearly a momentum for international
law and international humanitarian law, as the world
is more united than ever by the goal of safeguarding
the relevance and integrity of fundamental legal norms.
Such developments reinforce Romania’s traditional
stance on the matter, given that promoting respect for
international law is one of the pillars of our national
foreign policy.
It is in that spirit that Romania already announced
its intention to join the proceedings initiated by Ukraine
against the Russian Federation before the International
Court of Justice in the case concerning Allegations
of genocide under the Convention on the Prevention

22-4420729/30

S/PV.9104

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Ukraine v.
Russian Federation).
The Romanian judicial authorities have also opened
in rem investigations into the crimes against humanity
allegedly committed on the territory of Ukraine based
on the passive personality principle, in conformity with
our criminal code.

30/30

29/07/2022

To conclude, Romania would like to reaffirm its full
solidarity with Ukraine and the Ukrainian people, while
recalling the necessity to uphold the very principles
of the United Nations Charter in preserving the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

22-44207
