S/2008/309

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 May 2008
Original: English

Letter dated 8 May 2008 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
Please find attached my letter of 23 April 2008 (see annex), which I sent to the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Alpha Oumar Konaré, in reply to his
letter of 20 February 2008, requesting a support package from the United Nations.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

08-33513 (E) 130508

*0833513*

S/2008/309

Annex
Letter dated 23 April 2008 from the Secretary-General to the
Chairman of the African Union Commission
I wish to thank you for your letter of 20 February 2008 (S/2008/178, annex I),
forwarding to me the requirements for enhancing the deployment of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), pending the possible establishment of a
United Nations peacekeeping mission, and requesting that the United Nations
provide further support to the African Union in meeting those requirements.
At the outset, I should like to take this opportunity to reiterate my deep
gratitude for the important role the African Union is playing under difficult
circumstances in the efforts to bring durable peace and security to Somalia.
You would have noted that in my latest report on Somalia, dated 14 March
2008 (S/2008/178 and Corr.1 and 2), I presented to the Security Council the findings
of the integrated strategic assessment and fact-finding missions that visited the
region earlier this year. The missions worked closely with colleagues in the African
Union in developing their assessments and recommendations. In that regard, the
United Nations firmly supports the view of the African Union that significant
progress has been made in the efforts to facilitate a credible and inclusive political
process in Somalia and that on this basis more can be done by the international
community to support Somali efforts at bringing lasting peace and security to the
country.
To this end, my Special Representative and the United Nations country team,
in particular, are stepping up their efforts to provide political mediation and
programmatic support necessary for the Transitional Federal Government and
Somali stakeholders to engage in a viable process towards a political agreement,
while building up the necessary governance and security infrastructure of the
country. At the same time, United Nations humanitarian agencies will continue to do
all they can to ensure that basic assistance is provided to those in need given
conditions on the ground.
As noted in my report, once sufficient progress has been made in regard to the
political and security agreements necessary for the deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, I will be in a position to make the appropriate
recommendations to the Security Council. In the meantime, the Secretariat will
continue to provide technical planning support to the African Union for the
deployment of AMISOM and to update contingency planning for such an operation,
in close coordination with my Special Representative, the African Union, the
Transitional Federal Government and other stakeholders.
In my report of 14 March, I brought the contents of your letter of 20 February
to the attention of the Security Council and requested that Member States provide
the resources necessary for AMISOM to fulfil its mandate. I also noted that the
United Nations stands ready to provide further support to the African Union for the
deployment of AMISOM.
We fully agree, as outlined in your letter, that the African Union requires
additional assistance from the international community in order to enhance the
effectiveness of AMISOM, particularly in regard to the Organization’s capacity to

2

08-33513

S/2008/309

support the Mission and to enable troop-contributing countries to deploy and sustain
their troops on the ground.
The proposals presented below on the ways in which the United Nations can
further support the African Union in the deployment of AMISOM have been
developed with two principles in mind. The first is that United Nations support
should be geared towards assisting the African Union to build its institutional
capacity to carry out its responsibilities in addressing the challenges it faces in
supporting AMISOM. This will not only help the African Union to meet its present
requirements, but also help to build its capacity to meet the longer-term challenges
of peacekeeping. In this connection, United Nations technical experts will focus
their assistance on providing the advice necessary for their African Union
counterparts to more effectively carry out their support functions for AMISOM.
The second principle underlying United Nations support to the African Union
for AMISOM is to help ensure that AMISOM is deployed, to the extent possible, on
the basis of United Nations standards, which will facilitate any future transition to a
United Nations mission should the Security Council decide to establish one in
Somalia.
To this end, the United Nations is ready to take a two-pronged approach in
assisting the African Union to meet those requirements.
The first area of assistance, as requested in paragraph 8 of the attachment to
your letter, would focus on building African Union capacity to address the support
challenges related to the deployment and sustainment of AMISOM through the
provision of additional United Nations technical advisers to the AMISOM planning
team in Addis Ababa, particularly, as noted in your letter, in the areas of
procurement, finance and logistics advisers. Please find attached to this letter a list
of additional technical advisers that the United Nations would be ready to provide to
the African Union in this regard, pending budgetary approval by the General
Assembly.
While those advisers are a response to the immediate needs of the African
Union in supporting AMISOM, the United Nations continues to stand ready to
support the longer-term institutional capacity-building needs of the African Union
for peacekeeping. To this end, the United Nations planners currently with AMISOM
are supporting their African Union colleagues, in coordination with donors, to, inter
alia, identify and bring on board new African Union staff who will enhance the
Organization’s capacity to support AMISOM in the short term while also
contributing to meeting the longer-term needs of the African Union. At the same
time, within the framework of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations African
Union Peace Support Team, the United Nations and African Union are conducting a
study of the longer-term institution-building requirements of the African Union
Peace Support Operations Division. Once this study is complete, the Department’s
Support Team will continue to work closely with their African Union colleagues and
donors towards implementing the findings and recommendations of the study with a
view to strengthening the African Union Commission’s capacity to manage ongoing
and future peace support operations.
The second area of assistance would focus on enhancing coordination between
the African Union, donors and troop-contributing countries with a view to ensuring
that sufficient and qualitative bilateral partner funding and support is secured both

08-33513

3

S/2008/309

for AMISOM-wide requirements and for the specific requirements of current and
potential troop-contributing countries. In this regard, I would like to suggest that the
African Union and the United Nations hold a high-level donor conference in the
coming months, perhaps in New York, to highlight the needs of AMISOM and
solicit additional donor contributions for the Mission. I would suggest that at that
time the United Nations and the African Union establish a standing coordination
mechanism to (1) ensure the continuous updating and validation of the AMISOM
concept of operations and requirements based on United Nations standards and
(2) develop and coordinate a programme of working-level meetings in Addis Ababa,
New York, and troop-contributor and donor capitals, with a view to following up on
outstanding requirements.
I make the above set of proposals because I believe it is the most effective,
efficient and timely way in which the United Nations could help the African Union
to meet its current challenges in supporting AMISOM and, at the same time, build
its capacity to meet future challenges.
With regard to the views you have expressed on the arms embargo on Somalia,
this matter falls under the purview of the Security Council. I have therefore brought
the matter to the attention of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

4

08-33513

S/2008/309

Attachment
List of additional United Nations AMISOM planners

08-33513

1.

Senior Planning Officer

2.

Engineering Planning Officer

3.

Contract management Planning Officer

4.

Security Planning Officer

5.

Communications and information technology Planning Officer

6.

Finance Planning Officer

7.

Contingent-owned equipment Planning Officer

5
