A /70/PV.82

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

82nd plenary meeting

Wednesday, 23 December 2015, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 4.20 p.m.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/70/L.37)
The President: Members will recall that, in a joint
debate, the Assembly considered agenda items 15, 116
and 123 at its 52nd plenary meeting, on 13 November
2015 (see A/70/PV.52). The sponsors of draft resolution
A/70/L.7/Rev.1 — adopted as resolution 70/110
and entitled “The impacts of the 2015/16 El Niño
phenomenon” — have requested that the proposal be
reconsidered in accordance with rule 81 of the rules of
procedure of the Assembly, which reads as follows:
“When a proposal has been adopted or rejected,
it may not be reconsidered at the same session unless
the General Assembly, by a two-thirds majority of
the members present at voting, so decides.”
May I take it that the Assembly agrees to reconsider
resolution 70/110?
It was so decided.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa to introduce draft
resolution A/70/L.37.
Mr. Nyembe (South Africa): On behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, I have the honour to introduce

draft resolution A/70/L.37, entitled “The impacts of the
2015/16 El Niño phenomenon”.
The Group of 77 and China would like to express
its appreciation to all delegations for their constructive
contributions, which have led to the finalization of the
text before the Assembly. This is an affirmation of
the support that the United Nations membership has
towards those countries affected by the impact of the
El Niño phenomenon. The draft resolution reaffirms
the importance of developing strategies at the national,
subregional, regional and international levels with the
aim to prevent, mitigate, and repair damage resulting
from the El Niño phenomenon. Allow me to highlight
some paragraphs that are important in this draft
resolution.
The draft resolution requests the Secretary-General
to include in his report to the General Assembly
at its seventy-first session, under the sub-item
entitled “Disaster risk reduction” of the item entitled
“Sustainable development”, a section addressing the
socioeconomic and environmental impacts of the
2015-2016 El Niño phenomenon. That is in addition
to the section requested in its resolution 69/218, of
19 December 2014.
Furthermore, the draft resolution decides to
convene a meeting of the plenary of the General
Assembly during its seventy-first session to discuss
action-oriented recommendations regarding the
socioeconomic and environmental impacts of the 20152016 El Niño phenomenon.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-44858 (E)

*1544858*

A/70/PV.82

23/12/2015

Lastly, the draft resolution invites the Economic
and Social Council to devote sufficient time during
its 2016 session to address the socioeconomic and
environmental impacts of the 2015-2016 El Niño
phenomenon, building upon the expertise from the
United Nations regional commissions, specialized
agencies and the relevant bodies of the United Nations
system.
I commend draft resolution A/70/L.37 to the
General Assembly for adoption by consensus.
The President: In the light of the decision taken
earlier at this meeting, we shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/70/L.37.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/70/L.37. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt it?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 70/110).

A/70/L.37

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 15.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(e) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Conferences
Note by the Secretary-General (A/70/107)
The President: Members will recall that, at
its 50th plenary meeting, on 9 November 2015, the
Assembly took note of the appointments of Ghana and
Liberia as members of the Committee on Conferences
for a period of three years beginning on 1 January 2016.
Members will also recall that one seat from
among the Group of Asia-Pacific States, one seat from
among the Group of Eastern European States, two
seats from among the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States and one seat from among the Group
of Western European and other States, for a period
of three years beginning on 1 January 2016, remain
vacant. On recommendation by the Chairs of the AsiaPacific States and the Eastern European States, I have
appointed Hungary and the Islamic Republic of Iran as
members of the Committee on Conferences for a period
of three years beginning on 1 January 2016. May I take
it that the Assembly takes note of those appointments?
2/24

It was so decided.
The President: With regard to the remaining two
seats for the Latin American and Caribbean States
and the one seat from the Western European and other
States, I urge those Groups to submit their candidatures
as soon as possible.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (e) of agenda item
114.
Agenda items 126 to 128 (continued)
International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994
Letter from the President of the
Security Council (A/70/661)
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
Letter from the Secretary-General (A/70/547)
Letter from the President of the
Security Council (A/70/661)
International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals
Draft resolution (A/70/L.39)
The President: Members will recall that, at its
31st plenary meeting, on 13 October 2015, the General
Assembly concluded its consideration of agenda
item 128. In order for the Assembly to take action
expeditiously on the draft resolution before it, it will be
necessary to reopen the consideration of that item. May
I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
reopen its consideration of agenda item 128?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/70/L.39. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to adopt it?
15-44858

23/12/2015

Draft
resolution
(resolution 70/227).

A/70/PV.82

A/70/L.39

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 126 to 128.
I shall now suspend the meeting, in view of the fact
that the Fifth Committee has not yet completed its work.
The plenary will resume following the adjournment of
the meeting of the Fifth Committee, in order to take
up the pending items before the Assembly, including
the proposals from the Fifth Committee, the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee), the Third Committee and the Sixth
Committee, whose considerations were postponed due
to budgetary implications.
The meeting was suspended at 4.20 p.m. and
resumed at 8.20 p.m.
Agenda item 11
Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS and the political declarations on HIV/AIDS
Draft resolution (A/70/L.38)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/647)
The President: The General Assembly will now
take action on a draft resolution entitled “Organization
of the 2016 High-level Meeting on HIV/AIDS”, issued
as document A/70/L.38. The report of the Fifth
Committee on the programme budget implications of
the draft resolution is contained in document A/70/647.
For the time being, the text of the report is contained in
document A/C.5/70/L.17.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/70/L.38. May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to adopt it?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 70/228)

A/70/L.38

was

adopted

The President: I shall now give the floor to
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote or position on the resolutions and the decision just
adopted.
Mrs. Norman Chalet (United States of America):
The United States would like to add its thanks to the
Ambassadors of Zambia and Switzerland for their
efforts in facilitating the discussions on the modalities
for the 2016 high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS. We also

thank the President of the General Assembly, his Chef
de Cabinet and staff and the many other delegations
that worked tirelessly to negotiate resolution 70/228.
The United States is pleased to join the consensus
on this resolution and strongly supports this critical
high-level meeting, which will review the progress
achieved thus far and provide recommendations to help
us meet the goal of seeing an end to the HIV/AIDS
epidemic by 2030.
Throughout the negotiations on the resolution, we
underscored the importance of the participation of civil
society in the high-level meeting and its panels. Civil
society organizations, non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), academic institutions, the private sector and
other stakeholders play an essential role on issues
relating to HIV/AIDS, especially as key implementation
partners. For that reason, the high-level meeting and
its panels should be open to all concerned parties,
including those that do not have consultative status
in the Economic and Social Council. Their expertise
and participation are essential to the success of the
meeting and to the implementation of the Declaration
of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political
Declarations on HIV/AIDS.
In that context, we would like to underscore our
belief in the importance of fairness and transparency in
compiling lists of NGOs for participation in the highlevel meeting and other United Nations summits and
high-level meetings. Any concerns that a Member State
may have about an NGO’s potential participation in the
high-level meeting need to be addressed openly and
transparently, not behind closed doors.
Mr. Vachon (Canada): Canada considers the 2016
high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS to be an important
event for the engagement of leaders in order to accelerate
a comprehensive response to HIV/AIDS. We would
like to thank the President of the General Assembly,
the co-Chairs — Zambia and Switzerland — and
colleagues for the hard work in achieving consensus so
that the high-level meeting modalities could be adopted
in due course.
Canada recognizes and values the role played
by non-governmental organizations in advocacy,
awareness-raising and programme implementation
in the fight against HIV/AIDS, including in the most
affected countries. Member States will continue to
rely on civil-society representatives, among others,
from various backgrounds, to address the persistent

15-448583/24

A/70/PV.82

challenges and gaps related to HIV/AIDS. In that
regard, their participation in the high-level meeting is
of paramount importance.
Given the important role of civil society in our
collective work on HIV/AIDS, Canada is deeply
concerned with the increasing trend towards limiting
the participation of civil-society representatives in
United Nations events. In that regard, Canada wishes
to underline the great importance that we attach to
the principles of transparency and due process at
the United Nations, including with respect to the
process for determining the inclusion of civil-society
representatives at United Nations meetings. Resolution
70/228 provides for the consideration of the list of civilsociety participants on a no-objection basis. It is our
understanding that, should any Member State choose
to object to the participation of individual civil-society
representatives, the objecting Member State will inform
the President of the General Assembly, in a transparent
manner, of the rationale for any objection, who will in
turn advise the General Assembly. It is in that spirit
that Canada joined the consensus on the resolution.
Canada furthermore wishes to note that there have
been numerous contentious negotiations surrounding
the process of accrediting civil-society representatives
to recent United Nations and General Assembly
proceedings and high-level meetings. Going forward,
it is Canada’s view that the United Nations should
consider a predictable and consistent approach to the
modalities for the participation at high-level meetings
of civil-society representatives without accredited
status in the Economic and Social Council. Canada
urges the Secretariat and Member States to consider
further steps in that regard. It is in all of our interests
that we regularize that process in a fair, appropriate,
inclusive and transparent manner.
Canada asks that its explanation of position be
included in the record of this meeting.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
I now give the floor to the observer of the European
Union to make a statement.
Mr. De Preter (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
We would like to extend our thanks and deep
appreciation to Ambassador Kasese-Bota of the
4/24

23/12/2015

Permanent Mission of Zambia and to Ambassador
Lauber of the Permanent Mission of Switzerland for
their tireless efforts to facilitate the discussions on
resolution 70/228 and for their work in conducting the
process of consultations in an open and transparent
manner, which culminated today in the adoption of
the resolution.
First of all, the EU and its member States want to
unambiguously reaffirm their commitment to the highlevel meeting on HIV/AIDS to be held next June. We
wish to stress the importance that we attach to the fight
against HIV/AIDS. We have already achieved much
through our joint determination, but we need to do
even more and cannot let up in our efforts. The highlevel event will provide us with an with opportunity
to attract high-level political attention to ensure that
all the necessary means will be devoted to ending the
AIDS epidemic by 2030.
The EU and its member States were deeply
disappointed with the reluctance shown by some
Member States in the context of negotiations on this
modalities resolution to ensure the full transparency
and participation of civil-society representatives at the
high-level meeting and to allow relevant non-accredited
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to participate.
We are deeply concerned about the increasing trend
towards limiting civil-society participation in United
Nations events in an arbitrary way. We firmly believe
that maintaining a genuine, open dialogue with relevant
civil-society groups should be a priority for the United
Nations and its membership, including in the context of
high-level meetings such as the upcoming discussion
on HIV/AIDS.
For that reason, throughout the consultations on
this resolution, we consistently defended the position
that the process of admitting NGOs to participate in the
high-level meeting should be completely transparent
and allow for the full involvement of the General
Assembly. We have proposed similar approaches for
other processes within the United Nations. We hope that
Member States will adopt a more constructive approach
in future discussions on civil-society participation in
United Nations events, and that the EU and its member
States will remain strongly committed to ensuring that
an improved, more open and transparent process for
the selection of NGOs to participate in specific United
Nations meetings will be used.
15-44858

23/12/2015

A/70/PV.82

We believe that a vigorous and independent civil
society is essential to the functioning of democracy and
the implementation of human rights. We see effective
engagement with civil society as a cornerstone of
successful human rights policies and attach the greatest
importance to the voice of civil society. We will
continue to stay actively engaged in debates on HIV/
AIDS and look forward to successful and transparent
negotiations on the political declaration and to fully
inclusive discussions during the high-level meeting.

the draft resolution is contained in document A/70/637.
For the time being, the text of the report is contained in
document A/C.5/70/L.17.

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 11.

Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 70/230).

Agenda item 28 (continued)
Social development
Report of the Third Committee (A/70/481)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/643)
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft resolution IV, recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 40 of its report. The report
of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget
implications of draft resolution IV is contained in
document A/70/643. For the time being, the text of the
report is contained in document A/C.5/70/L.17.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution IV, entitled “Persons with albinism”. The
Third Committee adopted it. May I consider that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 70/229).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 28?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 53 (continued)
International cooperation in the peaceful uses of
outer space
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/70/495)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/637)
The President: The Assembly will take action on
draft resolution II, recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 16 of its report. The report of the Fifth
Committee on the programme budget implications of

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution II, entitled “Matters relating to activities under
the United Nations Programme on Space Applications
in 2016”. The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) adopted it without a
vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 53?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 63 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/70/505)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/641)
The President: The Assembly will take action on
draft resolution VII, recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 32 of its report. The report of the Fifth
Committee on the programme budget implications of
draft resolution VII is contained in document A/70/641.
For the time being, the text of the report is contained in
document A/C.5/70/L.17.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution VII, entitled “Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Canada, Chad, Chile, Congo, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican

15-448585/24

A/70/PV.82

Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Côte d’Ivoire, Gabon, Israel, Morocco
Abstaining:
Central African Republic, France, Liechtenstein,
Mauritania
Draft resolution VII was adopted by 140 votes to 4,
with 4 abstentions (resolution 70/231).
[Subsequently, the delegations of China, Colombia,
Egypt, Liechtenstein, Mauritania and Viet Nam
informed the Secretariat that they had intended to
vote in favour; the delegation of the United States
of America had inteded to vote against.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 63?
It was so decided.
6/24

23/12/2015

Agenda item 69 (continued)
Rights of indigenous people
Report of the Third Committee (A/70/486)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/644)
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on the draft resolution recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 13 of its report. The report
of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget
implications of the draft resolution is contained in
document A/70/644. For the time being, the text of the
report is contained in document A/C.5/70/L.17.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Third Committee adopted the draft
resolution. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/232).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 69?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 72 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
(c) Human rights situations and report of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee (A/70/489/Add.3)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/640)
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft resolutions II and IV, recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 30 of its report. The
report of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget
implications of draft resolutions II and IV is contained
in documents A/70/640 and A/70/638, respectively. For
the time being, the texts of the reports are contained in
document A/C.5/70/L.17.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions II and IV, one by one.
We will first take a decision on draft resolution II,
entitled “Situation of human rights in Myanmar”. The
Third Committee adopted draft resolution II. May I
consider that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 70/233).
15-44858

23/12/2015

The President: I call on the representative of
China, who wishes to speak in explanation of vote on
the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Chu Guang (China) (spoke in Chinese): Our
delegation would like to make a statement on the situation
of human rights in Myanmar. We have maintained a
constant position and, therefore, China was not able to
participate in the consensus on resolution 70/233.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution IV, entitled “Situation of
human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, who wishes to speak in explanation of
vote before the voting.
Mrs. Vadiati (Islamic Republic of Iran): Apart
from the politically motivated nature of draft resolution
IV, which is totally unacceptable on its own terms,
it contains provisions that are definitely irrelevant
and unprecedented for inclusion in a human rights
resolution. Such provisions run counter to the basic
principles of international law and divert the General
Assembly and its relevant Committee from their proper
course.
The content of paragraph 14 is particularly
abhorrent, as it condemns the two forces that are part
of the regular armed forces of the Islamic Republic of
Iran deployed in Syria on an exclusively advisory basis
at the formal invitation of the Government to support
its legitimate fight against the terrorist onslaught in
Syria. Moreover, that paragraph denies the right of
Member States to establish peace and order on their
territory, including by requesting assistance. It also
takes an adverse and unwarranted position on the
actions by a regular army of a sovereign Member State.
That paragraph, together with paragraph 16, lumps
together — falsely and in a sinister manner — and
labels and condemns exactly those people who are
fighting Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and their affiliates.
The paragraphs blur the borders between the
terrorists and those who fight them, create confusion
regarding the United Nations-designated terrorist
groups and reward violent extremism and terrorists, as
well as their supporters, who during the past several
years have nurtured them with takfiri ideologies and
provided them with financial and logistical resources.
The unfounded accusation levelled in those two
paragraphs amount to revenge against those who have

A/70/PV.82

so far been the most effective force on the ground
against terrorism and violent extremism — a force
that, if not for its genuine and resolute fight, more of
the Middle East would have fallen under the black flag
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham/Da’esh. It
is unfortunate that the malfunctioning of the United
Nations human rights mechanism is providing an
opportunity to abuse the system and have such an
absurd draft resolution adopted.
In conclusion, the incongruous accusations and
condemnations raised in the draft resolution poison
the hope created by the Vienna negotiations process to
find a way out of the current impasse. It is particularly
regrettable that, in the wake of the recent upsurge in
barbaric terrorist attacks in different parts of the world,
which should have brought all of us closer together in
a united front against terrorism and extremism, the
draft resolution aims to sow discord in the international
anti-terror fight. However, let me assure those who
initiated the draft resolution that it will not dissuade
us from our resolute fight against violent extremism,
as we are determined to clear our environment of those
who sow terror and violence in our neighbourhood and
export it to the entire world.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Benin,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo
Verde, Cameroon, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait,
Latvia, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,

15-448587/24

A/70/PV.82

23/12/2015

the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Yemen, Zambia

political goals, which runs counter to the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and of international
law. That is an insult to the role of the Human Rights
Council and distances the General Assembly from
achieving its fundamental goals.

Against:
Algeria, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burundi,
China, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Ecuador, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab
Republic, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)

It is indeed strange that some countries that are
without either a constitution or a parliament, and that
do not even respect the rights of women, children and
the elderly, are talking about human rights in Syria.
That is a farce, and it should not be accepted by the
United Nations. What the Saudi and Qatari regimes are
doing to the people of Syria — killing them, financing
terrorism and trafficking and exploiting Syrian blood
and distorting the image of Islam — gives the wrong
impression, as is mentioned in the report. The fact that
they send droves of members of Da’esh, the Al-Nusra
Front and other terrorist groups is well known to all
countries.

Abstaining:
Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Central African
Republic, Congo, Dominican Republic, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Greece, Guyana, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Mali, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Nepal, Nigeria, Philippines, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Singapore, South
Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkmenistan, United Republic of Tanzania,
Zimbabwe
The draft resolution was adopted by 104 votes to
13, with 37 abstentions (resolution 70/234).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Canada and
Somalia informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour; the delegation of Belarus
had intended to vote against; and the delegations of
the Niger and Viet Nam had intended to abstain.]
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote following the voting, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Qassem Agha (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): We reiterate the principled position of our
country and of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM)
with regard to not dealing with draft resolutions that
target specific NAM member States individually but
not other countries.
My delegation wishes to express its deep sadness
at the fact that some delegations, including, regrettably,
some members of NAM, are repeatedly trying to exploit
the work of the Third Committee and of the General
Assembly in order to advance their interventionist
8/24

In conclusion, I would like to address the
representatives of the Saudi and Qatari regimes and say
that the Syrian people will neither forgive nor forget.
Mr. Al Musharakh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): The United Arab Emirates was one of the
sponsors of resolution 70/234, entitled “Situation of
human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic”, based on
our conviction that the tragedy of the brotherly Arab
people of Syria should be put to an end. For the past
five years, the Syrian people have been systematically
subjected to the worst forms of human rights violations,
including indiscriminate killings and detentions,
the deliberate targeting of civilians, sexual violence
and the use of prohibited chemical weapons against
civilians, as well as other violations. Despite previous
international resolutions that called for putting an
end to such violations and for holding perpetrators
accountable, the regime continues to commit crimes
against humanity, in flagrant contravention of human
rights law and international humanitarian law.
More than 60 countries sponsored resolution
70/234, which shows to what extent the humanitarian
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic has deteriorated.
The resolution calls on the international community to
reject those violations and to protect the human rights
of the brotherly Syrian people. We wish to thank all the
countries that voted in favour of the resolution.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
15-44858

23/12/2015

sub-item (c) of agenda item 72 and of agenda item 72
as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 79 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft resolution (A/70/L.22)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/645)
The President: The report of the Fifth Committee
on the programme budget implications of the draft
resolution is contained in document A/70/645. For
the time being, the text of the report is contained in
document A/C.5/70/L.17.
Members will recall that the Assembly held a
debate on agenda item 79 and its sub-items (a) and (b)
at its 68th and 69th plenary meetings, on 8 December
2015.
I now call on the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, who wishes to speak in
explanation of vote before the voting.
Mrs. Salas Pellicer (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would
like to speak in explanation of vote before the vote on
draft resolution A/70/L.22, submitted under agenda
item 79, entitled “Oceans and the law of the sea”.
We would first like to thank the facilitator of the
draft resolution, Ambassador Eden Charles of Trinidad
and Tobago, as well as Ms. Gabriele Goettsche-Wanli,
Director of the Division for Ocean Affairs and Law
of the Sea, and Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares, UnderSecretary-General for Legal Affairs of the Office of
Legal Affairs.
I should point out that Venezuela is not a party to
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS) or to the Agreement for the Implementation
of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating
to the Conservation and Management of Straddling
Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks. That
is why the standards mentioned in those instruments,
which include some that could be considered to be
customary law, cannot be applied to my country unless
we recognize them explicitly. Given the importance
of the sustainable management of biodiversity and
resources beyond national jurisdictions, my country

A/70/PV.82

believes that this national issue should be regulated by
a specific international instrument that is separate from
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
and the Convention on Biodiversity. It should prioritize
the precautionary principle and the need to preserve the
rights of humankind as a whole.
Venezuela hopes that future decisions on this
issue, including negotiations on a future multilateral
instrument, will be conducted in an inclusive and
participatory spirit. In Venezuela’s view, UNCLOS
should not be the only legal framework governing
activities related to the oceans and seas, nor can it be
considered a universal instrument.
Although the text of the draft resolution has positive
aspects, we should note the inclusion of elements that
compelled Venezuela to express reservations regarding
the outcome document of the 2012 United Nations
Convention on Sustainable Development on issues such
as those related to marine biodiversity. Similarly, my
country has expressed reservations about Goal 14 (c) of
the Sustainable Development Goals included in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1).
We believe that the process of updating the Convention’s
terms should be reviewed, as new situations have arisen
that the current text does not address adequately, and
for which it is in some cases even counterproductive.
That has affected the evolution of a mechanism that
should cover the most important current issues relating
to the oceans and seas in a balanced, equitable and
inclusive way.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela will therefore
abstain in the voting on draft resolution A/70/L.22.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/70/L.22, entitled “Oceans and the law of
the sea”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. Pollard (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I would like to announce that,
since the submission of the draft resolution, in addition
to those delegations listed in document A/70/L.22, the
following countries have become sponsors of the draft
resolution: Australia, Barbados, Belgium, Canada,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Greece,
Indonesia, Italy, Jamaica, Lithuania, Luxembourg,

15-448589/24

A/70/PV.82

Maldives, Mexico, Nauru, Norway, Papua New Guinea,
Portugal, Romania, Samoa, Slovakia, Sweden and the
United States of America.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States
of America, Uruguay, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Turkey
Abstaining:
Central African Republic, El Salvador, Mali,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
10/24

23/12/2015

Draft resolution A/70/L.22 was adopted by 143
votes to 1, with 4 abstentions (resolution 70/235).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Qatar and Viet
Nam informed the Secretariat that they had intended
to vote in favour; the delegation of Colombia had
intended to abstain.]
The President: Before giving the floor to the
speakers in explanation of vote following the voting, I
should like to remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Erciyes (Turkey): Turkey voted against
resolution 70/235, entitled “Oceans and the law of the
sea”. I would like to recall here that the reasons that
have prevented Turkey from becoming a party to the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
remain valid. Turkey supports international efforts
to establish a regime for the sea that is based on the
principle of equity and is acceptable to all States. In
our opinion, however, the Convention does not provide
sufficient safeguards for special geographical situations
and, as a consequence, does not take into consideration
conflicting interests and sensitivities arising from
special circumstances.
Furthermore, the Convention does not allow States
to register reservations to its articles. Although we
agree with the Convention in its general intent and
with most of its provisions, we are unable to become
a party to it owing to those prominent shortcomings.
That being the case, we cannot support a resolution that
calls on States to become parties to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and to harmonize
their national legislation with its provisions.
Mr. Celarie Landaverde (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): I am honoured both for myself and on behalf
of my delegation to address the plenary today on
resolution 70/235, on “Oceans and the law of the sea”. I
hope that our work will be rewarded with good results.
The Republic of El Salvador is aware of the
importance of the oceans, particularly their exploitation
within the framework of sustainable development,
which is essential if we are to ensure food security
for every human being on our planet in an organized
way. We also realize that there are regulatory gaps
in areas that include sustainable fisheries, transport
and the conservation and sustainable use of marine
biodiversity — issues where significant progress has
15-44858

23/12/2015

been made but for which more still needs to be done.
The Republic of El Salvador is not a State party to the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, and
we believe that measures, agreements and resolutions
that are agreed on among States or that emanate from
the General Assembly should take the standards of
general international law into account. That means that
such measures, agreements or resolutions, except those
that the States in question recognize explicitly, do not
create obligations for States that are not party to the
Convention without their consent.
El Salvador encourages all States to continue their
efforts relating to the use, conservation and protection
of the oceans and seas with the aim of ensuring a good
quality of life for future generations. That can be
achieved through the cooperation — bilateral, regional
or global — of all countries of the world, which will
help us to strengthen international peace and security
and friendly relations among all nations, in accordance
with the principles of justice and equal rights, as
enshrined in the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.
The issue of the oceans and seas should also
be seen as a harbinger of a truly important issue for
the international community, that of the living and
non-living resources on the seabed, which are part
of the shared heritage of humankind, the products of
which should be distributed in a genuinely fair and
equitable way to the true benefit of every country in
the world, especially developing nations.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 79?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 83 (continued)
Report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its sixty-seventh session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/70/509)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/642)
The President: The General Assembly will now
take action on a draft resolution recommended by
the Sixth Committee in paragraph 10 of its report.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the programme

A/70/PV.82

budget implications of the draft resolution is contained
in document A/70/642. For the time being, the text of
the report is contained in document A/C.5/70/L.17.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/236).
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 83?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 92 (continued)
Developments in the field of information
and telecommunications in the context of
international security
Report of the First Committee (A/70/455)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/639)
The President: The General Assembly will now
take action on a draft resolution recommended by the
First Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. The report
of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget
implications of the draft resolution is contained in
document A/70/639. For the time being, the text of the
report is contained in document A/C.5/70/L.17.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The First Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/237).
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 92?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 97 (continued)
General and complete disarmament
Report of the First Committee (A/70/460)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/646)
The President: The General Assembly will take
action on a draft decision recommended by the First
Committee in paragraph 95 of its report. The report of the

15-4485811/24

A/70/PV.82

Fifth Committee on the programme budget implications
of the amendment to the draft decision is contained in
document A/70/646. For the time being, the text of the
report is contained in document A/C.5/70/L.17.
We will first consider the draft amendment to the
draft resolution, as contained in document A/70/L.26.
I call on the representative of Japan, who wishes to
speak in explanation of position before the Assembly
takes a decision.
Mr. Minami (Japan): I would like to explain
Japan’s vote on the draft decision concerning the fourth
special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament. Japan will vote in favour of the draft
decision as amended. However, we feel it is regrettable
that its programme budget implications have been
generated by the draft amendment that will be
proposed after the draft decision’s adoption by the First
Committee. The First Committee adopted the original
draft decision on the understanding that it would not
entail any programme budget implications. However,
that understanding has regrettably been superseded by
the proposed draft amendment. Japan would therefore
like to call on all Member States to avoid such situations
in future.
The President: The General Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft amendment to the draft
decision, as contained in document A/70/L.26. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt it?
Draft amendment A/70/L.26 was adopted.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the
First Committee in paragraph 95 of its report, which
is entitled “Open-ended Working Group on the Fourth
Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to
Disarmament”, as just amended.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
12/24

23/12/2015

Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Central African Republic, France,
Netherlands, United States of America

Israel,

The draft decision, as amended, was adopted by 149
votes to none, with 5 abstentions (decision 70/551).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Switzerland
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour; the delegation of the United Kingdom
had intended to abstain.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 97?
It was so decided.

15-44858

23/12/2015

Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 131 to 134, 138, 141 and 144 to 147.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Gert Auväärt of Estonia, to introduce in one
intervention the reports of the Fifth Committee before
the Assembly.
Mr. Auväärt (Estonia), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee: Given that many of us have not really slept
during the last 48 hours, I will try to be as brief as
possible.
I have the honour today to introduce to the General
Assembly the reports of the Fifth Committee. The Fifth
Committee met from 8 October to 21 December 2015
and held 23 plenary meetings and numerous rounds of
informal consultations.
I would like to draw the Assembly’s attention to the
fact that several Fifth Committee reports have already
been considered by the General Assembly, at its 29th,
52nd and 75th plenary meetings, held on the following
agenda items: agenda item 138, “Scale of assessments
for the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations”, specifically on Article 19; agenda item 114,
“Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments”; agenda item 135, “Programme
planning”; agenda item 137, “Pattern of conferences”;
agenda item 142, “Report on the activities of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services”; agenda item 132,
“Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations”; agenda
item 143, “Administration of justice at the United
Nations”; and agenda item 160, “Financing the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali”.
I shall now present additional reports of the Fifth
Committee on the following items.
On agenda 131, “Financial reports and audited
financial statements, and reports of the Board of
Auditors”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 7 of its report contained in
document A/70/624, the adoption of a draft resolution
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
On agenda item 133, entitled “Programme budget for
the biennium 2014-2015”, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly, in paragraph 10 of its report

A/70/PV.82

contained in document A/70/631, the adoption of two
draft resolutions adopted by the Committee without a
vote. In paragraph 11 of the same report, the Committee
recommends the adoption of a draft decision.
On agenda items 144, entitled “Financing of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994”,
145, entitled “Financing of the International Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991”, and 146, entitled “Financing
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals”, the Committee, in paragraph 6 of the
respective reports contained in documents A/70/632
to A/70/634, recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of the related draft resolutions adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
On agenda item 141, entitled “United Nations
common system”, the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report
contained in document A/70/635, the adoption of one
draft resolution that was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
On agenda item 138, entitled “Scale of assessments
for the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/70/416/Add.1, the adoption of a draft
resolution adopted by the Committee without a vote.
On agenda item 147, entitled “Scale of assessments
for the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations”, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly, in paragraph
6 of its report contained in document A/70/636, the
adoption of a draft resolution adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
On agenda item 134, entitled “Proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2016-2017”, in paragraphs
37 to 42 of document A/70/648, the Committee
considered five draft resolutions. In draft resolution I,
the Committee adopted the draft resolution “Questions
relating to the proposed programme budget for the

15-4485813/24

A/70/PV.82

biennium 2016-2017” without a vote. In draft resolution
II, on “Special subjects relating to the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017”, a
recorded vote was requested on an oral amendment
to section 20 of draft resolution A/C.5/70/L.19. The
Committee voted not to include the oral amendment
in the draft resolution. The Committee subsequently
adopted the draft resolution, as a whole, without a vote.
The Committee adopted draft resolution III, entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017”, draft
resolution IV, entitled “Unforeseen and extraordinary
expenses for the biennium 2016-2017”, and draft
resolution V, entitled “Working Capital Fund for the
biennium 2016-2017” without a vote. The Committee
also recommended the adoption of 11 statements on
programme budget implications. The relevant reports
of the Committee are issued in documents A/70/637 to
A/70/647.
On agenda item 132, “Review of the efficiency of the
administrative and financial functioning of the United
Nations”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 5 of its report contained in
document A/70/649, the adoption of the draft decision
“Questions deferred for future consideration”, which
the Committee adopted without a vote.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank
delegations, especially the coordinators and budget
chairs, the Secretariat, my fellow Bureau members
and the Chair for their efficient work. I wish
members happy holidays.
The President: I thank the Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee.
Before proceeding further, I would like to emphasize
that, as the Fifth Committee has just finished its work,
most of the reports are available in English only. It is
my understanding that all of the reports will be issued
in all official languages as soon as possible. I thank
representatives for their understanding.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth Committee
that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Fifth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee
14/24

23/12/2015

and are reflected in the relevant official records. May I
remind delegations that under paragraph 7 of decision
34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a main committee and in a plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in
the plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with decision 34/401, explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance. That means that where
recorded votes were taken, we will do the same. I should
also hope that we will proceed to adopt without a vote
those recommendations that were adopted without a
vote in the Committee.
Agenda item 131
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/624)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/238).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 131.
Agenda item 133
Programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/631)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth Committee
15-44858

23/12/2015

in paragraph 10 of its report and a draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 11 of the
same report.
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I
and II and on the draft decision, one by one.
We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled “Capital
master plan”, the text of which, for the time being, is
contained in document A/C.5/70/L.9.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 70/239).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015”,
the text of which, for the time being, is contained in
document A/C.5/70/L.10.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 70/240 A-B).
The President: We now turn to paragraph 11 of
the report to take action on the draft decision entitled
“United Nations Office for Partnerships”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft decision, as recommended by the Fifth Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 70/552).

A/70/PV.82

text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/70/L.11.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/241).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 144.
Agenda item 145
Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/633)
The President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time
being, the text of the draft resolution is contained in
document A/C.5/70/L.12.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/242).

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 133.

The President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 145.

Agenda item 144

Agenda item 146

Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other
Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and
31 December 1994

Financing of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/632)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/634)
The President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time
being, the text of the draft resolution is contained in
document A/C.5/70/L.13.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?

15-4485815/24

A/70/PV.82

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/243).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 146.
Agenda item 141
United Nations common system
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/635)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/70/L.14.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/244).

23/12/2015

in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/70/L.16.
We will now take action on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/246).
The President: I would like to confirm the
understanding reached in the Fifth Committee that, on
an exceptional basis for the 2016-2018 scale period only,
three countries in Level B — the Bahamas, Bahrain
and Oman — will be afforded discounts of 7.5 per cent
to their assessment rates, and that in 2018 only, Saudi
Arabia will be afforded a discount of 7.5 per cent to its
assessment rate, and that those discounts shall be borne
on a pro rata basis by the permanent members of the
Security Council.

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
141.

The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 147.

Agenda item 138 (continued)

Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2016
to 2017

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/416/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/70/L.15.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/245).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 138.
Agenda item 147
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of United Nations peacekeeping operations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/636)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
16/24

Agenda item 134

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/648)
The President: The Assembly has before it five
draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 43 of its report.
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I
to V, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Questions relating to
the proposed programme budget for the biennium 20162017”, the text of which, for the time being, is contained
in document A/C.5/70/L.18.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 70/247).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution
II, entitled “Special subjects relating to the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017”,
the text of which, for the time being, is contained in
document A/C.5/70/L.19.
I now call on the representative of Cuba.
15-44858

23/12/2015

Mr. Sánchez Azcuy (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
In order to reiterate the long-standing position of my
delegation, I should like to refer to section XX of draft
resolution II, entitled “Estimates in respect of special
political missions, good offices and other political
initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or
the Security Council”.
No intergovernmental agreement has been negotiated
by Member States with regard to the definition of the
concept of “responsibility to protect”. My delegation
therefore firmly believes that the budget estimates and
the related narrative presented in connection with the
Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect should
be eliminated and should be taken into account only
once the General Assembly has take a decision on that
concept, its implementation, scope and other related
matters.
I therefore reiterate the request of the Cuban
delegation to amend section XX of draft resolution II
to include the following two preambular paragraphs,
which I will now read.
“Recalling that the General Assembly has not
taken a decision on the concept of the responsibility
to protect, its scope, its implications or its possible
forms of implementation,
“Noting that the estimates of cluster I include
narratives, functions, expected outcomes, success
indicators, results and other information related to
the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
the Responsibility to Protect, decides to eliminate
all references to actions and results related to the
responsibilty to protect as expressed in the strategic
framework and related narratives of the Office of
the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide and requests the SecretaryGeneral to issue a corrigendum to his report”.
We request support for the amendment I have
just introduced.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote or position.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg): I have the honour to
deliver this explanation of vote on behalf of the States
members of the European Union on the amendment to
section XX of draft resolution II, which have just been
introduced by the representative of Cuba.

A/70/PV.82

The mandate of the Office of the Special Adviser on
the Prevention of Genocide was approved by Security
Council resolution 1366 (2001). It is our responsibility
to ensure that the Office is adequately funded in order
for it to be able to effectively implement its mandate
and all the functions related to it. The paragraphs of
the resolution currently under consideration would,
however, greatly reduce the capacity of the Office of
the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide to
implement its mandate. Those paragraphs would, in
particular, hamper the Office in carrying out its mandate
in close collaboration with other United Nations
entities, in particular with the Special Adviser on the
Responsibility to Protect, who focuses on developing
the conceptual, political and operational aspects of the
responsibility to protect.
For that reason, we will vote against the amendment
that has just been introduced. We call on other
delegations to do likewise.
Mr. Yazdani (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation has asked for the floor to explain its vote on
the proposed amendment introduced by the delegation
of Cuba on section XX of draft resolution II.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has always supported
the activities of the United Nations within its mandates
and based on its rules and regulations, in particular
the Charter of the United Nations. In accordance with
the Charter, the General Assembly occupies a central
position as the chief deliberative policymaking and
only universally representative body of the United
Nations. It is therefore worth mentioning that there is
no consensual agreement among Member States in the
General Assembly on the concept of the responsibility
to protect or its scope, implications or possible ways of
implementation.
In conclusion, although the Islamic Republic of
Iran supports the expeditious, effective and immediate
response of the United Nations in the prevention
of genocide and mass atrocities, in the view of my
delegation, there is no intergovernmental consensus
on the concept of the responsibilty to protect. It is
therefore not acceptable to my delegation that the
limited financial resources of the Organization be
allocated to a post for which there are no agreed terms
of reference for its functions owing to the absence of
an agreed definition with regard to the responsibility
to protect.

15-4485817/24

A/70/PV.82

For those reasons, my delegation will vote in favour
of the amendment proposed by the delegation of Cuba.
Mr. Jiménez (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation has asked for the floor to explain its
position with regard to the amendment proposed by the
representative of Cuba with regard to draft resolution
II on estimates in respect of special political missions,
good offices and other political initiatives authorized
by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council.
Any definition of the responsibility to protect must
be based on a clear recognition of the principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference
in the internal affairs of States. Since 2012, the
resources for the Special Adviser on the Responsibility
to Protect have been completely combined with those
of the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
the Prevention of Genocide. My delegation is firmly
in favour of that Special Adviser, in line with my
Government’s permanent principled position against
genocide.
Nevertheless, the budget estimates and the related
narrative presented for the Special Adviser on the
Responsibility to Protect must be eliminated and should
be considered only once the General Assembly takes
decisions on the concept, its execution, the scope of
application and other related matters. For that reason,
my delegation will support the amendment made to the
text by Cuba, and we would urge the other members to
do the same.
Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I asked for the floor in order to explain our
position on the amendment proposed by Cuba on part
XX of draft resolution II.
Insofar as there is no existing consensus on
the concept of the responsibility to protect, its field
application and the way it should be implemented, the
concept runs counter to the principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations, particularly those
of non-interference in the internal affairs of Member
States and respect for State sovereignty and territorial
integrity. Those would be violations of the Charter, and
therefore we support Cuba’s proposal.
The President: We shall first consider the oral
amendment to part XX of draft resolution II. A recorded
vote has been requested.
I call on the representative of Cuba on a point of
order.
18/24

23/12/2015

Mr. Sánchez Azcuy (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I am very sorry to have to raise a point of order but,
pursuant to rule 89 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, when a motion is introduced two
delegations must speak in favour and two against. My
delegation has heard only one delegation speak against
Cuba’s proposal. I would suggest that we hear from
the Secretariat as to whether this is understood as
acceptance of the Cuban proposal, without necessarily
having to move to a vote. While we wait for the
clarification, I would ask, Mr. President, that you delay
the voting and that this matter be clarified immediately,
that is, whether it is appropriate to proceed to a vote
when the number of speakers established under rule 89
have not spoken against my delegation’s proposal.
The President: The understanding of the President
is that this is not a proposal. This is an amendment and
we can continue with the voting.
I call on the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Sánchez Azcuy (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Once again, my apologies. but according to rule 89, it
says that
“[a] representative may move that parts of a
proposal or of an amendment should be voted on
separately. If objection is made to the request for
division, the motion for division shall be voted
upon. Permission to speak on the motion for
division shall be given only to two speakers in
favour and two speakers against.”
The rule continues from there, but I think that that
is the point that my delegation would like to highlight.
Once again, I reiterate the request of my delegation that
the Secretariat clarify the situation wherein only one
delegation has spoken against the proposal, or rather,
the amendment of my delegation.
The President: I want to read out rule 90 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, on voting
on amendments.
“When an amendment is moved to a proposal,
the amendment shall be voted on first. When two
or more amendments are moved to a proposal,
the General Assembly shall first vote on the
amendment furthest removed in substance from
the original proposal and then on the amendment
next furthest removed therefrom, and so on until
all the amendments have been put to the vote.
Where, however, the adoption of one amendment
15-44858

23/12/2015

necessarily implies the rejection of another
amendment, the latter amendment shall not be put
to the vote. If one or more amendments are adopted,
the amended proposal shall then be voted upon. A
motion is considered an amendment to a proposal
if it merely adds to, deletes from or revises part of
the proposal.”
That means that the understanding of the Secretariat
and of the President of the rules of procedure is that we
are entitled to move to the vote, which we are just in the
process of taking. I will take the permission to go on
with the voting on the amendment.
I understand that the representative of Cuba still
does not agree with the President. I now call on him.
Mr. Sánchez Azcuy (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): It is
not that I disagree with you, Mr. President. That is not
the case at all. I am simply directing a question to the
Secretariat on a matter of substantive order. You have
kindly replied, Mr. President, based on rule 90, which
my delegation greatly appreciates. But my question was
related to rule 89, because only one delegation spoke
against the motion made by Cuba. Once again, I am
very grateful for your patience and your explanation
of rule 90, but I would ask you, very respectfully, to
clear up the question that my delegation has regarding
rule 89 and the fact that only one delegation has spoken
against the amendment proposed by my delegation.
I once again reiterate the thanks of my delegation,
and I am sorry, Sir, for having delayed your efficient
management of the meeting.
The President: Yes, I must say that I find this
discussion to be very strange. As Member States know,
the President of the General Assembly is voted in for
only one year; so it is difficult to know all the difficult
interpretations. I wish to ask if there are any other
Member States that, together with Cuba, challenge my
interpretation of the rules of procedure. If that is not
the case, we will proceed with the voting, and then the
Assembly can vote in another President next year.
A recorded vote has been requested on the oral
amendment to section XX of draft resolution II.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Nicaragua, Pakistan,

A/70/PV.82

Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
(Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe

Venezuela

Against:
Albania,
Andorra,
Argentina,
Australia,
Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, China, Colombia, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Guinea, Guyana, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Libya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Myanmar,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Panama, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Suriname, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Yemen, Zambia
The oral amendment to section XX of draft
resolution II was rejected by 74 votes to 12, with
58 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Congo informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution II as a whole. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 70/248).

15-4485819/24

A/70/PV.82

The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017”,
the text of which, for the time being, is contained in
document A/C.5/70/L.20. The Fifth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 70/249
A-C).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the
biennium 2016-2017”, the text of which, for the time
being, is contained in document A/C.5/70/L.21. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 70/250).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Working Capital Fund for the biennium 2016-2017”,
the text of which, for the time being, is contained in
document A/C.5/70/L.22. The Fifth Committee adopted
draft resolution V. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 70/251).
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolutions just adopted.
Mr. Yazdani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish to
speak in explanation of vote on resolution 70/248.
My delegation wishes to disassociate itself from
section XX of the resolution, with regard to the allocation
of budgetary resources to the Panel of Experts on the
Islamic Republic of Iran. As my delegation clearly
stated at the time of the establishment of the Panel, we
firmly believe that the Security Council’s sanctions
against the Islamic Republic of Iran are unlawful and
target the civilian population. The sanctions are based
on unfounded, baseless allegations and are derived
from the political motivations of some countries,
as confirmed by the consensual decision of the
International Atomic Energy Agency on 15 December
2015. My delegation therefore rejects the funding of the
Panel on the same basis.
Moreover, it is worth mentioning that, after the
agreement between Iran and permanent members of
the Security Council and Germany, known as the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, the Security Council,
in its adoption by consensus of resolution 2231 (2015),
20/24

23/12/2015

decided to terminate the provisions of all previous
resolutions on Iran’s peaceful nuclear programme,
including resolution 1929 (2010).
I would therefore like to emphasize that, under the
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, the Panel of Experts on the Islamic Republic of
Iran will be automatically dissolved and all the resources
associated with the engagement of and support to the
experts on the Panel, including any United Nations
staff resources assigned to support the members of the
Panel, will be adjusted accordingly.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): I am pleased to be making
a statement of position on section IV of resolution
70/248, “Subvention to the Extraordinary Chambers
in the Courts of Cambodia”, adopted under agenda
item 134, on the supplement to the voluntary financial
commitments to the Chambers for 2016. On behalf of
the Government of Cambodia, I would like to express
our sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General for
his efforts to secure funding for the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC).
I would like to note that, since the establishment
of the Chambers, the Royal Government of Cambodia
and the United Nations have now collaborated for nine
years in order to bring to trial the top Khmer Rouge
leaders most responsible for crimes committed between
1975 and 1979. We understand that justice must be
done not only for the families of the victims but for
the entire population of Cambodia, which had to deal
with the hardships of the Khmer Rouge regime. The
proceedings in the Chambers are lengthy, and funding
them is a demanding task. To date, the top Khmer
Rouge leaders have been charged with genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes.
The essential aims of the Court are as follows:
first, that it is important, not only for Cambodia but for
many other countries as well, that we tell succeeding
generations that such events must not be repeated, for
they resulted only in the massacre of our own people
and in the hardships we have had to endure in the wake
of the crimes — a culture of peace is our best hope
today — secondly, that the Khmer Rouge leaders will
have no impunity for their crimes not matter how much
time has elapsed since they were committed; thirdly,
that, along with the sense of justice that the trials in the
Chambers can bring the survivors, we must cherish the
principles of reconciliation and peaceful coexistence;
and fourthly, that the judgements of the Chambers
15-44858

23/12/2015

will serve an academic purpose for the study of
interested researchers and students, both national and
international.
Efforts have been made this year to continue the
Courts’ proceedings, and a joint statement on the
Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia
was therefore recently issued in Phnom Penh, on
17 November, reflecting the outcome of a meeting
between Mr. Sok An, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister-in-Charge of the Office of the Council of
Ministers, the Chair of the Royal Government Task
Force on the Khmer Rouge Trials and Mr. Stephen
Mathias, Assistant Secretary-General for Legal Affairs
of the United Nations. My delegation also welcomes
the joint statement made on 8 December by Mr. Sok
An and Ambassador David Scheffer, Special Expert of
the Secretary-General on United Nations Assistance to
the Khmer Rouge Trials, in which they noted that the
ECCC continues to make steady progress in discharging
its caseload, including the Trial Chamber’s current
examination of the facts relating to charges of genocide
in its case number 002/02.
The joint statement emphasizes that the Court
is in urgent need of further contributions to meet its
financial needs and adds that Cambodia supports the
Secretary-General’s request for a subvention for the
international component of the budget. The Special
Expert also expressed his commitment to working with
the Cambodian Government in seeking contributions
to support the national component. Over the next two
years, the ECCC’s national component will amount to
$13.01 million, with $6.64 million and $6.37 million
allocated to covering its practical workload requirements
for 2016 and 2017, respectively.
I would like to note here that, for the past two years,
the Royal Government of Cambodia has increased
its support so as to cover 50 per cent of the national
staff’s salaries, in addition to the substantial operating
costs that it has funded since the ECCC’s inception,
in 2006. As of today, Cambodia has contributed a
total of approximately $30.6 million, $18.5 million of
that in cash and $12.1 million in kind, making it the
second-largest contributor to the ECCC after Japan.
Furthermore, the Government remains committed for
2016, having renewed its commitment to contributing
a total of $4.15 million, $2.5 million of which covers
six months of national staff salaries and $1.65 million
of which goes to operating costs, equivalent to 62.5 per

A/70/PV.82

cent of the national component of the Court’s proposed
budget for 2016.
Both the national and international funding
components of the Chambers are vital to the ECCC’s
ability to complete its important mandate without
interrupting the judicial proceedings. I would therefore
like to take this opportunity to ask our principal
donors to support us by coming forward to fill the
gap in national staff salaries by providing the funding
for another six months, and in particular to ask the
European Union to consider providing the €3.4 million
of its unallocated funds earmarked for both national
and international components for 2016.
I would like to to conclude by welcoming today’s
adoption of section IV of resolution 70/248, on the
subvention to the ECCC for 2016. We are firmly
committed to working closely with the United Nations
and all stakeholders in order to ensure that the ECCC
succeeds in achieving its mandate in a sustainable
manner and achieving its goals.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
in explanation of position. The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 134.
Agenda item 132
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/649)
The President: The Assembly will take action on a
draft decision recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 5 of its report. For the time being, the text of the
draft decision is contained in document A/C.5/70/L.24.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft decision, entitled “Questions deferred for future
consideration”. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 70/533).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 132.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I would like
to thank His Excellency Mr. Durga Prasad Bhattarai,
Permanent Representative of Nepal to the United
Nations and Chair of the Fifth Committee, for his

15-4485821/24

A/70/PV.82

extraordinary leadership and patient guidance of the
work of the Committee. I also thank the members of the
Bureau and the Secretary of the Committee for a job
well done, and all the delegations for their hard work
and spirit of consensus and compromise in the final
negotiations.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it for this meeting.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
Seventy years ago, the establishment of the United
Nations provided an opportunity to foster peace,
build democracy and create a just society on a global
scale. The Organization has also been a pathway
to independence for many members of our Group.
Throughout the seventieth session we should reflect
on the history and development of the United Nations
and its achievements and challenges, particularly
when it comes to addressing the interests and needs of
developing countries.
The future of developing countries lies in a strong
and robust multilateral system, and the Group of 77 and
China pays particular attention to crafting international
economic policies and relations and to narrowing the
gap between developing and developed countries. In
the past year, we have built a global consensus on a
number of issues that are critical for the developing
world, including the Addis Ababa Action Plan and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1), as well as the Paris Agreement under the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. In
the context of the Fifth Committee, we look forward
to engaging constructively on how to ensure that the
United Nations system can be adequately resourced to
support these ambitious agendas and mainstream them
across all the pillars of the United Nations as part of a
revitalized global partnership.
As we adopted the reports of all the Main
Committees, including the Fifth Committee, and in
particular the programme budget for the biennium
2016-2017, I have been pleased to see our work reflect
our collective commitment to improving the efficient
and effective functioning of the United Nations. As a
result of our intensive negotiations over the past few
months, we have adopted a budget of $5.4 billion
that is focused on enhancing the ability of the United
Nations to deliver on its mandates more effectively and
22/24

23/12/2015

efficiently. We have adopted a common system package
that is fit for purpose. The Group of 77 and China would
particularly like to focus attention on the development
pillar of the United Nations in all its aspects. I would
like to reflect on one of my favourite quotes attributed
to my former President, Nelson Mandela: “It always
seems impossible, until it is done.” In that regard, I
welcome the successful and, for the first time in 13
years, timely conclusion of these difficult and complex
negotiations by our capable experts. I sincerely hope
that this positive and constructive spirit will continue
in future years.
I would like to take this moment to thank you,
Mr. President, for your kind support as our experts
negotiated during this session. We have been fortunate
to have a man of your stature at the helm, with a deep
understanding of financial matters. The Group’s thanks
also go to the Secretary-General, the Secretariat, the
Advisory Committee on Administrative Budgetary
Questions and the Board of Auditors for their expert
analysis and advice. I would like to express the Group’s
sincere appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Durga Prasad
Bhattarai of Nepal, Chair of the Fifth Committee, for
his able leadership throughout the process. I would also
like to convey my appreciation to the secretariat of the
Group of 77 for their dedicated support throughout our
chairship, and a special word of thanks to the members
of the Group of 77 and China for their support, as well
as to all our partners for their constructive engagement
in working for a better world for all.
To quote my former President Nelson Mandela
again, “[A]fter climbing a great hill, one only finds
that there are many more hills to climb.” As we bid
the Assembly farewell as Chair of the Group of 77 and
China, we are happy that this year has ended on another
good note, and we encourage all delegations to continue
to reach out to each other and strive to find common
solutions to global problems.
In conclusion, the Group of 77 and China would
like to wish everyone happy holidays and to reiterate
its commitment to returning in the new year, under the
able leadership of the Kingdom of Thailand, in order to
engage constructively in the resumed seventieth session
with the same tenacity, zeal and vigour that we have
shown so far. I would like to wish Mr. Virachai Plasai,
Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of Thailand
to the United Nations, and his team all the best.
15-44858

23/12/2015

Mr. Mukerji (India): I would like to express my
delegation’s pleasure in the adoption of the programme
budget for the biennium 2016-2017. I would like to
reiterate the principles we have always advocated,
which are that adequate resources should be allocated
to fulfilling the mandates generated by the collective
membership, and that resources for programmatic
and substantive components should outweigh those
allocated to posts. We are also of the view that the United
Nations should allocate and respond to emergencies
such as Ebola, as we did last year, and natural disasters.
We are satisfied that the methodology of the scale of
assessments has been preserved in both the regular
budget and the peacekeeping budget, despite the intense
last-minute negotiations.
This outcome has been made possible by the
constructive engagement of all Member States and
the leadership shown by my colleagues Ambassador
Bhattarai of Nepal, Chair of the Fifth Committee, and
Ambassador Mamabolo of South Africa, Chair of the
Group of 77 and China. There can be no more fitting
tribute to Ambassador Mamabolo’s chairship of the
Group of 77 and China for the momentous year that is
just ending.
Since this will be my last statement in the United
Nations in my capacity as Permanent Representative of
India, I take my leave of all those here in the hope that
we will be able to be fit for purpose and implement all
the outcomes we have negotiated, including not only
those from this year but also that of 2005 relating to
speedy reform of the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I would like to thank
the General Assembly for adopting the programme
budget for the 2016 and 2017 biennium by consensus.
The hard work, unwavering commitment and flexible
cooperation of all have contributed to reaching that
agreement. I applaud the Member States for this
collective achievement. Our Secretariat staff were
proud to support them in their successful efforts.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank His
Excellency Ambassador Mr. Durga Prasad Bhattarai,
Chair of the Fifth Committee, for his skilful leadership
of the Committee. I would also particularly like to
thank you, Mr. President, for your strong commitment
and leadership in directing this difficult process.

A/70/PV.82

The budget the Assembly has just approved reflects
the difficult global financial reality we have faced for
a number of years. Funding continues to shrink, while
demands on the United Nations grow. Through it all,
we are doing everything possible to fulfil the mandates
the Members give us. We are guided by two pressing
obligations, of which the first is our duty to respond
to the needs of the world’s people and the second our
responsibility to make the most of the resources we
are entrusted with. Through creativity, hard work and
diligence, we are rising to the challenge.
The Assembly has wisely decided to add resources
to strengthen the very important pillar of development.
I commend its decision to support the follow-up
and review of our efforts to reach the Sustainable
Development Goals (see resolution 70/1) and carry out
the agenda on financing for development. The Assembly
has also decided to reduce resources under public
information and common support services to an even
greater degree than the efficiencies I had identified.
That presents some challenges, especially at this critical
juncture. We are carrying out the important initiatives
the Assembly has approved, including Umoja, mobility
and the development of a global service delivery model.
Nevertheless, we remain committed to exerting our best
efforts to deliver on these transformational initiatives
and all the other mandates we have been given.
After the budget has been set, the Organization’s
financial health depends on contributions from all
Member States. We now have a revised scale of
assessments for sharing the costs of the regular budget
and peacekeeping operations. I applaud the consensus
decisions on those matters.
Today’s resolution on the common system
(resolution 70/244) reflects the wishes of the Member
States. It also takes account of the views that we have
communicated through my Chief Executives Board for
Coordination. The staff federations were also heard
throughout the process. I am pleased that the new
system is more simple and streamlined. It will allow
organizations to further recognize the performance
of staff. I thank the Member States, the International
Civil Service Commission and all those involved in
achieving a consensus.
As we know, this is the last regular budget to be
adopted during my tenure as Secretary-General. I am
deeply grateful for our fruitful collaboration over these
nine years. From my first day in office, I pledged to

15-4485823/24

A/70/PV.82

bring greater transparency and accountability to the
United Nations. That is my personal work ethic and also
the most efficient way to do business. High standards
of professionalism inspire our staff and reassure our
partners. Openness benefits everyone.
I also arrived here with a vision for modernizing
our Secretariat and making it truly global. Member
States saw the value in that approach, approving a
mobility framework that will make the best possible use
of our greatest asset, the United Nations staff. I am also
grateful for their support to Umoja, which is already
improving our capacity to manage global operations.
Together, we are creating a stronger United Nations for
a better world.
At this time in a budget year, delegations are
usually still negotiating in conference rooms. This time
they worked through the night and reached agreement
earlier than in past years. I know that many of those
here may be sleep-deprived right now. They definitely
deserve a holiday. There were enormous challenges on
the global agenda in 2015. At the same time, we can be
proud of major accomplishments, especially the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda for Financing for Development,
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Paris Agreement under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change. Those and other
advances proved that multilateralism works. Today’s
consensus action is a strong sign of our ability to
work together. We need that spirit of global solidarity
more than ever. In 2016, we will act on our plans for a
healthier and more peaceful planet where all people can
live in dignity.
Finally, I wish all those here and their families a
happy and healthy new year.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
Statement by the President
The President: I totally agree with the SecretaryGeneral that the adoption on time of the budget and the
conclusion of the work of the Fifth Committee have
brought us to the end of what has been a remarkable
year for multilateralism and consensus. I feel it is
appropriate to once again thank the Chair of the
Fifth Committee, Mr. Durga Prasad Bhattarai, for his
extraordinary leadership of the Committee’s work, and
to express my appreciation for the spirit in which all
delegations have worked.
24/24

23/12/2015

From a wider perspective, we should be proud of
the incredible breakthroughs that our Organization
has achieved in 2015. In particular, the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) and the
Paris Agreement under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change were excellent outcomes
from ground-breaking multilateral processes.
Throughout his nine years in office, the SecretaryGeneral has been instrumental in building momentum
and support for action on climate and sustainable
development. I have greatly enjoyed working with
him in the past four months. During that time, I have
seen at first hand the leadership and energy he has
demonstrated on so many global challenges. I can say
that I had no doubts in nominating him as man of the
year for a Danish television programme on international
affairs that will be shown this Christmas.
In 2016 we will be kick-starting the implementation
of those agreements, but the new year must also be about
reaching lasting peace for ongoing conflicts, reviewing
the global humanitarian system and addressing the
current refugee crisis. It is my sincere hope that in the
coming year the United Nations and the international
community will show the same spirit of cooperation and
consensus that we have seen in 2015. I wish everyone
happy holidays and a well-deserved rest.
Programme of work
The President: With regard to the programme
of work of the General Assembly, apart from
organizational matters and items that may have to be
considered by operation of the rules of procedure of
the Assembly, and bearing in mind that consideration
and action have already been taken by the Assembly
on a majority of items thus far, I should like to inform
members that the following items on the agenda remain
open for consideration during the seventieth session of
the General Assembly: agenda items 4 to 7, 9, 11, 13 to
16, 18, 18 (d), 20, 20 (d), 20 (g), 21, 23, 23 (a), 30 to 36,
40, 41, 43 to 49, 56, 57, 66 (a) and (b), 67, 73 (a) to (d),
74, 79, 79 (a), 91, 107, 109, 110, 112 (a) and (b), 113 (a) to
(c), 114 (e) to (g) and 115 to 166.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to take note
of those agenda items that remain open for consideration
during the seventieth session of the Assembly?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.30 p.m.
15-44858
