S/PRST/2012/23

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 October 2012
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6852nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 31 October 2012, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Women and peace
and security”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitments to the full and effective
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889
(2009), and 1960 (2010) and recalls all statements of its President on Women
and Peace and Security as reiterating the Council’s commitments.
“The Security Council urges all parties to fully comply with their
obligations under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women of 1979 and the Optional Protocol thereto of
1999 and strongly encourages States that have not ratified or acceded to the
Convention and Optional Protocol to consider doing so.
“The Security Council underlines the primary role of national
Governments, affected by armed conflict, to enhance participation of women
in prevention and resolution of conflict and in peacebuilding within the
framework of the Women, Peace and Security agenda. The Council further
stresses that United Nations entities should continue to support and
supplement, as appropriate, efforts of national Governments in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
“The Security Council takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on Women and Peace and Security (S/2012/732) for the purpose of
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and particularly welcomes its call
for enhanced participation, representation and involvement of women in
prevention and resolution of armed conflict and in peacebuilding, as well as a
stronger commitment to address challenges to such engagement of women at
all levels.
“The Security Council welcomes the role of UN Women in contributing
to the implementation of resolutions on Women and Peace and Security. The
Council welcomes briefings by the Under-Secretary-General/Executive
Director of UN Women. The Council notes with satisfaction the increased
coordination and coherence in policy and programming for women and girls
within the United Nations system, welcoming efforts to avoid duplication and
overlap since the creation of UN Women.

12-57021 (E) 011112

*1257021*

S/PRST/2012/23

“The Security Council recognizes the contributions of civil society,
including women’s organizations, through informal interactions with members
of the Council at headquarters and during Council field missions.
“The Security Council recognizes the need for more systematic attention
to the implementation of women peace and security commitments in its own
work to ensure the enhancement of women’s engagement in conflict
prevention, resolution and peacebuilding and to continue to integrate
appropriate gender perspectives into the mandates of relevant United Nations
peacekeeping missions as well as in other relevant thematic areas of peace and
security.
“The Security Council welcomes the contribution of Gender Advisers to
the implementation of resolutions on women peace and security by providing
training and awareness raising of United Nations peacekeepers and assisting in
capacity building activities of national governments, as well as those of civil
society. In this regard, the Security Council underlines the need for continued,
appropriate and regular training for Gender Advisers.
“The Security Council reiterates its call to deploy Women Protection
Advisers to peacekeeping missions. The Council stresses the need to ensure
that gains made in the protection and promotion of women’s and girls’ rights
and empowerment are sustained during United Nations mission drawdown and
transitions.
“The Security Council takes note of the important role that civil society,
including women’s organizations, can play in the prevention and resolution of
armed conflict, peacebuilding and post-conflict situations and encourages the
international community, regional organizations and concerned Member States
to promote their active engagement and effective participation in a variety of
roles, as appropriate, with a view to the implementation of 1325 (2000).
“The Council welcomes the efforts of Member States to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) at the national level, including the development of
national action plans or other national-level strategies, and encourages
Member States to continue to pursue such implementation.
“The Security Council recognizes the important engagement by men and
boys as partners in promoting women’s participation in the prevention and
resolution of armed conflict, peacebuilding and post-conflict situations.
“The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-General’s call upon his
Special Envoys and mediators, as well his senior representatives in United
Nations mission context, to regularly consult with civil society, including
women’s organizations, as well as with women and girls from affected
communities, enabling them to actively engage in all stages of peace
processes.
“The Security Council stresses the importance of promoting and
protecting the human rights of women and girls in the context of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and other relevant Security Council
resolutions. The Security Council acknowledges that human rights of women
and girls are at particular risk during armed conflict and post-conflict
situations and notes that civil society members working on women’s human

2

12-57021

S/PRST/2012/23

rights issues may be targeted in a number of these situations. The Council
urges concerned Member States to pay special attention to addressing these
risks.
“The Security Council stresses the importance of assisting Member
States in promoting women’s full and equal participation in post-conflict
electoral processes and constitutional reform. The Council encourages
concerned Member States conducting these electoral processes to continue
their efforts, with support from United Nations entities, to address the gender
dimension in all phases of electoral processes, noting that specific attention
must be paid to women’s safety prior to, and during, elections.
“The Security Council underscores the need for Member States in postconflict situations, in consultation with, inter-alia, civil society, including
women organizations, to address the specific requirements and priorities of
women and girls in their national strategies to improve their socioeconomic
conditions, participation in income generating activities, and their access to
education and basic services.
“The Security Council stresses the need for continued efforts to address
obstacles in women’s access to justice in conflict and post-conflict settings,
including through gender-responsive legal, judicial and security sector reform
and other mechanisms.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong condemnation of all violations
of applicable international law committed against women and girls, including
sexual and gender based violence and killing and maiming, in armed conflict
and post-conflict situations and urges the complete cessation by all parties of
such acts with immediate effect. The Security Council also urges Member
States to bring to justice those responsible for crimes of this nature.
“The Security Council notes that the fight against impunity for the most
serious crimes of international concern committed against women and girls has
been strengthened through the work of the International Criminal Court,
ad hoc and mixed tribunals, as well as specialized chambers in national
tribunals. The Council reiterates its intention to continue forcefully to fight
impunity and uphold accountability with appropriate means.
“The Security Council draws attention to the importance of a
comprehensive approach to transitional justice in armed conflict and postconflict situations, encompassing the full range of judicial and non-judicial
measures, as appropriate.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General in his next annual
report to give an update on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) to
include, inter alia, achievements, gaps and challenges to the implementation of
the resolution as well as this statement of its President.”

12-57021

3
