S/PRST/2009/6

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 April 2009
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6105th meeting of the Security Council, held on 9 April 2009, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Guinea-Bissau”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls its previous statements on Guinea-Bissau,
and notes the latest report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) (S/2009/169). The Council
reaffirms its support for the continuing efforts to consolidate peace in that
country.
“The Security Council welcomes the swearing-in as Interim President of
Guinea-Bissau of M. Raimundo Pereira and notes with satisfaction the
commitment of the new authorities to maintain the constitutional order,
following the assassinations of the President of Guinea-Bissau, Joao Bernardo
Vieira and of the Chief of Staff of the Armed forces, Tagme Na Waie, and to
deepen national consensus on the transition and the electoral process.
“The Security Council also welcomes the convening of the presidential
election for 28 June 2009, and urges the Government and all political actors to
create the best conditions for the holding of a free, fair, transparent and
credible presidential election. It welcomes the assistance already provided by
bilateral and multilateral partners to support the electoral budget, and calls
upon the donors to continue to provide technical and financial assistance for
the electoral process.
“The Security Council takes note of the Final communiqué of the
26th Meeting of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Mediation and Security Council expressing the need to deploy military and
police contingents to ensure the protection of the republican institutions, the
authorities, as well as the electoral process in Guinea-Bissau. In this regard,
the Security Council invites ECOWAS to work in coordination with the
Government of Guinea-Bissau.
“The Security Council condemns recent cases of arbitrary detentions,
armed attacks and intimidation, and demands a full protection of human rights
and fundamental freedom of the people of Guinea-Bissau. It urges the Armed

09-29919 (E) 090409

*0929919*

S/PRST/2009/6

Forces leadership to ensure that its commitment to abide by the civilian
authorities and respect constitutional order is fully honoured.
“The Security Council stresses the importance of national reconciliation
and the fight against impunity in Guinea-Bissau, and calls on the international
community to support the Commission of Inquiry established to investigate the
assassinations of the President and of the Chief of Staff of the Armed forces.
“The Security Council reiterates the importance of the security sector
reform (SSR) in Guinea-Bissau, and in this regard, urges the international
partners to continue to support the implementation of the quick-impact
projects. It welcomes the convening of a roundtable on Guinea-Bissau’s
Security Sector Reform with a view to follow up the coordination and the
implementation of the identified projects and programs on SSR, to be held in
Praia, Cape Verde, on 20 April 2009.
“The Security Council remains seriously concerned by the growth in
illegal drug trafficking, as well as transnational organized crime in GuineaBissau and in the sub-region. It commends the joint action of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the Department of Political
Affairs/UNOWA, Department of Peacekeeping Operation and INTERPOL to
help implement the ECOWAS Plan of Action against drug trafficking. It calls
upon the international community to continue to support the implementation of
the Guinea-Bissau anti-narcotics operational Plan, as well as of the ECOWAS
Plan of Action.
“The Security Council calls on the international community to provide
timely and adequate support for the implementation of the Strategic
Peacebuilding Framework adopted by the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). It
looks forward to a sustainable mobilization of resources for economic
reconstruction and peace consolidation in Guinea-Bissau.
“The Security Council reiterates the importance of the regional
dimension in the resolution of the problems faced by Guinea-Bissau and, in
this regard, welcomes the role of the African Union, ECOWAS, CPLP, and the
European Union in the peace-building process.
“The Security Council commends the Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the staff of UNOGBIS, as well as the United Nations country
team, the Peacebuilding Commission country-specific configuration on
Guinea-Bissau for their contribution to peace, democracy and the rule of law
in Guinea-Bissau. The Security Council reiterates that it looks forward to
receiving recommendations from the Secretary-General on how the United
Nations presence in Guinea-Bissau should be reconfigured to support
peacebuilding more effectively.”

2

09-29919
