S/PV.7649

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7649th meeting

Thursday, 17 March 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gaspar Martins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Angola)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Mr. Mahmoud
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Klein
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Liberia
Thirty-first progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2016/169)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-07453 (E)
*1607453*

S/PV.7649

The situation in Liberia

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Liberia
Thirty-first progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2016/169)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Liberia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Mission in Liberia;
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women; and Mr. Olof Skoog,
Chair of the Liberia configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Sweden.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/169, which contains the thirty-first
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Liberia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zarif.
Mr. Zarif: At this time last year, the National
Security Council of Liberia endorsed the Government
of Liberia’s plan for the transition of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). This marked
the beginning of an historic undertaking, led by the
Government of Liberia, to assume full responsibility
for security by 30 June 2016, in line with the deadline
set by the Security Council.
With less than four months remaining, the
Government of Liberia has intensified its efforts to
implement the plan. Last month, the Government,
with UNMIL and other international stakeholders,
conducted a stock-taking exercise to assess progress
and reprioritize activities within the plan so as to
ensure that its most important targets are met by
30 June. Both the Government and UNMIL are
confident that, with sustained political commitment,
2/10

17/03/2016

the priority targets of the plan will be achieved.
However, more concerted efforts by the executive and
legislative branches are required to ensure the urgent
enactment and implementation of critical legislation
relating to the security sector. In January, after long
delays, the Senate approved the draft firearms and
ammunition control act, which now remains before the
House of Representatives. Other important outstanding
legislation, such as the police and immigration service
acts, are still pending with the Senate and have yet to be
submitted to the House.
The implementation of the plan has been uneven,
with a number of activities falling behind schedule. In
addition to delays in the passage of legislation, challenges
in releasing the necessary Government funding for
security transition have been a considerable constraint.
Competing priorities for Government spending and the
deteriorating economic outlook recently compelled the
Government to announce austerity measures and to
revise national budget projections downward. While we
understand that these revised projections are unlikely to
affect the commitments undertaken by the Government
with regard to the security transition, there are still
major funding gaps for security transition tasks, such
as arms inspection or training, and equipment for
the Liberia National Fire Service, which will require
external support. I appeal to bilateral and multilateral
partners to provide support to the security transition,
particularly to those activities that enhance public trust
and confidence in security sector personnel. Failure
to do so may result in a fragile security transition,
which could undermine the many gains made in peace
consolidation in the country.
Meanwhile, UNMIL has continued to hand over
security responsibilities to national security agencies,
such as the Liberian National Police, the Bureau of
Immigration and Naturalization and the Bureau of
Corrections and Rehabilitation, including the provision
of security at Monrovia Central Prison and the National
Palace of Justice in Zwedru, and at one of the country’s
two airports. The Mission remains engaged with the
Liberian security agencies to advance the development
of institutional structures and legal frameworks for the
justice and security sectors, as well as the establishment
of accountability mechanisms. This includes the
training and mentoring of their senior management,
assisting in the drafting of required legislation, policies
and standard operating procedures, supporting the
further decentralization of security services at the
16-07453

17/03/2016

The situation in Liberia

regional and county levels, and the establishment of
county and district security councils.
In parallel, UNMIL has continued to implement
its drawdown plan and the authorized reductions
in its military and police personnel, in accordance
with resolution 2239 (2015). After the completion of
the security transition, UNMIL’s residual force and
formed police units will be concentrated in and around
Monrovia, as well as in Gbarnga and Zwedru. UNMIL
will maintain critical enablers to ensure its mobility
and quick deployment in support of Liberian security
agencies and to protect civilians in the event of a
deterioration of the security situation that could threaten
a strategic reversal. With the reduction of the military
component, the 50 military observers will redeploy
in the five UNMIL offices in Gbarnga, Greenville,
Harper, Voinjama and Zwedru, and will work closely
with the United Nations civilian police and the field
support component to perform their duties.
UNMIL has also continued to consolidate its
deployments and streamline its activities in line with
the mandated tasks. By 30 June, UNMIL will have
consolidated its 13 county offices into five regional
offices. As part of the consolidation process, we have
also proposed a reduction of over 30 per cent in UNMIL’s
civilian staffing for the 2016-2017 budget cycle. The
closure of the field offices has been accompanied by
a proactive public information campaign, including
the holding of town hall meetings between senior
Government officials and local communities. I have
personally attended most of these meetings to explain
the objectives of the security transition, to emphasize
the importance of the Liberian security actors exercising
full responsibility, to remind the communities of their
role in maintaining peace and security, and to assure
them of the United Nations continued support.
While we will continue to convey these messages,
there is an increasing sense of unease and apprehension
among Liberians across the board about the UNMIL
drawdown and the prospect of its eventual departure. As
Council members are aware, President Johnson-Sirleaf,
in a joint letter with President Ouattara of Côte d’Ivoire,
urged the Secretary-General to request the Security
Council to maintain the quick-reaction force and United
Nations forces in both countries until after the elections
in Liberia. The events of 13 March in Côte d’Ivoire
strengthened the perception among the Liberians of an
inadequate local capacity to deal with security threats
in Liberia. Three opposition political parties and

S/PV.7649

several civil society organizations, under the umbrella
of a joint action committee, called for the postponement
of the UNMIL departure until after the elections. This
petition was formalized in a memorandum addressed to
the Council, which was handed over to me on 11 March.
Concerns remain about the slow pace of key
political and institutional reforms that are essential to
promoting and sustaining reconciliation. The enhanced
political commitment of all Liberian institutions and
civil society to constitutional reform, decentralization,
land reform and good governance is vital in order to
address the root causes of past and potentially future
conflicts, and to establish a new compact between the
Government and the population it is intended to serve.
Lack of action on the various key pieces of legislation
is a major cause of the slow progress in the security
transition. In addition to the bills already mentioned,
other essential pieces of legislation awaiting to be
enacted include the land rights act, the land authority
act, the local governance act, the gender equity bill,
the whistle-blowers protection act, the corrupt offences
act and the domestic violence act. I would like to take
this opportunity to appeal to members of the Council to
call for the expeditious adoption of all these bills. This
is the responsibility not of the executive branch alone,
but of the Liberian Government as a whole, particularly
the legislature.
As UNMIL draws down, it becomes critical to
invest in capacity-building and strengthening the rule
of law and justice sectors. In that regard, it is important
that the Liberian judiciary system, with the support of
UNMIL and the international community, intensify
efforts to improve the provision of services, ensuring
that the population and communities are empowered
to settle disputes, and to ensure the protection of their
interests. Some additional priorities include the need to
reduce the high level of pre-trial detentions, promote
justice in relation to children and sexual and genderbased violence, improve conditions in prisons and, last
but not least, implement the national human rights plan.
Liberia’s long-term security and stability also
require continued focus on improving regional
cooperation, including cross-border cooperation
with Côte d’Ivoire. Both countries enhanced security
measures along the border following the fatal clashes
related to illicit cross-border farming. These have
included the temporary deployment of the armed
forces of Liberia to reinforce national security agencies
operating in the area. The Liberian Minister of Defence

16-074533/10

S/PV.7649

The situation in Liberia

has indicated the possibility of deploying a joint military
operation, together with Ivorian counterparts, to deter
cross-border attacks. The issue will be discussed at
the quadripartite meeting of the heads of the armed
forces of the two countries and the Force Commanders
of the two Missions later this month. Such discussions
will be held within the framework of the next session
of the joint commission for bilateral cooperation
between Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire, as proposed by the
Liberian Government.
The second joint council of chiefs and elders of
Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire, held in January, was also a
positive development in efforts to prevent and resolve
conflicts at the local level through peaceful means.
The Mano River Union plan to hold technical and
ministerial meetings in Abidjan in April, with the
support of UNMIL and the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire, to discuss enhanced collaboration in the
areas of maritime security, border security and counterterrorism is another welcome development. In the
meantime, progress has been achieved in the voluntary
repatriation of Ivorian refugees from Liberia. Following
the resumption of the process in December, 10,654 of
some 37,000 remaining refugees have returned to Côte
d’Ivoire so far. We are hoping that tomorrow there will
be another 200 refugees returning to their country.
The expected completion of the security transition
on 30 June will be one of the most significant milestones
for Liberia and the international community since the
end of the country’s civil war and the signing of the peace
agreement in 2003. It will also mark the beginning of
a new phase in United Nations engagement in Liberia.
However, Liberia and the international community must
not lose sight of the still arduous path to a genuinely
sustainable peace in Liberia and the region, which will
require the long-term engagement and support of the
international community.
Before concluding, I should like to thank you,
Mr. President, and all members of the Security Council
for the strong support being provided to UNMIL and
its operations.
The President: I thank Mr. Zarif for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms.Mlambo-Ngcuka.
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: I visited Liberia three weeks
ago, and I am thankful to Angola for the invitation to
speak to the Council on the subject today, soon after
my visit.
4/10

17/03/2016

I found that the country has a strong, vibrant
democracy and the healthy engagement of different
stakeholders. The women continue to be resilient in the
face of persisting challenges. We have to applaud the
strength of the Liberian democracy since the end of the
conflict. It is, however, vital now that we continue to
invest in the Liberian people’s broader resilience and
recovery. The dividends of peace need to flow greater
and deeper for women and girls.
Liberian women have earned global fame for
helping to bring an end to the civil war, convincing
the rebels to lay down arms, consolidating peace and
ensuring that the country does not relapse into conflict
since the civil war ended 13 years ago. Liberian women
today are also known for the extraordinary role they
played in halting, reversing and eliminating the Ebola
epidemic. I bring the inspiring example of Liberian
women when I speak to women from Syria, Colombia,
South Sudan, the Central African Republic or the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in my travels to
conflict-affected countries. Truly, Liberian women are
a source of inspiration.
However, Liberian women have yet to benefit fully
from the dividends of peace. The absence of war does
not mean the presence of complete peace. We have to
ask ourselves: What does peace mean to women when
they continue to experience high daily levels of sexual
and gender-based violence, with very limited access
to justice? Only 8 per cent of girls have completed
secondary education or higher, and there are reports
of alarming rates of sexual abuse and exploitation in
schools by teachers and administrators, with total
impunity. Whenever I speak with teenagers, they ask me
for more female teachers; this call has also been echoed
to me by the President. Harmful traditional practices,
from child marriage to female genital mutilation and
the abduction of girls into the Sande and Poro secret
tribal societies, are devastating both to women’s lives
and the country’s recovery. Thankfully, the bill on
domestic violence currently before Parliament includes
the banning of both female genital mutilation and the
end of child marriage. We are anxious that the bill
be passed.
The country that elected Africa’s first woman
President is ranked 149th in female representation
in Parliament, and there are even lower rates of
women’s leadership in local districts, towns, clans and
chiefdoms. Again, we appreciate the fact that there is
an effort — which needs the Council’s support — to
16-07453

17/03/2016

The situation in Liberia

secure a quota ahead of the coming local Government
elections so as to increase women’s representation
and participation. Sexual and gender-based violence
continues to be one of the most reported crimes,
particularly against minors, yet the overwhelming
majority of perpetrators escape justice, despite the
hard work of some Government officials and civil
society organizations.
The drawdown of our troops must be accompanied
by significant investment in and support for a
criminal justice system that works and serves the
people. In addition, as many of us know, women were
disproportionately affected by the Ebola epidemic.
They were at the greatest risk of infection because of
their roles as caregivers and nurses. Women are proud
of their role and share a strong desire to strengthen their
health system. In a country where women are a majority
of cross-border traders and approximately 85 per cent
of daily market traders, many women were suddenly
impoverished by border closures, travel restrictions and
market shutdowns. These women have called upon us
to help them rebuild their trade, which does not require
a lot. As the Government Minister of Gender, Children
and Social Protections noted, these women were heroes
before the Ebola crisis hit. They are now back to zero.
Gains against maternal and infant mortality were
quickly reversed by the disruption of basic services. My
mission to Liberia was also to look into our support
to the effort to provide water, sanitation and hygiene
services as an initiative that we are undertaking
together with Oxfam International and the Government.
The Governments of both Liberia and Sierra Leone are
our partners.
The Council is mainly deliberating today on the
continuation of the Mission drawdown plans and the
future of the United Nations presence in Liberia. There
cannot be a vacuum when the Mission leaves. We have
to show Liberians that the end of the peacekeeping
Mission does not mean that the international community
will turn its back on them. There is no better way of
showing that than by resolving to invest in those who
need us most, who have been most affected by the
war and the epidemic and who are also important to a
secure post-conflict Liberia. Insecurity and impunity
impact girls and women hardest. It is important that we
understand and act on that so that no one is left behind.
What I am asking of the international community is
to increase its deployment of support to reconstruction,

S/PV.7649

peacebuilding initiatives and the rule of law in order to
bring women and girls the justice and peace dividend
they have earned. During my visit we launched
a five-year joint programme aimed at preventing
sexual and gender-based violence that encompasses
every important Government actor and a major
number of United Nations entities in a great example
of coordinated and extensive consultation with the
community. The plan, which I have to say is one of the
best I have ever seen anywhere, needs our support to
succeed, especially in its law-enforcement aspect.
The Government of Liberia, with support from
UN-Women and the United Nations country team,
has been at the forefront of implementing the
Secretary-General’s seven-point plan on genderresponsive peacekeeping. Future investments in
Liberia’s reconstruction must continue to adhere to the
commitment to allocating a minimum of 15 per cent of
all peacebuilding funds to gender equality. Similarly,
we have to ensure that women are included, engaged
and participate in the benefits of all the investments
in water, sanitation and hygiene infrastructure that are
planned as part of the recovery from Ebola. We stand
ready to support the training that will equip them to
be competent partners in ensuring that those services
are provided. We should learn from the good practices
in the fight against Ebola that were led by women
or targeted them so that we can apply them to other
epidemics that particularly affect women and girls,
such as the Zika virus.
We have supported efforts and provided economic
grants for hard-hit cross-border traders, supported
orphaned children and stigmatized survivors and
ensured that women’s needs were reflected in the
United Nations humanitarian response. The country’s
network of women’s peace huts, the local peacebuilding
mechanism that has been copied in several countries in
the region, must continue to receive our support for the
needs it still has and in order to ensure that it becomes
fully embedded in the local governance system.
The country needs thousands of female teachers and
midwives for an ambitious economic empowerment
programme in support of rural women and to help them
relaunch trading activity. Liberia’s women need strong
justice organizations and security actors to ensure
respect for the country’s laws.
Even as the Mission continues its drawdown, I must
ask it to consider its contribution to gender equality as
a key element of its legacy. I am happy to report that

16-074535/10

S/PV.7649

The situation in Liberia

the Liberia country team and the Mission have been
planning for an orderly handover of gender-related
functions and have consulted and fully integrated
their efforts with the UN-Women team and other
stakeholders in the country. The Mission has been
playing an important role in advancing women’s
participation in peacebuilding and peace consolidation,
while supporting various Government institutions in
implementing their commitments to gender equality,
advocating for important legal reforms and even
building the capacity of women’s organizations through
quick-impact projects.
UN-Women and the rest of the United Nations family
are preparing for the challenging task of inheriting
those functions and continuing to move forward. We
need the support of the Mission, the Security Council
and the international community at large in the
crucial next few months, especially in four specific
areas. First, as has been mentioned, is the enactment
of pending bills on domestic violence, land rights,
reproductive health and governance decentralization,
which are important to women and gender equality. The
second is women’s involvement in the decentralization
of health, education and agricultural and water and
sanitation services. The third is a robust, dependable
criminal justice system that can, and must, protect its
communities and women. The last is the importance
of taking ambitious steps to improve the decreasing
representation of women in politics at the national and
local levels, including through enforceable quotas and
temporary special measures.
That is a short and modest list for a country whose
women fought very hard to defeat the rebels and Ebola.
We must make sure that gender inequality is also
defeated and that their political voices are heard. In
very large measure, the future of Liberia depends upon
its women and their resilience. That is something that
the international community cannot turn away from and
must, in fact, take up as strongly as it can, or we will
leave with our mission having been fully accomplished.
The President: I thank Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I thank you for the invitation to
brief the Security Council this morning on behalf the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Mr. President. I will
focus my remarks on the ongoing security transition
6/10

17/03/2016

and the Commission’s priorities for its engagement
with Liberia in the next few years.
There are many lessons to be learned from previous
transitions. We now have a great opportunity to plan for
a smooth transition that will put Liberia on a robust path
towards further consolidation of peace. There can be no
excuses for a fragmented approach on the part of the
United Nations system or the international community.
We also have a collective responsibility to avoid the
financial cliff that has sometimes characterized the
drawdown of United Nations peacekeeping operations
in the past. Sustained international attention is
imperative, both financially and politically. The PBC
looks forward to playing its part.
I would now like to turn to the PBC’s statement of
mutual commitment with the Government of Liberia.
In the light of the several transitions under way, our
configuration has undertaken to review our engagement
to ensure that it is aligned with the Government’s
current efforts and is adding real value to them. A
technical level mission, which included representatives
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Peacebuilding Support Office, the United Nations
Development Programme, the Department of Political
Affairs and the Chair of the Liberia configuration,
visited Monrovia at the end of January. They met with a
wide range of Government interlocutors, civil society,
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), the
United Nations country team and the donor community
for constructive discussions on peacebuilding needs in
Liberia and the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
going forward. Our mission reported a clear and widely
shared vision of what peacebuilding efforts are needed
and clear views on how and where the Commission can
play an important role.
At the same time, the mission noted some concerns.
The difficult budgetary situation puts a strain on the
Government’s ability to roll out the key peacebuilding
programmes it has identified as priorities. In addition,
interlocutors on the ground reported that there was
public apprehension about the drawdown of the UNMIL
presence. Clear communication to the public and the
proper management of perceptions will be important in
that regard, as well as assuring them of the enduring
commitment of the international community, including
the United Nations, to the people of Liberia.
Building on wide consultations, the Peacebuilding
Commission affirmed that our engagement’s priority
16-07453

17/03/2016

The situation in Liberia

areas remained valid. I will touch on them briefly,
starting with security sector reform.
First, in the light of the upcoming drawdown of
UNMIL in accordance with resolution 2239 (2015), the
PBC will work to support the Liberian Government’s
efforts to strengthen the operational efficiency of
the security agencies in the country by helping the
Government to address structural challenges and the
provision of justice and security to all Liberians. It
will be vital to ensure that priority activities within the
Government of Liberia’s plan for UNMIL’s transition
are completed on time.
Secondly, on the rule of law, in order to build the
effectiveness and the integrity of legal institutions,
increase equitable access to justice and strenghten the
rule of law, the PBC will support the Government’s
efforts to address systematic weaknesses in the criminal
justice system and weak administrative procedures, and
ensure adequate budgetary allocations to capacitate
institutions central to security and the rule of law. The
Commission will also help advance the constitutional
reform process in a timely manner, ensuring robust
civic education and civil society engagement.
Thirdly, on reconciliation, as articulated by
the Government, reconciliation in Liberia is a
multidimensional process of overcoming social,
political and religious cleavages, healing the physical
and psychological wounds from the civil war, and
confronting and addressing historical and structural
wrongs, in particular the root causes of conflict.
The PBC will strengthen its efforts to expedite the
reconciliation process, in close consultation with local
actors in Liberia.
Fourthly, on elections, the PBC will focus its work
on the upcoming 2017 elections, which represents
a significan opportunity for further democratic
consolidation. We will support the efforts of the
Government and the National Elections Commission
to ensure that the elections are successfully conducted
and further contribute to improving governance,
reconciliation and stability. This will depend on efforts
to enable the widest possible public awareness and
participation, as well as deployment of preventive
measures ranging from formal mechanisms for electoral
dispute resolution to regular channels for dialogue
between the security forces and the population.
Last but not least, the PBC has a responsibility to
highlight socioeconomic needs that are fundamental to

S/PV.7649

building sustainable peace. As Liberia is still recovering
from the economic effects of the Ebola virus disease
and the severe impacts of the drop of commodity prices
on raw materials, there is a need to reinvigorate the
economy by strengthening the private sector, create
jobs and build capacity for domestic revenue generation.
We will work to strengthen our engagement with the
international financial institutions in this regard. The
decentralization process, which is a cross-cutting issue
in our work, will be important not only to strenghtening
State presence and authority outside of Monrovia, but
also to extending the provision of basic social services.
I look forward to highlighting such issues over the
coming 12 months.
Through our statement of mutual commitments,
we seek to align the work of the Commission behind
existing commitments, rather than duplicate efforts by
creating new ones. We will work to draw attention to
and rally international support around commitments
made in strategic frameworks, such as Liberia Rising,
the Liberia Agenda for Transformation, the Strategic
Roadmap for National Healing, Peacebuilding and
Reconciliation and, equally important, around the
constitutional review process, the draft legislation
related to land rights and administration, local
governance, decentralization and civil service reform.
These important pieces of legislation cut to the core
of peace and State-building and have the potential
to transform State and society relations in Liberia,
provided that they move forward.
The Commission commits to undertaking political
advocacy and accompaniment, advocating for generating
necessary resources and fostering coordinated actions
among all relevant stakeholders. The Commission
will continue to promote and integrate a strategic and
coherent approach to peacebuilding and serve as a
forum for dialogue for all relevant actors. In particular,
the configuration will draw and sustain international
attention to and support for the preparations for the
2017 elections and continue to highlight peacebuilding
issues during the ongoing security transition.
Before concluding. let me make a few
recommendations to this body. In light of the upcoming
drawdown of UNMIL, we encourage the United
Nations system, to the widest extent possible, to engage
in joint strategic planning for a well-managed transition
and for meeting long-term peacebuilding needs during
and beyond the transition. In addition, we emphasize
the need to take into account regional dimensions of

16-074537/10

S/PV.7649

The situation in Liberia

17/03/2016

peacebuilding and the importance of working together
with the Economic Community of West African States
and the Mano River Union and of building on successful
regional initiatives.

I also wish to thank the Executive Director of
UN-Women for her statement. We appreciate the
ongoing attention and support that the women of Liberia
continue to receive from UN-Women.

I would like to make the case for including women
and youth in all peacebuilding efforts as we move
forward. operationalizing resolution 2250 (2015).
Executive Director Mlambo-Ngcuka has just made a
very impressive intervention, which is very compelling
and convincing as to including women as we move
forward. I also think that we need engage the large
youth population, as it constitutes one of the greatest
assets for Liberia’s work to consolidate peace and to
move forward with confidence.

Thirteen years after the civil conflict, significant
progress has been made in Liberia in the areas of
peace and security, with the support of UNMIL. With
stability established, focus has now shifted to economic
and social development and governance reforms. The
thirty-first progress report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/169) provides a fairly accurate report of the
situation in Liberia and a level of preparedness of
Liberian security institutions to assume from UNMIL
the full security responsibilities of the country come
30 June. As of 15 March, the Government of Liberia has
assumed full responsibility for six of the eight UNMIL
responsibilities. We therefore thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the support
of UNMIL in furtherance of the implementation of the
Government’s transition plan.

In conclusion, the Peacebuilding Commission
remains determined to advance Liberia’s peacebuilding
agenda, as outlined by the Government, and is
reinvigorated by the renewed commitment showed by
all actors through the process of revising our strategy
of engagement. We look forward to supporting the
efforts of the Security Council in ensuring a wellmanaged drawdown.
The President: I thank Ambassador Skoog for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Liberia.
Mr. Patten (Liberia): It is a privilege for me to
participate in a meeting of the Council on the work of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). I wish
to convey the deep gratitude of the Government and the
people of Liberia to the Council for its continued support
of peace and stability in Liberia. In the same vein, I wish
to commend Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and the entire UNMIL
family for the many contributions they are making in
the consummation of peace and stability in Liberia. I
wish to further thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his statement, which has given
further insights into the work of UNMIL.
Similarly, I wish to thank the Chair of the Liberia
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
Ambassador Olof Skoog, for his statement. The work of
the PBC has been critical to sustaining peace in Liberia.
The statement draws on the collaborative efforts
of all stakeholders on the new statement of mutual
commitments. We endorse the recommendations in
the statement.
8/10

I wish to affirm that UNMIL has been a significant
and dependable partner, creating a platform for
continued dialogue and assistance as we implement the
transition. Steady progress has been made in the areas of
training and capacity-building of the Liberian National
Police, the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization
and other security institutions, and the deployment of
officers to various countries has begun. As of January,
additional Liberian National Police officers, including
emergency response and police support units, have been
deployed in eight border counties to address threats
to peace, including cross-border threats. Additional
logistical support, including vehicles, communication
equipment and uniforms, has been supplied.
Not only is it important to enhance the numerical
capacity of both the police and immigration services,
but renewed focus has also been placed on the quality of
training they receive. The ability of the national police
to plan and carry out training is essential to bolstering
the capacity of the police. The protection of human
rights and civilians, which remains paramount to the
work of the security institutions, has gained added
traction by planners and training being made available
to the relevant institutions in this area. Other aspects
of the training being provided by the institutions are
focused on leadership and management, border-control
management, human trafficking, immigration law, and
so on. The Liberian Government is optimistic that all
activities under UNMIL that have not been taken over
16-07453

17/03/2016

The situation in Liberia

S/PV.7649

by the relevant security institutions will be taken over
by 30 June.

the legislature, the Government of Liberia is confident
that they will soon be passed into law.

We acknowledge that corruption remains a challenge
and a threat to governance. However, the Government
of Liberia is not relenting in the fight to defeat it,
through the support of the Liberia Anti-Corruption
Commission and the Ministry of Justice. Since our
previous statement in the Council (see S/PV.7519),
a number of Government officials — including the
Managing Director of the National Port Authority,
the former Minister of Commerce and the former
Managing Director of the Liberia Petroleum Refining
Company — have been indicted on corruption charges.
Last week, the President dissolved the board of
directors of the Liberian chapter of the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies,
in relation to the expenditure of funds donated for
the Ebola disease. In a case of economic sabotage
related to private use permits, convictions have been
obtained against the former Managing Director of
the Forestry Development Authority, Moses Wogbeh,
and other senior managers, who were convicted and
sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment and ordered to
pay approximately $6 million in restitution. The former
Comptroller of the National Drug Service was found
guilty of economic sabotage and theft of property,
sentenced to five years’ imprisonment and ordered to
pay $179,000 and LRD 958,000 in restitution. There is
also a case involving the former board of directors of
the National Oil Company of Liberia and some senior
officers. Currently ongoing at the Temple of Justice is
the corruption case involving the suspended Managing
Director of the National Port Authority, Matilda W.
Parker and the former Comptroller Christina Palay.

It has been a couple of months since Liberia
was declared Ebola-free. Now safe as a result of the
global efforts that were exerted to defeat the scourge,
thousands more Liberians could have succumbed to the
pandemic. Even though Ebola has been overcome, the
direct consequences of the disease, exacerbated by the
global economic decline and the decrease in prices of
the country’s main export commodities — rubber and
iron ore — have devastated the economy, leading to
a reduction of over $70 million in projected revenues
for the 2015-2016 fiscal year, and budget cuts across
all levels of Government. That has made it difficult for
the Government to fully implement its transformation
agenda as planned.

Liberia’s transformative agenda also remains on
course. This vision is firmly embedded in the resolve
of the Government to introduce extensive changes in
the areas of governance, the rule of law, education,
infrastructure and health care. Following the submission
of its report to the President, the recommendations
from the work of the constitutional review process are
now before the national legislature. A number of bills
have been submitted to, and are under consideration by,
that body, including the local Government act, the land
rights act, the police act and the immigration act, as well
as many other bills that are earmarked for enactment
into law, including bills related women. While there
have been some delays in taking action on those bills by

When the Security Council requested that Liberia
assume full security responsibility by June 2016,
Liberia did not expect that the financial burden for
that transition would be borne by it alone. Since the
adoption of the plan by the Council, only Sweden
and the European Union have contributed directly to
it, in spite of the appeal by the Council for support.
Liberia wishes to therefore call on the international
community, donors and partners to lend their support
to this worthy cause.
Let me now turn to the letter written by President
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and her Ivorian counterpart,
President Alassane Ouattara, to the Security Council.
Concerns have been raised by many Liberians about
the security of the country as we approach the 2017
elections. Those concerns, which find support in many
quarters, are based on the perception that the departure
of UNMIL would create a security vacuum. That
negative perception has been reinforced by the recent
terrorist attack in neighbouring Côte d’Ivoire, the news
of the relocation of the United Nations rapid response
force stationed in the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire from Abidjan to Mali, and the planned
presidential elections in 2017.
While it is the view of the Government that State
security institutions are being prepared to carry out
their duties during such a critical time, it is important
to address that negative perception. The Government of
Liberia proposes that the Council consider maintaining
a deterrent force in Liberia — not troops on the ground
to engage in combat but a force sufficient to provide
psychological support and a cushion up to the 2017

16-074539/10

S/PV.7649

The situation in Liberia

elections. The force could be a subregional force.
The presence of a United Nations force on the ground
coupled with community policing will help create an
enabling environment for peace, the conduct of general
elections and the seamless handover to an elected
Government. It is therefore desirable, in the light of
the prevailing environment, for the Security Council to
give some thought to the issues raised in the letter by
the President.
In conclusion, it is important to stress that the
terrorist attack that took place in Côte d’Ivoire over the
weekend has led to cause for concern in Liberia. Given

10/10

17/03/2016

the fragility of our security institutions, we call on the
international community to urgently lead coordination
efforts with the relevant stakeholders, including
regional and subregional groups, on how to ensure that
terrorists do not find a foothold in the region.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite the Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

16-07453
