S/PV.6701

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional
:

Sixty-seventh year

6701st meeting
Wednesday, 11 January 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Nkoana-Mashabane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mammadyarov
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Raza Bashir Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 9 January 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2012/19)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-20465 (E)

*1220465*

S/PV.6701

Union Peace and Security Council could benefit
significantly from such political engagement, which
would assist us in developing a greater strategic
approach to developments in Somalia.

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 9 January 2012 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2012/19)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Burundi, Kenya, Somalia and
Uganda to participate in today’s meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate in
today’s meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, to participate in today’s meeting.
I wish to welcome the participation at this
meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Azerbaijan and Kenya, and the Minister of Defence of
Uganda.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/19, which contains a letter dated
9 January 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Minister of International Relations and Cooperation
of the Republic of South Africa.
It gives me great pleasure to preside over this
important meeting on Somalia, at which we will
receive briefings of the United Nations Secretariat and
the African Union Commission, as well as the troopcontributing countries to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). Today’s meeting is a practical
demonstration of the close cooperation we seek to
enhance between the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council in matters related to
peace and security on the African continent. We are
convinced that the Security Council and the African

2

Today’s briefing on Somalia is taking place at a
time when a ray of hope is finally beginning to flicker
behind the dark clouds that have overshadowed the
country for too long. While the situation in Somalia
still involves significant challenges, the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG), in the words of the
Secretary-General, “with determination and proper
support … can begin to anchor itself across Somalia”
(S/2011/759, para.89).
Through our collective endeavours, the future of
Somalia can today be firmly placed on a trajectory of
progress and stability. Recent positive developments at
the political, military and humanitarian levels present
the international community, and the Somalis in
particular, with a window of opportunity to turn the
page and advance towards peace, security and
development.
We can all share the optimism of the SecretaryGeneral, who, during his historic visit to Mogadishu,
stated that a few years ago people tended to think of
Somalia only as a place of famine or bloodshed. It was
indeed a forgotten conflict. The Secretary-General
challenged all of us to change the way we see Somalia.
Somalia has been high on the list of priorities of
the Secretary-General. We wish to place on record our
gratitude for his continued efforts to assist Somalia as
it embarks on the road to recovery and stability.
Through his efforts and the active engagement of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
African Union, successes have been recorded at several
levels.
The Kampala Accord of June 2011 and the
adoption of the political road map in September 2011
to end the transition by 23 August have been widely
supported by the Transitional Federal Institutions and
the international community. Most recently, at a Somali
national consultative conference held in Garowe from
21 to 23 December 2011, participants reached an
agreement on the size of the new constituent assembly
and the basis for representation therein, the finalization
of a federal constitution by April, and the creation of a
post-transition bicameral parliamentary structure
within defined timelines.

12-20465

S/PV.6701

Despite the fact that some deadlines have been
missed, I am encouraged by the progress made thus far
in the implementation of the road map. We wish to
encourage the Transitional Federal Institutions to
utilize the existing window of opportunity to achieve
measurable results, such as the adoption of the national
security and stabilization plan by Parliament, the
finalization of the constitution and the reform of
Parliament.
We call on all other Somali stakeholders to
demonstrate the requisite political will and the
determination to implement the Kampala Accord and
the political road map of September 2011 so as to meet
the agreed deadlines. We also strongly urge the parties
to resolve the current crisis within the Transitional
Federal Parliament.
The Transitional Federal Government forces,
supported by AMISOM, have liberated Mogadishu
from Al-Shabaab control. Additionally, the armed
forces of Kenya, deployed in southern Somalia, and of
Ethiopia, near eastern Somalia, have placed
Al-Shabaab forces under severe pressure. We must use
the security space created by AMISOM and at great
cost to Uganda and Burundi, which have valiantly
fought alongside TFG forces, to expand the TFG’s
control over Mogadishu. Similarly, we must use the
opportunities being presented in eastern and southern
Somalia to extend the governance control of the TFG
over a larger territory of Somalia and establish security
in those newly liberated areas.
We note with concern, however, that AMISOM’s
operational and deployment capabilities continue to be
hampered by resource gaps, including arrears in the
reimbursement for contingent-owned equipment and
the lack of force multipliers and force enablers to
AMISOM.
In that regard, we welcome the recently
completed African Union-United Nations joint
assessment mission, which was deployed to develop a
revised strategic concept. We also welcome the
5 January decision of the African Union Peace and
Security Council to endorse the enhancement of
AMISOM, including an increase in its mandated troop
strength from 12,000 to 17,731. We look forward to
working with all Council members in considering the
Secretary-General’s recommendations for an enhanced
support package for AMISOM.

12-20465

The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains
dire. However, improvements are being made, with two
of the six famine-declared regions having recently
graduated to their pre-famine status. That is a welcome
development. We encourage the international
community to continue its efforts to save millions from
famine.
In conclusion, through our collective efforts, we
must also communicate a positive message to the
ordinary people of Somalia that they have not been
abandoned by the international community. We must
communicate the message that peace, stability and
development are not the privilege of some, but are to
be enjoyed by all humankind, irrespective of station or
geographical location. We must not fail Somalia and its
people.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.
Mr. Pascoe: I appreciate the opportunity to brief
the Security Council today on the situation in Somalia.
The participation of high-level representatives
underscores the commitment of the international
community to address the conflict that has been going
on in Somalia for the past two decades.
Much has been achieved in the past few years, yet
many challenges continue to plague our attempts to
stabilize the political, security and humanitarian
situation. We continue to work closely with the African
Union (AU), the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and our many international
partners to move the peacemaking efforts in Somalia
forward. I would like to sincerely thank this Council
for its consistent support to our efforts in Somalia.
Commissioner Lamamra and certain AU member
States will present in detail the requirements for
expanding the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) operation, following the recent decisions
of the Peace and Security Council. The joint
undertaking of the AU and the United Nations to
develop the strategic concept of AMISOM operations,
which will be presented shortly, has been an exemplary
model of collaboration between the two organizations
under the leadership of the African Union.
There are some outstanding issues that will
require further refinement before we request Council
action, such as establishing further linkages between

3

S/PV.6701

the political and military strategies; agreeing on clear
command-and-control arrangements; determining the
allocation of AMISOM contingents by sector; further
fine-tuning a reasonable package of enablers and force
multipliers; and identifying the required support for the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and its allied
forces, whose contribution is essential to sustaining
AMISOM efforts. We look forward to working closely
with the African Union and IGAD in finalizing those
issues.
In order to help frame our discussions today, I
believe that it would be useful to outline once again the
Somalia strategy that we have been pursuing and how
we see that process moving forward. Council members
will recall that, in 2008, the Secretary-General laid out
the United Nations three-pronged integrated approach,
aligning the political, security and humanitarian tracks.
His approach was endorsed by the Security Council
and in several international conferences held thereafter
on Somalia.
The political strategy we have followed over the
past four years has been consistent. It is, first, to
support the TFG in completing the key tasks that will
bring the transition to a close; secondly, to assist the
TFG in broadening the base of the peace process
through outreach and reconciliation; and thirdly, to
work to help develop basic State institutions, especially
in the security sector.
To implement the first part of the political
strategy on moving the transition to a close, we have
the road map for ending the transition, signed in
Mogadishu on 6 September, which comprises priority
tasks that need to be completed by August. This entails
finalizing the constitution-making process, in which we
have we have seen some good progress. We welcome
the adoption of the Garowe Principles by the leaders of
the Transitional Federal Institutions, Puntland,
Galmudug and an Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a
representative last month. They provide a credible path
for adopting the new constitution and ending the
transition according to the Transitional Charter.
Secondly, we have supported the outreach and
reconciliation efforts of the TFG with those groups
outside the peace process. This outreach was the key
element behind the Djibouti Agreements of 2008,
facilitated by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah. It
will be recalled that this process led to the joining of

4

the then Asmara-based Alliance for the Re-liberation of
Somalia in the political process and the formation of a
broad-based Somali Government, led by President
Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, and an expansion of
Parliament to represent a broad spectrum of political
positions.
Today, with the support of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Mahiga, the TFG is
continuing its dialogue with various groups and has
provided support to local-level reconciliation and
peacebuilding initiatives. It has developed a close
working relationship with Puntland, as demonstrated
by the visit of President Sheikh Sharif to Garowe last
year. It is attempting to implement similar initiatives
with Galmudug. Last November with the support of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS),
60 civil society leaders met and agreed that they should
play a principal role in the implementation of the road
map. The next step is for the TFG to draw up a national
reconciliation plan with regional authorities including
the Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a. We hope that this will be
completed soon.
The third imperative is to help the TFG develop
functioning State institutions. In this regard, the
Government is committed to moving forward. It has
been collecting revenue from Mogadishu port and
airport, and paying its security forces and civil
servants, although more work needs to be done to
ensure accountability. With the help of the United
Nations and members of the international community,
the TFG has established a functioning Joint Security
Committee and the Cabinet has approved a national
security policy in consultation with all road map
signatories.
The efforts to strengthen AMISOM, build
Somalia’s security institutions and address piracy are
an integral part of the broader United Nations strategy
I have just mentioned. Since 2009, the United Nations
Support Office for AMISOM has been building the
capacity of AMISOM to provide security through its
logistics support package. This has entailed the
provision of fuel and rations, medical and logistical
support,
accommodation
and
transport,
and
administration of the Trust Fund through which
Member States fund the provision of contingent-owned
equipment.
Meanwhile, in line with the 2008 approach,
Member States have provided significant assistance in

12-20465

S/PV.6701

forming a Somali National Security Force. The Force
now numbers more than 10,000 troops, who are being
paid and supported regularly. We are grateful to the
Government of Japan for its generous contributions,
which have enabled UNPOS, working with AMISOM
and the United Nations Development Programme, to
pay the salaries of the Police Force. We will continue
to work on improving their living conditions, providing
them with the necessary equipment and refurbishing
the police stations.
With this support, and of course the backing of
AMISOM, the TFG has expanded its presence to cover
almost all of Mogadishu. The improvement in security
is not complete, as witnessed by the grenade tossed
into the United Nations compound today. We cannot
relax our efforts. Establishing national security forces
is the work of a generation and we should not expect
transformation overnight. However, the visit of the
Secretary-General in December, and the relocation of
his Special Representative to Mogadishu later this
month, are indications of just how far we have come.
The efforts of the international maritime forces
are having a significant impact on the fight against
piracy, with the number of ships being captured
actually declining. The contributions of the various
naval forces are an integral part of a wider effort that
includes assisting local communities to undertake
alternative forms of employment, tracking the flow of
money to identify those benefiting from piracy,
prosecuting those responsible, and creating a coastal
security force.
Let me turn to our humanitarian efforts. Despite
many risks and difficulties, the United Nations and
other humanitarian actors have provided humanitarian
assistance to Somalis in the country and in refugee
camps in neighbouring countries for the past 20 years.
Over the past year, humanitarian actors have managed
to reach more than 2 million people with food
assistance and 1.4 million people through water and
sanitation interventions. In addition, the massive scaleup in humanitarian efforts has reduced the number of
areas affected by famine from six to three. We
welcome the vast international support in response to
the famine and hope that this assistance will continue.
It is important to underscore the serious
difficulties humanitarian operations continue to face,
especially in getting access to affected populations.
This will be an ongoing problem as long as the security

12-20465

dynamics remain fluid. Ultimately, establishing
sustainable peace and stability is the only way to bring
an end to the suffering of the Somali people. But we
must recognize that the increase in military operations
carries some risks and difficulties for civilians and
humanitarian operations, and we are working to
mitigate those as much as possible.
Let me briefly discuss how we see the path
forward for Somalia. We believe that we — along with
the African Union, IGAD and the Somali Government —
have all the elements of a political, security and
development strategy that the Somalis and the
international community can together implement. In
the next few months, the focus will be, first, on
ensuring that the final draft of the constitution is
completed by 20 April and adopted by a national
constituent assembly the following month. This will be
followed by the election or selection of a new
Parliament, reduced from the current 550 to 225, to be
sworn in by mid-June, followed by the election of the
Speaker and President, in accordance with the Kampala
Accord. This timetable is ambitious and requires full
buy-in and determination on the part of the Somalis
and the full support of the international community. Let
me reiterate that the consensus, both inside and outside
Somalia, is that there will be no extension of the
transition period.
The second major task will be expanding the
control of the Government by establishing
administrative arrangements for those areas in southern
Somalia recently recovered by military actions from
Al-Shabaab. Special Representative Mahiga has been
promoting a transparent and inclusive approach in
setting up local administrations in the newly recovered
areas, and has made several efforts to involve civil
society and clan elders in these reconciliation and
outreach efforts. The TFG has pledged to organize
meetings with political actors on the two areas where
the extremists have already been pushed back. We
expect to see more progress in the next few weeks.
The third component is improving governance,
promoting transparency in the use of financial
resources and establishing a functioning civil service.
There is already some progress in this regard with the
re-establishment of the Bureau for Investigation of
Corruption, whose commissioners are currently being
vetted. We also intend to continue working with the
Government in finalizing its national development
plan.

5

S/PV.6701

On the fourth issue, security, we will continue to
work on building the capacity of the TFG’s security
forces. The national security and stabilization plan has
been finalized and is awaiting parliamentary approval.
The relocation of UNPOS to Mogadishu will facilitate
further coordination with AMISOM and the
Government in implementing this plan. It is important
that AMISOM be provided with the necessary financial
and logistical capacity to expand its operations in
Mogadishu and South-Central Somalia.
In the next few months, the focus will be on the
fifth area, namely, revitalizing economic activity and
delivering basic services. There are reports of greater
economic
activity
throughout
Mogadishu.
Reconstruction has started in a number of the
devastated areas previously defined in 1991 and 1992
as the green line, as well as in parts of the city affected
by the most recent fighting. For instance, a number of
businessmen have joined together to rebuild the central
oil depot, and there is a plan to build a holiday
weekend sports resort along Gezira beach. As we
increase our presence in Mogadishu, the various United
Nations agencies will work closely with the
Government and its partners to focus on recovery and
development. We are pleased that the Government of
Turkey is working with UNPOS to host the second
Istanbul meeting in April, whose primary focus will be
economic development.
Finally, let me turn now to the risks and
challenges of the current moment. To achieve the
strategy I have outlined, it is vital to address the issue
of internal and external spoilers that are trying to
undermine the implementation of the road map, and
ending the transition as planned. We are particularly
concerned about the impact of the current
parliamentary crisis. The international community must
support the TFG to resolve the crisis through dialogue.
At the same time, the Council has indicated that it is
willing to act against spoilers to the peace process. We
need to consider how to make that a reality.
On the security front, Al-Shabaab continues to be
a threat, despite its withdrawal from Mogadishu in
August. It has stepped up its suicide and improvised
explosive device attacks in the capital. A concerted
military offensive by AMISOM and regional Powers
may present a chance of defeating them as a military
movement, but the political and ideological challenge
must also be addressed. That can be achieved through
the delivery of a peace dividend and real change in

6

people’s lives. Limited resources continue to hinder
our ability to do more. In October, the United Nations
and TFG laid out proposals for stabilization and
recovery in Mogadishu. However, despite improvement
in transparency, direct resources to the Government are
still not flowing.
As we continue to support the peacemaking
efforts in Somalia, it is important that we provide
practical means to help the Government to become
more cohesive and inclusive, strengthen its ability to
address
the
security
challenges,
carry
out
reconstruction and development planning, and generate
and collect revenue. Irrespective of the structure of the
State to be defined by the constitution, it is vital that
the Somalis have a national security sector. That will
require longer-term commitment and investment by the
international community.
It is also important that the international
community, with support from the African Union,
IGAD, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the
League of Arab States, continue to work in a concerted
manner, building on the recent gains made in the peace
process. The United Nations system, guided by the
Security Council, will continue to provide the
necessary coordination and support. We look forward
to the upcoming London conference, which also offers
an opportunity to discuss and work on those critical
issues.
It is evident that the only lasting solution for
Somalia is one that is created and led by Somalis
themselves. The Government’s efforts at building
consensus for reconciliation are slowly gaining ground,
despite the serious challenge by extremists. The
international community must make a vital investment
at this time to nurture the fragile peace process, help
the Government to establish its authority in more areas
of the country, build its security and rule of law
institutions and expand AMISOM’s operations as
requested by the African Union.
The President: I thank Mr. Pascoe for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lamamra.
Mr. Lamamra: On behalf of the African Union,
let me start by expressing our gratitude to the Security
Council for according us this opportunity to address it
at such a critical juncture in the Somalia peace process.
The Council’s decision to schedule this meeting on

12-20465

S/PV.6701

Somalia, at the request of the African Union (AU), is a
testament to the importance that members of the
Council attach to the situation in that country, as well
as to their commitment to build the kind of partnership
that the challenges in Somalia and elsewhere in Africa
so urgently require.

sea port grows longer by the day. Mogadishu has
played host to several high-profile visitors, including
the African Union Commission Chairperson, SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, the President of the General
Assembly, President Ismaël Omar Guelleh of Djibouti
and Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan of Turkey.

AU Commission Chairperson Jean Ping sincerely
regrets that prior commitments have prevented him
from attending this meeting. He extends his
compliments to the Council and its members, confident
that today’s deliberations will pave the way for further
progress in the relentless search for lasting peace and
reconciliation in Somalia.

Those achievements were made by an underresourced and under-equipped AMISOM. They also
came at a considerable cost to the Mission. Scores of
young Burundians and Ugandans, fighting side-by-side
with their Somali comrades, have paid the ultimate
price in the line of duty. The month of October 2011
was particularly difficult, as AMISOM and TFG forces
stepped-up their efforts to secure the capital after the
forced withdrawal of Al-Shabaab.

More than a year ago, I had the opportunity to
address (see S/PV.6407) this organ on the issue of
Somalia to convey the request made then by the AU
Peace and Security Council and to appeal for the
enhancement of the United Nations support package to
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
Subsequently, the Security Council adopted resolution
1964 (2010), which authorized the Secretary-General
to continue to provide support for an enhanced troop
strength of 12,000. That the Security Council decision
fell short of what the AU had requested is in no doubt.
Yet, it represented a step forward, and we endeavored
to make the best out of it in support of the aspirations
of the Somali people to lasting peace, security and
stability.
Today, I am pleased to report that significant
progress has been made on the ground by the forces of
AMISOM and those of the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG). For the first time in 20 years,
almost the whole of Mogadishu is under the control of
the TFG. In addition, military operations in other parts
of the country by TFG forces, with the support of
Kenya and Ethiopia, have further weakened
Al-Shabaab extremists and other anti-peace elements.
The Somali population has been quick to embrace
the relative peace brought about by the efforts of
AMISOM and TFG forces. Since August 2011, the
capital, Mogadishu, has experienced something of a
revival. Roads are being repaired, homes rebuilt and
markets reopened. Real estate prices — for instance,
along Via Moscow — have doubled. And people are
now staying out in the streets late into the night,
despite the omnipresent threat of terrorist attacks.
Traffic at the Aden Abdulleh International Airport has
trebled, while the line of ships waiting to dock at the

12-20465

We at the African Union are determined to ensure
that the sacrifices they have made, on behalf of all of
us, are not in vain. We are therefore grateful to the
people and the Government of Burundi and of Uganda.
Their actions are a true reflection of African solidarity
and our collective commitment to stand by the people
of Somalia in their hour of need.
In spite of the severe challenges posed by a
devastating humanitarian crisis, the gains made on the
ground have created an unprecedented window of
opportunity to further peace and reconciliation and to
help the Somali people open a new chapter in their
troubled history. This is all the more true as progress is
also being made on the political front, particularly
since the middle of last year. The implementation of
the Kampala Accord of June 2011 and the political
road map of September 2011 is generally on course.
Undoubtedly, some challenges remain to be
overcome. One could, in this respect, point to the
prevailing situation in the Transitional Federal
Parliament, which has been in a state of paralysis and,
on one occasion, was the scene of a brawl as a result of
the illegal removal of the Speaker of the Parliament,
Sharif Hassan Sheikh Aden. Yet such difficulties are to
be expected given the complexity and protracted nature
of the conflict in Somalia. In a way, the situation is as
much a reflection of deficiencies in leadership on the
part of the Somali stakeholders as it is an indication of
a failure on the part of the international community to
provide support that is truly commensurate with the
challenges at hand.
It is against that background that the African
Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on

7

S/PV.6701

Development (IGAD), recognizing the urgent need to
help the Somali people sustain this renewed
momentum in the peace process, decided to pursue the
critical approach of enhancing the capacity of both
AMISOM and TFG forces.
I am glad to report that the strategic concept for
future AMISOM operations, whose development
involved broad consultations with the Somali
authorities, the troop-contributing countries (TCCs),
United Nations and other partners in Addis Ababa,
Nairobi and Mogadishu, as well as a series of planning
sessions, was endorsed by the African Union Peace and
Security Council at its 306th meeting, held in Addis
Ababa on 5 January.
The
Secretariat
deserves
our
highest
commendation for fully supporting this process,
including the deployment of a team of competent
United Nations planners who worked very closely with
the Commission to finalize the strategic concept. That
document is therefore the product of a joint effort.
Essentially, the strategic concept provides for the
following: an increase in the level of United Nationssupported AMISOM uniformed personnel from 12,000
to 17,731, including 5,700 from the new troopcontributing countries, a Djiboutian contingent and the
rehatted Kenyan troops, as well as an AMISOM police
component; the deployment by Burundi and Uganda of
additional troops to reach the current United Nationsauthorized strength of 12,000; the extension of
AMISOM’s area of responsibility, including the
insertion of AMISOM troops in the areas liberated with
the support of Ethiopia; the provision of the required
force enablers and multipliers, as well as logistical
support to other components of AMISOM; and, last but
not least, enhancement of the TFG security and allied
forces, so as to enable and empower them to play an
increased role in the implementation of the strategic
concept.
I wish to reiterate the call made by the Peace and
Security Council of the AU for the Security Council to
expeditiously consider and authorize the support
required for the implementation of the strategic
concept for future AMISOM operations. The strategic
concept relies very heavily on the provision of force
enablers and multipliers, logistical support, funding for
reimbursement of contingent-owned equipment, selfsustenance of troops and other critical requirements.
We remain appreciative of the support being provided
on the ground to AMISOM by the United Nations, and

8

we certainly look forward to the pursuit of such a joint
endeavour.
The AU Commission, on its part, is accelerating
preparations and consultations on the follow-on
planning requirements through continued engagement
with our four troop-contributing countries — Burundi,
Djibouti, Kenya and Uganda — and with IGAD
countries, countries of the region and other partners.
This will include the elaboration and early finalization
of a revised AMISOM concept of operations so as to
adequately address all relevant pending issues, such as
command and control, liaison and coordination, and
troops-to-task per sector.
Obviously, the military efforts of AMISOM and
the TFG forces are designed to achieve the political
objectives that are articulated in the Mogadishu road
map. With incoming Kenyan forces now an integral
part of AMISOM, and with the support provided by
Ethiopia, several new areas throughout the country are
being liberated from terrorist insurgents. In that
context, it is important to ensure that there is no
political vacuum in the liberated regions. That
highlights the need for increased political outreach and
reconciliation on the part of the TFG, as well as
recovery support. Therefore, coherence between
military operations and political strategy remains
imperative and is adequately articulated in the strategic
concept.
Consequently, the African Union Commission
will continue to support the concerted efforts of the
Special Representative of the Chairperson, Ambassador
Boubacar Diarra; the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Augustine Mahiga; and
the IGAD Facilitator, Kipruto Kirwa, to assist the
Somali leaders and other stakeholders in focusing on
the implementation of the Kampala Accord and the
political road map in the light of the progress achieved
so far, in particular at the Garowe conference on
constitution-making.
Somalia is at a crossroads. We should not relent
in urging the Somali stakeholders to take advantage of
the current momentum, so as to once and for all bring
to an end the violence and suffering visited upon their
people by two decades of conflict and destruction. We
should insist on the need for them to fully comply with
the commitments contained in the Kampala Accord and
the Mogadishu road map. We should continue to stress

12-20465

S/PV.6701

that they have the primary responsibility for achieving
lasting peace and reconciliation in their country.
At the same time, we should not lose sight of the
fact that the Somalis cannot succeed without adequate
support from the international community. As stressed
by the Chair of the AU Commission in his 15 October
2010 report on Somalia to the Peace and Security
Council, we cannot hide from the fact that, so far, the
international community has yet to fully assume its
responsibility in Somalia. Its action in Somalia has
been belated, hardly keeping pace with developments
on the ground, partial — forcefully addressing some
aspects of the crisis, for instance the scourge of piracy,
while not giving sufficient attention to the action
required on the mainland — and inadequate. The
resources mobilized so far are incommensurate with
the challenges. The international community has not
shown the sense of anticipation and proactivity
required or seized opportunities, when they presented
themselves, to further peace and reconciliation in
Somalia.
Today, learning from our past experiences and
shortcomings, we have the opportunity to turn the
situation in Somalia around for the greater good of its
long-suffering people and in support of regional
stability and international security. As the present
deliberations proceed, I have no doubt that we are all
fully aware of what is at stake. Failure to act now will
be extremely costly.
While reiterating our gratitude to the Security
Council for the steps that it has already taken in
support of AMISOM, we cannot but call on it to do
more to enable us all to cover the remaining ground in
our long journey towards lasting peace, reconciliation
and security in Somalia.
In closing, I want to again express the African
Union’s appreciation to South Africa, as President of
the Council, for its sustained efforts to further the
partnership between the AU and the United Nations; to
IGAD for its leadership and resolve; to the AMISOM
TCCs, including the new contingents from Djibouti
and Kenya, for their commitment; and to the SecretaryGeneral and the Council for the continued attention
being paid to the situation in Somalia.
The President: I thank Mr. Lamamra for his
briefing.

12-20465

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Moses
Wetangula, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya and
Chair of the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union.
Mr. Wetangula (Kenya): It gives me great
pleasure to attend and participate in this Security
Council meeting on the situation in Somalia.
May I commence by commending the Republic of
South Africa, as President of the Security Council for
the month of January, for having convened this
meeting and for having invited Kenya, as the current
Chair of the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union (AU), to participate. Before I make my
statement, I wish to also convey to you, Madam
President, to all members of the Council and, through
you, to their countries and people the very best wishes
for a peaceful and prosperous 2012. It is certain that
we cannot say the same for Somalia.
This meeting on Somalia could not have come at
a better time. It follows closely on the intense work
undertaken at the regional and continental levels in the
past three months that culminated in the
recommendations of the 306th meeting of the AU
Peace and Security Council, held on 5 January, which
have been communicated to the Council for
consideration. I personally look forward to the
outcomes of today’s deliberations.
The Somali crisis is a matter of which the African
Union has remained seized since the start. While it has
generated a range of challenges, our resolve to turn
Somalia around has been unwavering. In that context, I
wish to pay special tribute to Uganda and Burundi —
two countries whose daughters and sons continue to
pay the ultimate price for the search for peace in
Somalia on behalf of the continent and the world at
large. I also want to recognize the commitment of
Ethiopia for its critical role and support to the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and allied
forces, Djibouti for the deployment of its first
contingent of troops to Somalia, and my country,
Kenya, for its ongoing operation, which has liberated
parts and populations in south and central Somalia.
Those efforts have been supported immensely by
the decisions taken by the Council that have endorsed
the mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and improved the logistics package
available in support of that operation, as well as the
bilateral support that has been extended in support of

9

S/PV.6701

various activities, including the training of the Somali
National Security Forces.
Today’s meeting has been convened at a time of
unique opportunity for Somalia. As we are all aware,
we have before us an unprecedented window of
opportunity to finally restore security, peace and
stability in Somalia. That has been occasioned by the
momentum created following the defeat and
withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu after its
defeat by AMISOM and the TFG forces in August
2011. The operations of the Kenyan and TFG forces in
southern and central Somalia also dealt a devastating
blow to Al-Shabaab, and Ethiopia’s assistance has
made its case even more precarious.
That concert of action was followed by another
first, that is, the cooperative effort among the troopcontributing countries, regional countries, the African
Union and the United Nations that developed the new
strategic concept for future operations of AMISOM in
Somalia (see S/2012/19, annex). As the Council is
aware, the AU Peace and Security Council approved its
new strategic concept, which details the elements of
the critical option for optimizing the operation in
Somalia. Of great significance is the need to endorse
the surge of troop levels from 12,000 to 17,731 and the
imperative to provide the required force enablers and
multipliers, as well as logistical support to the other
components of AMISOM.
The AU request to the Security Council of
October 2010 to provide capabilities that could cut out
the Al-Shabaab supply lines, especially through the
port of Kismayo, and to diminish its ability and those
of its international terrorist allies from supplying arms,
fighters and contraband, is as relevant today as it was
then. It is my hope that it will find some positive
expression from the Council.
I take this opportunity to renew the request for
the Security Council and the international community
to help in the monitoring and inspection of all vessels
entering and leaving Kismayo to curb the menace. In
that regard, I wish to thank the Council for adopting
resolution 2023 (2011), which reinforces sanctions on
Eritrea in an effort to diminish the effects of spoilers
on the efforts to restore peace to Somalia. It is our hope
that that resolution, like others before it, will be
implemented in full.
In the experience of Kenya, Al-Shabaab is a force
that has visited very many destructive elements on the

10

region. It has attacked our tourist installations. It has
tossed grenades into churches, with human casualties.
It has kidnapped and captured Kenyan soldiers, whose
whereabouts are unknown. It has captured aid workers
in the Dadaab refugee camp, whose whereabouts are
also unknown. It has captured a tourist, who died in its
hands, and it still has the audacity to claim ransom for
a dead body to be released, among many other
atrocities. We are also worried by the current political
developments in Somalia that threaten to derail the
political process. Hence, the timelines of the
transitional period, as delineated in the Kampala
Accord and the Mogadishu road map, are upset.
The AU believes that the political process must
remain within the framework developed. Hence, it
hopes that the Council can join in bringing its weight
upon the Somalia political leadership, through the use
of alternative means of persuasion and incentives, to
safeguard it and to ensure that the gains made in the
military and security sectors add value to the overall
objective of achieving peace in Somalia.
As we pursue the political and military strategies
in Somalia, it is also imperative that we focus attention
on the humanitarian situation in the country. As
Council members are aware, Kenya hosts more than
600,000 refugees in the Dadaab complex, where
humanitarian assistance efforts continue to be
threatened, especially in view of the withdrawal of
some agencies following Al-Shabaab attacks and
threats.
Furthermore, the humanitarian needs in the
liberated areas of Somalia are great, in particular after
the expulsion of more than 20 humanitarian
organizations. I wish to draw the attention of the
Council to the need to encourage and urge
humanitarian actors to stand in solidarity with Somalia,
to exert pressure to ensure humanitarian access and to
take measures to hold accountable those who inhibit or
subvert humanitarian efforts. Kenya remains
committed to providing the necessary corridors and
support for humanitarian access to the needy in
Somalia.
Furthermore, it is critical to encourage activities
that restore normalcy and enable the resumption of
livelihood activities, especially in areas that have been
liberated. Such efforts will form the basis for extending
TFG governance to those regions, increase the
legitimacy of the transitional process and bolster

12-20465

S/PV.6701

reconciliation activities. For its part, Kenya has
assisted by helping senior ministers of the Transitional
Federal Government to visit and address their nationals
in the areas that have been liberated.
In addition, we call on all parties concerned to
reflect on the next steps for Somalia after the end of
the transition period in August. In that regard, we
commend the United Kingdom and Turkey for their
efforts to show renewed interest in organizing meetings
on Somalia. We hope that such meetings will add value
to the ongoing process.
I wish to take this opportunity to thank the Prime
Minister of Turkey and the Secretary-General for
showing leadership by visiting Mogadishu. Subsequent
visits were made during the same period by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Minister of
Defence of Kenya.
As we prepare to give Somalia the rightful place
that we all expect it to have among other countries,
Kenya is preparing to send its Ambassador to that
country, who is based in Nairobi, to join the Turkish
Ambassador who is currently residing in Mogadishu.
We urge other countries with Nairobi-based
representatives to Somalia to do the same.
The pressure that we have placed on Al-Shabaab
has shown that piracy, described previously by the
Secretary-General as a land-borne disease, not a seaborne disease, has been on the decline. Statistics for
the past two months show that the number of ships
being hijacked has decreased quite considerably. I hope
that this will show the international community that
putting pressure on, and eventually defeating,
Al-Shabaab will be one of the many ways of
eliminating piracy, which has made the shipping routes
of the Indian Ocean ever so dangerous and expensive.
Finally, I call on the Council to support efforts to
build the capacity of Somali institutions to provide
security and administrative services to the country’s
people. Those efforts are critical to achieving the
ultimate objective of sustainable peace in Somalia and
therefore cannot be left to ad hoc measures that remain
largely uncoordinated. We urge the Council to remain
focused on, and seized of, the situation in Somalia, as
has been the case. We in the region, in particular the
AU and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, will play our part by doing what we can
to support our brothers and sisters in Somalia.

12-20465

The President: I thank Minister Wetangula for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Crispus Kiyonga, Minister of Defence of Uganda.
Mr. Kiyonga (Uganda): I would like to
congratulate you, Madam President, and the delegation
of South Africa on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January. I also thank
you for organizing this important and timely briefing
on Somalia.
On behalf of the Government of Uganda, I would
like to thank the Security Council for its commitment
to the cause of peace and security on the African
continent, and in Somalia in particular.
This briefing is taking place at a time when we
can look back and say that we have made visible
progress in moving forward to stabilize Somalia. We
can say that now there are prospects; there is a new
opportunity to harness efforts in order to deal a final
blow to the terrorist forces of Al-Shabaab. That
opportunity should not be squandered. The members of
the international community should galvanize their
efforts to seize this opportunity to save ourselves from
the scourge of terrorism in the region.
Uganda and Burundi, acting through the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), have been in
Mogadishu supporting the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and battling Al-Shabaab since
2007. We have driven the enemy out of Mogadishu and
enabled the TFG to control the city. We have created an
environment in which international actors can safely
travel into and out of Mogadishu. We have secured the
airport and the seaport. Those achievements have been
made at great sacrifice in terms of lives lost on the
battlefront — those of our sons and daughters, among
the troop-contributing countries and in the TFG. Those
gains have been achieved at the cost of resources
expended by the United Nations, the European Union
and a number of bilateral donors.
The view of Uganda is that we could have made
even greater progress had it not been for a number of
shortcomings. In our analysis, those include the
challenges related to cohesion within the TFG
leadership and the failure to fast-track the development
of Somali security forces. In our view, five years down
the line, those forces would now be in control of
Mogadishu had they been developed at a much faster

11

S/PV.6701

rate. Additional shortcomings are related to the
insufficiency of forces within AMISOM, the less-thanadequate facilitation of AMISOM and the initial lack
of enthusiasm from the international community.
What is the new situation that gives us optimism
that we can now defeat Al-Shabaab and stabilize
Somalia?
First, I want to commend the Republic of Kenya
for taking two important steps: pursuing Al-Shabaab
terrorists into Somalia in defence of their country and
taking the decision to now be part and parcel of the
AMISOM force.
Secondly, I want to thank the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia for the strong support it has given
to the TFG allied forces, which has led to the capture
from Al-Shabaab of important areas along the border
with Somalia.
Thirdly, I want to commend the Republic of
Djibouti, which has started to deploy its promised 850
troops to Somalia as part of AMISOM.
In the next few weeks, Burundi will deploy an
additional 1,000 troops to Somalia. The delay in that
particular troop deployment was occasioned by the
need to organize the logistics. For its part, Uganda will
complete its final deployment of 1,700 troops to
Somalia by March. Again, the delay is due to the fact
that the Government of the United States has been
organizing the logistics that these troops need in order
to be deployed.
As we have heard, Kenya and Djibouti have
together undertaken to deploy to AMISOM a total of
over 5,000 troops in order to beef it up to a force of
over 17,000 troops. And so now we not only have more
troops, but also Al-Shabaab is being attacked on a
number of fronts, including in Mogadishu, on the
border with Kenya and from the border with Ethiopia.
The fight against piracy also offers prospects for
beefing up the fight against Al-Shabaab. The pirates
who have disrupted international trade through their
actions on the high seas are incubated on mainland
Somalia. Therefore, it is critical that we take advantage
of the new situation to effectively link the anti-piracy
fight with the overall struggle to stabilize Somalia. The
re-establishment of the Somali State and the restoration
of law and order to that country will be sure ways of
dealing with the root causes of piracy.

12

As the Council is aware, the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union has approved a strategic
concept for future AMISOM operations in Somalia,
based on a technical analysis and recommendation
made by an AU-United Nations technical assessment
team.
What, then, should our next steps be? We
recommend in the main that, first, the Security Council
approve the expansion of AMISOM force levels from
12,000 to 17,731, as requested by the AU Peace and
Security Council; secondly, that the Council recognize
that the fight against Al-Shabaab is now beyond
Mogadishu; thirdly, that the Council enhance its
support package to AMISOM adequately so that the
assessed contributions of the United Nations cover the
payment for force multipliers and enablers, as
recommended in the strategic concept — this package
should include compensation for contingent-owned
equipment as well; and fourthly, that some of the
resources being used to fight piracy be extended and
linked to the effort to stabilize mainland Somalia.
Uganda welcomes the initiative of the United Kingdom
to convene a special summit on Somalia in London in
February, and looks forward to a positive outcome in
terms of mobilizing greater support for political,
security, humanitarian and development efforts.
In order to allay any doubts, I want to make
reference to some concerns I have heard since arriving
in New York to the effect that there is lack of clarity
about the command-and-control structure of the
proposed expanded AMISOM force. Since Kenya
entered Somalia and Ethiopia renewed support to the
TFG allied forces, intensive consultations have been
taking place at the bilateral, regional and multilateral
levels. President Mwai Kibaki of Kenya, President
Yoweri Museveni and Prime Minister Meles Zenawi of
Ethiopia have been in constant contact on this matter.
The summit of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) has held a number of
extraordinary sessions on the matter of Somalia. Even
before the joint AU-United Nations technical
assessment team was formed, the IGAD summit had
tasked the Chiefs of Defence Staff in our region to
clearly articulate how the coordination of our forces in
the field could be achieved. Until Friday last week, the
only difference that existed at the level of the Chiefs of
Defence Staff was the issue of whether the 12,000
troops contributed by Uganda and Burundi should all

12-20465

S/PV.6701

be deployed in Mogadishu or if part of the force should
be deployed in the newly liberated zones.
Last week, consensus was reached among the
troop-contributing countries that the additional 2,700
troops to be deployed by Uganda and Burundi should
not go to Mogadishu. Their deployment will take into
account the liberated areas created by actions taken by
Kenya and Ethiopia. Therefore, we, the Ministers of
Defence of the troop-contributing countries, instructed
our Chiefs of Defence Staff to further fine-tune the
command-and-control architecture proposed by the
joint AU-United Nations technical team to take account
of this consensus. This is being done and will be ready
within the next few days.
In conclusion, the consultations taking place at
IGAD and the AU are intended not only to address the
military aspects of our work in Somalia but, even more
critically, to focus attention on the political question.
We know only too well that the crisis in Somalia is
basically of a political rather than of a military nature.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Mr. Mammadyarov (Azerbaijan): First of all, I
should like to welcome the Minister of International
Relations and Cooperation of South Africa, Her
Excellency Ms. Maite Nkoana-Mashabane. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General
Lynn
Pascoe;
the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, Ambassador Lamamra; and the representatives
of the countries contributing troops to the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for their very
intensive and deep briefings.
I would like to express our support for the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia in its
efforts to overcome difficulties, achieve reconciliation
and build a secure, stable, united, democratic and
prosperous nation. Let me also express our full support
for AMISOM, commend the efforts of the Somali
National Security Forces, and pay tribute to the troopcontributing countries. I would also like to commend
the efforts of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and its member States in contributing to achieving
peace and national reconciliation in Somalia and
mobilizing assistance to meet the urgent needs of the
peoples affected by the humanitarian crisis in that
country.

12-20465

We must continue to approach the complex
situation in Somalia with care and sensitivity and on
the basis of a comprehensive strategy aimed at
addressing the political, humanitarian and security
problems in that country through the collaborative
efforts of all stakeholders. As Somalia moves towards
the end of the transition in August, special efforts
should be made to protect security and the political
gains of the past few years, and to ensure that all steps
ultimately contribute to the delivery of the road map.
It is obvious that security gains on the ground
cannot be consolidated without adequate assistance
from the international community, including in
providing AMISOM with all necessary resources to
strengthen its capabilities and to contribute to the
implementation of its mandate. As the SecretaryGeneral makes clear in his recent report on Somalia,
“the resources available to the United Nations and
AMISOM for Somalia are not commensurate with the
challenges or the mandates given” (S/2011/759,
para. 94). We fully support the Secretary-General’s
view that Somalia needs sustained help in order to
implement the road map. The decisions taken on
5 January by the African Union Peace and Security
Council and its call on the Security Council in that
regard should also be taken into careful consideration.
We also stress the importance of continued
international assistance for the building of Somalia’s
security institutions. We take note of the need for
adequate military assistance to fight asymmetric
terrorist attacks.
We are gravely concerned that the humanitarian
situation in Somalia continues to deteriorate.
Azerbaijan has responded to the appeals of respective
Governments and international organizations to
provide urgent aid aimed at addressing the
humanitarian crisis in the Horn of Africa, including
Somalia — the worst-affected country in the region. It
is important that the international community continue
to support Somalia, including by contributing to the
United Nations consolidated appeal for that country. At
the same time, all parties must allow unimpeded
humanitarian access and refrain from actions that
threaten the safety of the local population and those
assisting them. There is also a need to redouble efforts
to find long-term solutions for refugees and internally
displaced persons in Somalia. Azerbaijan is ready to
continue its support.

13

S/PV.6701

Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank Mr. Pascoe and Commissioner
Lamamra for their briefings today. I also thank you,
Madam President, for your own important statement. I
also welcome the insightful contributions from the
Foreign Minister of Kenya and the Minister of Defence
of Uganda.
As you yourself said, Madam President, we are
discussing Somalia at a time of real opportunity. The
current situation in Somalia is grave. Instability,
drought and famine continue to blight the country and
to inflict unimaginable suffering on the Somali people.
But this is also a time of opportunity. We have entered
a crucial year for the political process in Somalia, and
there has been some progress on the ground in the area
of security. Al-Shabaab is being driven back on several
fronts in south-central Somalia. The African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has secured most of
Mogadishu, and regional administrations continue to
develop. The United Kingdom believes that we need to
seize that opportunity to make real progress in Somalia
and to deliver a better future for the Somali people. I
would like to make four main points today: on the
humanitarian situation, the political process, AMISOM
and the upcoming London conference on Somalia.
First, we salute the work of the United Nations
and other humanitarian actors in Somali to combat the
famine and drought affecting the country. We also
welcome the support from new donors to the United
Nations consolidated appeal for Somalia. But it is vital
that the international community continue to provide
its sustained support for the relief effort. It is clear that
more work needs to be done in that area.
Secondly, the United Kingdom is committed to
supporting the United Nations-led Djibouti peace
process and to working with Somalis and international
partners to build a peaceful and stable Somalia. The
transitional governmental arrangements under the
Djibouti peace process end in August. We urge the
Transitional Federal Institutions to avoid squabbling
and to cooperate with each other to make substantive
progress in the implementation of the road map before
that date. In particular, it is imperative that we see
progress on reconciliation and establish dialogue
among all those who are willing to subscribe to a
peaceful political process. Local and regional
administrations can play an important role in that. The
process for developing a new constitution must be
more inclusive and representative, so that all Somalis

14

feel that the new constitutional arrangements reflect a
genuine national discussion. In short, it is time for
Somalia to move out of transition and towards genuine
legitimate and representative Government structures
based on a constitutional process. Somalis themselves
must determine their own governance structures. The
international community will support them, but the
transition must end in August.
Thirdly, I would like to welcome the considerable
success that AMISOM and the Somali national security
forces have achieved in recent months. That has been
possible thanks to the commitment and courage of
AMISOM troops. I would like to pay particular tribute
to the Ugandan and Burundian contingents, who have
suffered many losses in achieving that success.
However, as Defence Minister Kiyonga said, the threat
has not disappeared. Now more than ever, it is essential
that we provide AMISOM the support that it needs to
consolidate security in the areas it controls and to
expand the secure areas as a part of a clear, realistic
and coordinated military strategy.
We recognize that predictable and sustainable
funding is essential for AMISOM to be able to operate
effectively. That is why the United Kingdom is
providing $15 million in uncaveated funding to the
United Nations Trust Fund for AMISOM. That is in
addition to the $6 million that we contributed in 2011.
But such contributions are only a temporary solution.
We are determined that a long-term solution be found
to provide sustainable funding for AMISOM.
AMISOM must be run in an effective, efficient and
accountable manner. Regional States and AMISOM
must coordinate effectively. A coordinated — indeed,
integrated — regional approach is essential to security
in Somalia. We welcome the United Nations-African
Union cooperation at the operational level, and on
peacekeeping more generally, and encourage the efforts
of the African Union (AU) and its partners to further
enhance AU peacekeeping capabilities. In that context,
we take careful note of the report (see S/2012/19,
annex) of the African Union Peace and Security
Council following the technical assessment mission.
However, the report leaves a number of questions
unanswered, as Mr. Pascoe explained. We therefore
look forward to more detailed information and
recommendations in the forthcoming report of the
Secretary-General. The United Kingdom will consider
those recommendations carefully, and we are ready to

12-20465

S/PV.6701

lead the Council’s response to them in the month of
February.
Fourthly, the United Kingdom believes that there
is an opportunity now to address the wider strategic
challenges facing Somalia. That opportunity should not
be squandered. That is why British Prime Minister
David Cameron will hold a conference in London on
23 February to discuss how the international
community might more effectively support progress
towards peace and stability in Somalia. The United
Nations and our African partners will of course
continue to lead for the international community, but
the United Kingdom aims to act as a catalyst for a new
action-oriented international approach to supporting
their efforts in Somalia.
Finally, the problem of piracy remains a serious
threat to the international community as a whole. It
destabilizes Somalia and undermines our efforts to
promote the rule of law and security. As a contribution
to those efforts, we will also use the London
conference to promote industry engagement in regional
maritime capacity-building.
Now more than ever, there is an opportunity to
build stability in Somalia. Now we believe is the time
for the international community to come together and
to act. We must take that opportunity and achieve real
and sustainable progress in the coming months.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome you here today, Madam President, to preside
over this meeting. I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Lynn Pascoe; African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security Ramtane
Lamamra; His Excellency Mr. Moses Wetangula,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya; and His
Excellency Mr. Crispus Kiyonga, Minister of Defence
of Uganda for their statements. I also welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan at our
meeting today.
There has been some progress in the current
situation in Somalia. All parties in Somalia are
continuing their efforts to implement the road map for
the end of the transition. They have also taken
important steps in drafting a constitution and reforming
the Parliament. Somalia’s security forces and the
military operations of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) continue to produce significant
results. The areas under Al-Shabaab control continue to
diminish in size. The international community has paid

12-20465

greater attention and made greater inputs into the
situation in Somalia. We now face a rare historic
window of opportunity to address the question of
Somalia. At the same time, we should also be aware of
the serious challenges facing Somalia in the political,
security and humanitarian spheres.
Effectively implementing the road map is key to
lasting peace and stability in Somalia. All parties
concerned in Somalia should take advantage of the
current favourable opportunity by fully implementing
the road map and concluding the transition on
schedule. The international community should also
provide greater support to Somalia’s Transitional
Federal Government (TFG). The TFG should maintain
its internal unity, which is important in order to ensure
peace and stability in the country.
China has noted that the Transitional Federal
Parliament is facing a number of serious internal
differences. We hope that all parties concerned can
strengthen their communication and mutual trust,
addressing their differences through dialogue so as to
avert any unnecessary disruption in the peace process
in Somalia.
China welcomes the achievements registered by
the Somali security forces and AMISOM in their
military operations. China appreciates the contributions
made by the United Nations, the African Union, other
international and regional organizations and the
Governments of Uganda, Burundi, Kenya, Ethiopia and
Djibouti.
We hope that Somalia’s TFG can take effective
measures to bring about peace and stability in the area
under its control. The African Union is playing a
crucial role in addressing Somalia’s problems. The
United Nations should attach great importance to its
requests and recommendations.
The AU recently adopted a strategic concept for
the future operations of AMISOM that calls for an
increase in its troop strength, an expansion of its areas
of responsibility and an increase in United Nations
logistical support, which will help to promote peace
and stability in Somalia. China welcomes those
recommendations and hopes that the Security Council
will respond positively to them.
China remains concerned at the serious
humanitarian situation in Somalia. We appreciate the
relief efforts undertaken by the international

15

S/PV.6701

humanitarian organizations operating there and urge all
parties concerned fully to cooperate with the
international community in that respect. We call upon
the international community to continue to provide
Somalia with more effective support.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Somalia is
experiencing important changes at several levels. We
fully subscribe to the Secretary-General’s assessment
that it is time to take advantage of the existing window
of opportunity in three different but interlinked
dimensions: the security, humanitarian and political
dimensions.
I should therefore like to start by thanking you,
Madam President, for having convened today’s debate,
which brings together key partners to exchange views
at this critical juncture for Somalia, and also for your
important statement.
Allow me to greet the Ministers of Azerbaijan,
Kenya and Uganda and to thank them for their very
useful contributions to our debate, and also to thank
Under-Secretary-General
Lynn
Pascoe
and
Commissioner Lamamra for their very comprehensive
briefings.
Portugal agrees with the assessment that it is
essential to consolidate the gains made on the ground,
both in Mogadishu and elsewhere in the country, by
ensuring the delivery of basic services to the
population,
promoting
good
governance
and
safeguarding peace and security in Somalia. Doing so
will ensure that the efforts and sacrifices made by the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
regional partners and the Somali security forces, all of
which we commend, will also be honoured.
Safeguarding peace and security is a task to be
fulfilled in the first instance by the Somali military and
police forces. That is an objective to which we will
continue to contribute, namely through the European
Union’s training mission in Somalia.
Nevertheless, AMISOM has played, and will
continue to play, a crucial role in supporting and
protecting the Transitional Federal Institutions. We
reiterate our support for the Mission and look forward
to the Secretary-General’s report in the light of the
recent recommendations of the African Union Peace
and Security Council for AMISOM’s future operations.

positively contribute to filling the security vacuum
created in the areas liberated from Al-Shabaab’s
presence. In that regard, we express our appreciation to
Burundi and Uganda for their willingness to deploy
additional troops to reach the current United Nationsauthorized strength of 12,000 troops, and we pay
tribute to the courage of and the sacrifices made by
their soldiers.
We take this opportunity also to acknowledge the
efforts made so far by all partners involved in military
action to minimize the negative impact of military
intervention on Somali civilians, and we encourage
them to continue to do so, as well as to promote the
safety and welfare of civilians fleeing conflict and the
food crisis in the country.
Despite the positive trends, Al-Shabaab attacks,
which are still a reality, along with continuing famine
throughout the country and the piracy off the coast of
Somalia, highlight the importance of ensuring the
successful implementation of the road map, as military
action alone will not create lasting peace in Somalia.
Within the framework of the Kampala Accord and
the road map to end the transition in Somalia, some
progress has been achieved, the most recent being the
holding of the Garowe constitutional conference.
However, many challenges still lie ahead. We call on
the signatories to the Kampala Accord to ensure
cohesion, unity and focus on the completion of the
priority tasks, so that the transitional period may
indeed come to an end in August.
As Portugal has stated previously, it is also of
paramount importance to ensure inclusiveness and
representativeness throughout that process — and we
recall to that end the constructive role that women can
play in that context — as well as ensuring full respect
for human rights.
On the humanitarian front, we remain deeply
concerned over the prolonged nature of the crisis and
the famine that continues to prevail throughout the
country. We are nevertheless encouraged by the
enduring efforts being made on the ground by all the
humanitarian partners against a background of very
challenging conditions. However, assistance will be
fruitful only if it reaches those in need in a timely way.
To that end, we urge all partners to ensure full and
unhindered access for humanitarian aid across Somalia.

At the same time, Portugal believes that the
acceleration of the deployment of additional troops will

16

12-20465

S/PV.6701

The Secretary-General’s visit to Somalia was an
unequivocal sign of the political commitment of the
international community to the country and its people.
We call on the Somali parties to continue to pursue the
path towards peace and stability. For its part, Portugal
will continue its efforts within various forums to help
to define a strategy that comprehensively addresses the
multiple challenges that Somalia faces at the political,
security, humanitarian, human rights and socioeconomic levels. In that context, we very much
welcome the upcoming conference in London.
In concluding, let me also extend a word of
appreciation for the work carried out by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga,
and the commitment of the African Union and other
regional partners to make the current moment, as
Mr. Ban Ki-moon underlined last month, “a moment of
fresh opportunities” for the future of the Somali people
(see S/PV.6681).
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to thank you, Madam President, for having
convened this meeting, which makes it possible to
strengthen the dialogue and coordination between the
African Union and the United Nations on the question
of Somalia. In that respect, I should like to thank
Commissioner Lamamra for having made the trip to
New York to present the positions of the African
Union, as well as the Ministers of Kenya and of
Uganda. Lastly, I thank Mr. Pascoe for his
presentation.
On the political front, a key milestone was
achieved with the adoption on 6 September last by the
Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs) in Somalia, the
Presidents of Puntland and of Galmudug, and
representatives of Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a of the road
map setting out the priority tasks to be carried out by
20 August 2012. The timely implementation of all
components of that road map is now imperative.
Although the TFIs face considerable challenges, they
must nevertheless take advantage without delay of the
favourable developments in the security situation in
Mogadishu so as to implement the objectives set out in
the road map. We also expect the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) to be genuinely proactive in the
fight against maritime piracy.
The report of the Secretary-General dated
9 December 2011 (S/2011/759) makes clear that
insufficient progress has been made in the

12-20465

implementation of the road map. Moreover, the
parliamentary
crisis
that
started
on
13 December with the attempt to dismiss the speaker
continues. In those conditions, our vigilance with
respect to the action of the Transitional Institutions is
only heightened.
As the Council has already pointed out, the
continuing support of the international community for
the Transitional Institutions will depend on the
implementation of the road map in the set timeframe.
Those who would impede the peace process, as well as
peace and security in Somalia, could be subject to
Security Council sanctions.
However, we must also note the positive
developments. Significant progress has been made on
the constitutional aspect of the road map and on
parliamentary reform. The national conference on the
constitutional process, which was held from 21 to
23 December 2011 in Garowe, in Puntland, was a
relative success, as it made it possible to set clear
principles for the next steps of that process. That
progress must now be consolidated and the efforts
continued and supported.
On the security front, the success of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
security forces in recent months has made it possible to
regain control of new areas of Mogadishu and its
surroundings. Such results must be welcomed, while
the troops deployed on the ground undertake their work
in particularly difficult conditions. Such progress on
the ground was confirmed by the visit of the SecretaryGeneral to Mogadishu last December, for the first time
in 18 years, and the announcement of a return of
United Nations agencies to the Somali capital. Those
are positive signs for the future, on which we can
congratulate ourselves and that we welcome.
Similarly, the intervention led by Kenya since
October 2011, which was simultaneously carried out by
Ethiopia, relying on militias in the Somali west, have
also helped to weaken Al-Shabaab. We are delighted by
that weakening of Al-Shabaab, which is an
encouraging sign for the future of the political
transition.
In that context, the African Union has submitted
detailed requests to the Security Council to strengthen
AMISOM, while the situation indeed seems
favourable. As we have heard, those requests in
particular entail raising the troop ceiling and extending

17

S/PV.6701

the scope of the logistical support package. The new
strategic concept for AMISOM on 5 January (see
S/2012/19, annex) specifies the context in which those
requests are made. That strategic concept must now
undergo a thorough political, operational and financial
review, in particular on the basis of the report that the
Secretary-General will soon submit to us.
Moreover, we recall that establishing credible
Somali security forces is also essential. That is an issue
of political credibility for the Transitional Federal
Government. It is those forces that should take over
from AMISOM as soon as possible, and thus complete
the stabilization of the country in terms of security.
I will conclude by raising the humanitarian
situation, which is still a matter of concern. Four
million people, including 3 million in the south, still
need food assistance, while access to humanitarian aid
is possible only for approximately 1.5 million people,
given the deteriorating security situation and cases of
food aid being diverted.
The
United
Nations,
like
humanitarian
non-governmental organizations, provides vital support
to the population affected by the famine in the entire
region. We continue to stand ready to respond to the
food crisis in the Horn of Africa. Unimpeded access of
humanitarian aid must be ensured.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to start by welcoming the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of South Africa, Her
Excellency Ms. Maite Nkoana-Mashabane, and by
expressing appreciation for her having agreed to
preside over our meetings this morning and this
afternoon. Secondly, I would like to thank the
representative of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, for his briefing to us, as well
as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya and the
Minister of Defence of Uganda for their statements. I
also thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for providing a briefing to
inform our discussion.
This meeting is related to the debate to be held
tomorrow on the cooperation between the African
Union and United Nations, given that the United
Nations has established an important strategic
partnership with the African Union in Somalia. The
excellent work done by the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the recent collaboration
between the United Nations and the African Union in
planning the next phase of AMISOM operations are

18

both illustrations and the product of that close
cooperation.
The historic visit of the Secretary-General and
the President of the General Assembly to Somalia took
place barely a month ago. The momentum generated by
that visit certainly contributed to the outcome of the
national constitutional conference, held in Garowe
from 21 to 23 December 2011. The principles agreed at
the conference, with the established deadlines, show
the commitment of the national institutions to complete
the transition period before 20 August.
We agree with representatives who have
underscored the importance of implementing the road
map and the Kampala Accord. It is essential for the
Transitional Federal Government to show leadership
and resolve the parliamentary crisis. It must also
improve accountability and transparency. Achieving
such goals would bolster the trust of the international
community. In this last phase of the transition period,
the political process must be inclusive and
representative of the Somali people.
We also agree with the need to make a
coordinated and consistent effort against Al-Shabaab.
We are aware that AMISOM continues to face a serious
lack of resources and, for that second phase of
operations, it needs adequate, guaranteed and
predictable funding. We appreciate the inputs provided
today, as well as the communiqué of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union of 5 January, in
which it requests the Security Council to strengthen
AMISOM (see S/2012/19, annex). We will consider
that request together with the recommendations of the
Secretary-General.
We also believe that it is important to maintain a
comprehensive approach in Somalia. The security
strategy must go hand in hand with implementing the
road map. The long-term consequences of the
humanitarian disaster and the economic development
agenda must continue to be priorities. Humanitarian
aid must continue for the time being.
In that regard, we very much hope that the
upcoming meetings — both the conference in London
in February and, later, the United Nations conference
in Istanbul — will help to bring the transitional period
in Somalia to an end and lead to a more stable and
solid system of governance. Lastly, we support the
statement to the press to be made following this

12-20465

S/PV.6701

meeting and we welcome the efforts of the United
Kingdom in preparing it.

wider engagement of the United Nations peacekeeping
architecture, can be enlisted for the purpose.

Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We thank you, Madam, for
convening this meeting. We welcome the Foreign
Ministers of Azerbaijan and Kenya and the Minister of
Defence of Uganda, and thank them for their
statements. We also welcome the Foreign Minister of
Uganda, and thank the Under-Secretary General for
Political Affairs and the African Union (AU)
Commissioner for Peace and Security for their
briefings.

We share the concern expressed by speakers
about the situation in Somalia. Drought and famine
have exacerbated the humanitarian situation. Noting
that all international projections point to the
continuation of the humanitarian crisis into 2012, we
call upon the international partners to remain seized of
the matter.

Eighteen years ago on a hot summer day,
24 Pakistani peacekeepers wearing the United Nations
Blue Helmet laid down their lives in Mogadishu while
saving their colleagues belonging to other nations.
Fifty-seven Pakistani soldiers were injured in the
incident. Pakistan’s association with the cause of
Somali peace has grown ever since. This loss did not
deter us from continuing our engagement with Somalia
and our Somali brethren, whose cause of lasting peace
and stability Pakistan has supported all along. We
therefore associate ourselves strongly with the purpose
of this meeting and value the briefings given earlier.
We shall work for Security Council’s sustained
engagement with Somalia and encourage contacts with
and coherence in the work of the African Union on the
subject.
We extend our full support to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and welcome the
strategic concept of its operations, which has been
endorsed by the African Union Peace and Security
Council. The briefing of the countries contributing
troops to AMISOM provided us with an important
insight into the challenges faced by them in
implementing their mandate with sparse resources. We
commend their efforts. Predictable and continuous
funding for AMISOM must be ensured. The increase of
AMISOM uniformed personnel from 12,000 to 17,731
will help consolidate the gains made recently. A wellequipped and motivated AMISOM can better deliver
on the ground. The international partners of Somalia
and the Security Council must work in tandem to
improve peacekeeping operations in Somalia.
The development and enhancement of the
security forces of the Transitional Federal Government
are essential ingredients of the strategic concept. We
believe that international assistance, including through

12-20465

On the political front, we welcome the progress
made towards constitution-making, as manifested in
the Garowe Conference. Such progress paves the way
for the smoother implementation of Kampala Accord
and the political road map, as well as an amicable
resolution of the current parliamentary crisis. In this
regard, we support efforts of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the AU and the United
Nations. We look forward to the London conference
and hope that it will prove to be an important milestone
in Somalia’s journey towards peace and stability.
Somalia’s multidimensional challenges and
problems necessitate a comprehensive approach that
takes into account political, security, economic and
environmental factors. Such an approach will also help
end the menace of piracy off the coast of Somalia. We
believe that the African Union’s sustained engagement
with Somalia augurs well for peace and stability in that
country and the subregion. The Security Council would
do well to seize this opportunity and make amends for
years of neglect suffered by Somalia.
Pakistan has worked for peace in Somalia over
the years, including in our previous term on the
Security Council. We have also been active in the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation Contact Group on
Somalia and the United Nations Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. We will remain a
steadfast partner of Somalia.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): We
welcome you to the Council today, Madam, as well as
the Foreign Minister of Azerbaijan, and we thank you
both for your statements.
I would like to thank African Union (AU) Peace
and Security Commissioner Lamamra and UnderSecretary-General Pascoe for their briefings. I would
also like to thank the Ministers of Kenya and Uganda
for their presentations and for the deep commitment
and valuable support their countries have shown to

19

S/PV.6701

Somalia. Working closely with the representatives of
the troop-contributing countries, the joint United
Nations-AU assessment mission has done excellent
work in providing the basis for the briefings we have
heard today.
Somalia continues to face Africa’s most complex
challenges. Although famine conditions have eased in
some parts of the country, 3.7 million Somalis are still
in need of humanitarian assistance. Nearly 1 million
Somalis live in exile, and 1.5 million are displaced and
experiencing famine conditions. All parties must
ensure immediate and unfettered access to those in
need of emergency humanitarian assistance.
We should like to thank Member States for their
generous support of the United Nations 2011 Somalia
consolidated appeal, which was funded at 82 per cent.
Still, there are many gaps. For example, the protection
cluster was funded at only 17 per cent, thwarting
efforts to better protect vulnerable women and girls.
The recently launched 2012 consolidated appeal
requests $1.5 billion. The United States urges Member
States to support this appeal. Total United States
humanitarian assistance to the region since 1 October
2010 is $870 million, $250 million of which have been
used for Somalia.
Meanwhile, Al-Shabaab continues its despicable
acts, including suicide bombings, attacks on civilians
and humanitarian workers, and the expulsion of
humanitarian organizations at the height of the world’s
gravest humanitarian catastrophe. At the same time, we
have a moment of opportunity to turn the tide of
violence, poverty and despair in Somalia. The
remarkable courage of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and its Ugandan and Burundian
troops has helped to liberate Mogadishu from
Al-Shabaab’s occupation. We welcome Djibouti’s
deployment and urge the African Union and Djibouti
promptly to resolve any remaining questions about how
best to integrate Djiboutian troops into the Mission.
Kenya and Ethiopia have thrown their weight behind
the effort to defeat Al-Shabaab, and we welcome their
contributions as well.
The Kampala Accord, the road map and the
Garowe Conference outcome have all created
momentum for critical political reforms that must
complement early security gains. As difficult as it is for
all of us at a time of severe resource austerity, it is
imperative that the international community seize the

20

moment in Somalia. We must come together and rise to
meet these new challenges. It would be foolish to turn
our backs on our collective successes thus far. They are
our shared responsibility.
We have listened carefully to the African Union’s
calls to increase AMISOM’s troop ceiling beyond the
current mandated strength, and to the various proposals
to expand the use of United Nations-assessed funding
to support AMISOM. We await further details from the
AU, particularly concerning the command-and-control
architecture, as well as the Secretariat’s report,
including
its
cost
analysis
of
the
AU’s
recommendations, and the assessment made by the
United Nations Support Office for AMISOM of support
needs for the AU’s operations outside of Mogadishu.
We will give these proposals thorough and prompt
consideration, and call for a follow-on discussion as
soon as practical.
The United States intends to continue its strong
bilateral support to AMISOM troop-contributing
countries (TCCs). To date, we have committed more
than $337 million worth of training, equipment and
logistic support to AMISOM and its TCCs — in
addition to our assessment for the United Nations
Support Office for AMISOM. Furthermore, we have
committed more than $106 million worth of training,
equipment and other support to develop the capacity of
Somali security forces. We urge other Member States
to provide in-kind support or contributions to the Trust
Fund, without caveats, to fund urgently needed
projects, including reimbursement for contingentowned equipment. As AMISOM expands its footprint,
it is imperative that it have predictable and uncaveated
funding to sustain its operations.
While AMISOM plays a critical role, a coherent
and achievable political strategy must be in place. The
Kampala Accord and road map to end the transition are
key to achieving long-lasting peace and stability in
Somalia. We call upon all Transitional Federal
Institutions (TFIs), including Parliament as well as
other signatories, to meet their obligations and
responsibilities for the implementation of the road
map. Let me be absolutely clear on this point: we will
hold the road map signatories to account. They are
responsible for achieving the tasks outlined in the road
map, including an agreed upon constitution,
parliamentary reform and credible and transparent
elections. Any further support by the United States will
be contingent upon the successful completion of the

12-20465

S/PV.6701

key tasks of the road map. We will stand by Somalia’s
side, but we are prepared to walk away if the TFG and
the TFIs cannot show concrete, measurable progress in
2012.
There is some reason for optimism. While the
road map process is far from complete, the December
Garowe Conference, attended by the signatories of the
road map, represents a significant and positive step
forward on the completion of the key task of
constitutional and parliamentary reform and the
indirect election of a president and speaker of
Parliament by August 2012. The Garowe principles,
agreed to by the senior political leadership, now need
further discussion and consideration by a broader
cross-section of the Somali people, including civil
society, which we urge begin with the second phase of
the Garowe conference to be held later this month. We
welcome the initiative of United Kingdom Prime
Minister David Cameron to host the 23 February highlevel conference in London to maintain momentum for
the political and security success and to build
international consensus and support for the path
forward in Somalia.
Finally, let me reiterate our strong support of the
United Nations efforts in Somalia. The historic visit
last month by the Secretary-General and the President
of the General Assembly is evidence of their
commitment to restoring peace and stability in
Somalia. The United States commends and fully
supports the decision to move the headquarters of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia to
Mogadishu
this
month.
We
thank
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mahiga for his
efforts and urge him to remain focused on compliance
with the benchmarks and timelines set by the road map
signatories in accordance with the Kampala Accord.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
let me thank you, Madam President, for presiding over
this important meeting. We deeply appreciate the time
that you are personally devoting to this issue by
presiding over the Council’s deliberations. I would also
like to place on record our appreciation for the
participation of Commissioner Lamamra and the
Ministers from Kenya, Uganda and Azerbaijan in
today’s meeting, as well as for their valuable
statements. I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.

12-20465

The situation in Somalia is at a crossroads. Two
decades of instability and insecurity have taken their
political, economic and social tolls and will require the
concerted long-term commitment of the international
community to assist the Somali people in their efforts
at restoring peace, security and economic development
in their country. The effective engagement of the
international community during 2011 helped tide over
the worst phase of the humanitarian crisis in Somalia.
However, approximately 250,000 people remain at
risk, and there is a need to persevere with our efforts to
deal with the many problems.
On the political front, the extended transition
period has seen the adoption of a comprehensive road
map by the Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs), in
accordance with the June 2011 Kampala Accord. The
implementation of the road map is critical — in
particular the drafting and adoption of the constitution,
its endorsement by a constituent assembly, and
parliamentary reforms — with a view to ending the
transition in a timely manner by August 2012. In that
regard, we have noted that several concrete measures
have been taken by the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG). We welcome that the technical
committee comprised of representatives of the TFIs,
regions and the international community met twice and
agreed to track progress through four subcommittees.
On the other hand, the TFIs have missed a number of
deadlines in the implementation of the road map. The
recent developments concerning the speaker have the
potential to derail the implementation of the road map;
they are therefore of serious concern. We therefore
urge all stakeholders to resolve their differences and
expedite the implementation of the road map.
On security front, we commend the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and TFG forces
for the gains made against Al-Shabaab. We also
commend troop-contributing countries for the
sacrifices made by their soldiers in Somalia.
Nevertheless, Al-Shabaab has shown that it is capable
of carrying out almost daily attacks, including against
high-profile targets. In that connection, we welcome
the operations being undertaken by Kenyan and
Ethiopian forces in coordination with the AMISOM
and TFG forces.
There is also a need for the Security Council to
take further measures in support of the TFG to restrict
the resources that Al-Shabaab earns from use of ports
and the export of charcoal. We request that the

21

S/PV.6701

Secretary-General submit a report to the Council on the
requirements, in terms of naval and other assets, that
would be needed for the international community to be
able to interdict vessels that visit Kishmayo and other
ports and profit Al-Shabaab and pirates in Somalia.
Such a report would allow the Council to take an
informed decision on the request of the African Union
concerning use of ports by Al-Shabaab and pirates.
Since AMISOM is the mainstay of the efforts of
the international community for dealing with the
security situation in Somalia, it is necessary that
AMISOM be further strengthened. AMISOM continues
to face serious resource gaps. The Council should
expeditiously
and
favourably
consider
the
recommendations of the African Union and troopcontributing countries on the support extended to
AMISOM by the United Nations and the international
community. Its funding must be made adequate, secure
and predictable. It is also necessary to provide
AMISOM with enablers and force multipliers such as
helicopter units, transport and engineering capabilities.
We support their inclusion within the United Nations
support package.
There is also a need to expand TFG forces and to
strengthen their capacities for the long-term stability
and security of Somalia. New recruitments have to be
undertaken, as well as full training and the provision of
proper equipment. We call on the Member States to
make uncaveated contributions to the United Nations
and African Union trust funds for AMISOM and to
enhance their support for TFG forces. For its part,
India contributed $2 million to the African Union and
United Nations Trust Funds, without any caveats, for
AMISOM operations last year. We stand ready to
provide further support to AMISOM.
Piracy off the coast of Somalia remains a serious
problem facing the international community. As of
31 October 2011, Somali pirates held 19 ships and 331
hostages. Combating maritime piracy is therefore an
important issue that is intrinsically linked to the
security situation in Somalia. So far, the TFIs have
paid little attention to that problem. We think that the
benchmarks on piracy in the road map outlining
transition tasks should be expeditiously implemented
by the TFIs, including in such areas as the demarcation
of an exclusive economic zone, the establishment of an
operational coast guard and a navy and the adoption of
a legal framework to address piracy, hostage-taking
and payments of ransom, among other aspects. We also

22

stand ready to help in building the capacity of the TFIs
and States in the region to take effective measures
against piracy off the coast of Somalia.
Moreover, given the growing scope and
expanding coverage of the problem, the international
community has to think about adopting a
comprehensive counter-piracy strategy. In our view,
such a strategy should involve a United Nations-led
anti-piracy force to conduct naval operations, which
would help to improve coordination in anti-piracy
operations by various naval forces. The strategy should
also provide for the enactment of national laws on
giving priority to criminalizing piracy, as defined in the
United Nations Convention of the Law of the Sea. The
strategy should contain measures to effectively sanitize
the Somali coastline and identify safe corridors and
buffer zones.
India has already taken several steps, including
anti-piracy patrols in the Gulf of Aden since 2008, and
has also deployed its ships in the eastern and northeastern Arabian Sea. That has helped to neutralize
several attempts at piracy. While we will continue our
counter-piracy operations, there is also an urgent need
for the international community to address the serious
problem of hostage-taking by pirates and the
consequent humanitarian problems faced by hostages
and their families.
In conclusion, the situation in Somalia calls for
the enhanced engagement of the international
community with the Somali federal and regional
authorities to comprehensively address the multitude of
problems in the political, security, humanitarian and
counter-piracy fields. The Council should stand ready
to take the lead in all of those efforts.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate South Africa on
having assumed the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January, as well as to welcome you,
Madam Minister, as you lead the Council in its
discussions today. I also wish to thank your country for
having
organized
this
meeting,
in
which
representatives of the African Union and countries of
the subregion are taking part, specifically Kenya and
Uganda. I welcome the presence of their distinguished
representatives in the Chamber. Finally, I wish to thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs and
the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union for their briefings.

12-20465

S/PV.6701

Togo welcomes the fact that Somalia is truly a
central concern of the Security Council, which last year
held several meetings and adopted a number of
resolutions on issues related to that country.
The situation in Somalia, which has long been
unstable, has recently been taking a positive turn in the
political, security and humanitarian assistance areas, as
detailed in the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral, issued on 9 December 2011 (S/2011/759).
My country welcomes the adoption, by the
Transitional Federal Institutions, of the road map for
ending the Somali transition by 20 August. The success
of that comprehensive programme depends on the
willingness of the various political actors to work
together. My country urges them to do so. Obviously,
that success is also contingent on the provision of
sustained and meaningful financial support by the
international community.
While the future seems promising for Somalia,
the present still remains a cause for deep concern in
terms of the security situation. In his report, the
Secretary-General confirms that the capital city of
Mogadishu, which is now controlled almost entirely by
the Transitional Federal Government, is not safe from
indiscriminate attacks carried out by armed elements
and former Al-Shabaab fighters wearing Transitional
Federal Government uniforms.
Suicide attacks are terrorizing the population and
justify the deployment of additional troops to control
the 16 districts of the capital. However, Mogadishu is
obviously not the only city in Somalia. Somalis are
being targeted by Al-Shabaab in other regions of the
country. In that regard, we are pleased that the
countries deploying troops to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), as well as other
countries of the region, agreed to continue joint
planning activities in order to develop options for tying
together all ongoing military operations in Somalia into
a coordinated and coherent effort against Al-Shabaab,
as well as to extend the authority of the Transitional
Federal Government beyond the capital.
The execution of that ambitious plan, in a country
where weapons are in wide circulation and can be
bought for next to nothing, requires troops and
additional resources. That is why the African Union
Peace and Security Council is justified in requesting
that the Security Council increase the number of

12-20465

AMISOM troops, which could reach a strength of
17,000.
Togo welcomes the conclusions of the meeting of
the African Union Peace and Security Council held on
5 January, in which formal recommendations were
made to expand the force as a necessary step towards
improving the security situation in Somalia and
achieving peace and reconciliation by implementing
the Kampala Accord and the Mogadishu road map.
The fight against insecurity in the world is being
waged, as evidenced by the measures currently under
consideration by the Security Council. Nevertheless,
insecurity on the high seas persists. Although the
frequency of acts of piracy has diminished to some
extent, several ships and dozens of hostages remain in
the hands of pirates.
The fight against piracy should be merciless, as
the success of that phenomenon in Somalia is being
emulated elsewhere, in particular in the Gulf of
Guinea. The fight should be coordinated. Any
assistance provided to the countries of the subregion in
patrolling their coastlines must effectively confront the
pirates. In that context, Togo welcomes the dynamic
steps taken by the European Union, NATO and
Combined Task Force 151, a multinational coalition
naval force, which have reduced the number of attacks
on and seizures of ships.
Togo reiterates its support for the relevant
Security Council resolutions on the issue of piracy and
invites the States of the region to join forces with the
international community, not only to hunt down the
pirates but also, most important, to cut off their means
of support. It is encouraging to note that the United
Nations has become very much involved in that fight
by cooperating closely with such international
organizations
as
the
International
Maritime
Organization (IMO). In the course of the twentyseventh session of its biennial Assembly, on
30 November 2011, the IMO adopted a resolution on
piracy and armed robbery against ships in waters off
the coast of Somalia. By doing so, the IMO renewed
the commitment of its members to effectively continue
the combat that scourge with a view to eliminating it
entirely, while at the same time respecting international
law. But it also called upon countries whose ships are
flying their flag to adopt precautionary measures to
help prevent attacks and to provide security for ships.

23

S/PV.6701

We feel that it is important to point out that the
support provided to the Transitional Federal
Government authorities to tackle such criminal acts
should not only be focused on material means, but also
on capacity-building and judicial assistance in order to
make it possible to prosecute the pirates who have been
arrested.
It is clear that all the sacrifices made by
AMISOM’s soldiers, all the hardships experienced by
the Somali people and all the material and financial
commitments made by the international community
will only be rewarded by peace in Somalia if the
measures taken by the Security Council are upheld by
all States. Violations prevent a swift settlement of the
matter, which would only worsen the hardship felt by
the Somali population.
Togo believes that the countries of the Horn of
Africa should overcome their differences and pool their
efforts with a view to freeing neighbouring Somalia
from the tyranny of interest groups and to allow the
subregion as a whole to enjoy peace, security and
stability.
I would like to conclude by briefly referring to
the humanitarian situation, which, although tragic a
few weeks ago, has improved gradually thanks to the
action taken by humanitarian organizations and to the
aid provided by several countries, which Togo
welcomes. Protection and support for refugees should
continue to be of major concern for the United Nations.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, let me
welcome you, Madam President, and thank you for
convening today’s meeting and presiding over it. It is
an important meeting that we are having today on
Somalia.
I would like to join others in thanking UnderSecretary-General Lynn Pascoe and Ambassador
Lamamra for their briefings. By the same token, I
would like to welcome the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kenya, Mr. Moses Wetangula; the
Minister of Defence of Uganda, Mr. Crispus Kiyonga;
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan,
Mr. Elmar Mammadyarov.
Let me focus briefly on three points, namely,
first, the future posture, composition and support of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM);
secondly, the political state of play and the way
forward, especially after the end of the transitional

24

period; and thirdly, very briefly, the relocation of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS)
to that country, specifically to Mogadishu.
First, I would like to reiterate our strong support
for AMISOM. The African Union (AU) peacekeeping
force in Somalia provides an excellent example of an
African response to an African crisis and deserves our
continued political, strategic and financial support. We
took note of the new AU strategic concept for
AMISOM operations that was recently shared with us
(see S/2012/19, annex). We welcome the continued
commitment of the AU and its member States to the
Mission, and we commend Uganda and Burundi for
contributing troops to the peacekeeping force. We
express our sympathy for the losses they have suffered,
and we appreciate the arrival in Mogadishu of the first
troops from Djibouti.
We also took note of the communiqué of the AU
Peace and Security Council of 5 January, which
endorses the increase of the AMISOM troop level to a
strength of up to 17,700, including troops from
Djibouti and rehatted Kenyan forces. We are ready to
work constructively with other Council members to
consider enhancing the support for AMISOM.
Let me now turn briefly to my second point —
AMISOM’s recent military achievements. The
successful training of Somali security forces by the AU
training mission in Somalia and their subsequent
deployment, and especially the liberation of almost all
of Mogadishu and other parts of the country, contrast
clearly with the continued lack of political progress.
Although the Garowe meeting had positive results and
some provisions of the road map have been
implemented, we are worried about the considerable
delays in other areas and about the renewed infighting
among some of Somalia’s political players.
We call on the Transitional Federal Institutions to
make the best possible use of the remaining months
until August in order to move the transition process
forward at last. In the interests of the people of
Somalia, further progress needs to be made in such
core areas as constitutional reform, basic security,
political outreach and reconciliation, good governance
and institutional reform. At this stage, we believe that
another extension of the transitional period is neither in
the interests of the Somali people nor of the
international community.

12-20465

S/PV.6701

The Somali people and the international
community must now agree on what succeeds the
transitional arrangements. The discussion among
Somali stakeholders in Garowe in December and the
principles agreed there are a first step on that path. We
welcome the upcoming London conference to be
convoked by the British Government as an opportunity
to hold further discussions concerning the immediate
future of Somalia.
My third point relates to the recent announcement
of the Secretary-General to relocate United Nations
staff to Somalia and Mogadishu, in particular UNPOS.
My delegation has always favoured the swift relocation
of United Nations staff from Nairobi. We understand
that the process is difficult and involves personnel and
administrative challenges. Nevertheless, we are
convinced that the move will further help UNPOS to
support the Somali people and provide access to the
situation on the ground.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate you, Madam
President, on presiding over the Security Council in
this first month of 2012. I would also like to
specifically thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe and my colleague
and friend Mr. Ramtane Lamamra for their briefings. I
also welcome the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Kenya and Azerbaijan and the Minister of Defence of
Uganda.
After two decades of war, Somalia appears now
to be seeing signs of progress and hope, although we
realize that there is still a long road ahead. In recent
months, Somalia has made considerable strides in
political terms, including the signing, on 6 December
2011, of the road map and the adoption of the Garowe
principles by the Transitional Federal Government in
January 2012.
There have also been gains on the security front
following the strikes against the Al-Shabaab movement
in Mogadishu and other regions of Somalia. That
was the result of resistance by the Transitional Federal
Government and the robust measures taken by
neighbouring countries. It was also due to the ongoing
support of the international community.
However, despite those clearly important
achievements, considerable challenges remain to be
addressed. In political terms, we note the difficulties
with regard to the implementation of the road map and
the major delays in implementing several of its

12-20465

provisions. In addition, increasing tensions between the
authorities of Puntland and Somaliland as well as other
so-called regional authorities could undermine what
has been achieved politically to date.
On behalf of my country, I should like to
commend the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Mahiga, for the successful meeting held
in Garoowe, which laid out a specific timetable for
ending the transition period. In the months ahead, we
will need to work to support the Somali authorities in
this critical transition period, and we will need to
effectively support the implementation of the road map
and the capacity-building process of the Federal
Government in Somalia.
We will also need to help strengthen initiatives
aimed at national reconciliation. In humanitarian terms,
and despite the halving of the risk of hunger in certain
regions, the situation in certain regions remains very
fragile and grave, and millions of Somalis are in a
precarious state in humanitarian terms. In that regard, I
welcome the serious and outstanding efforts made by
the United Nations, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and non-governmental organizations,
which have supported the people of Somalia in dealing
with the varied challenges they face in terms of
security.
Despite the major strides made, the attack in
October in Mogadishu by elements of Al-Shabaab and
their attempt to retake some Somali cities makes clear
that the process is still fragile and that that movement
still poses a threat to the safety and security of the
region as a whole. Piracy and hostage-taking represent
yet another challenge that will need to be addressed
with unrelenting determination.
In the area of security, in more general terms I
should like to thank Djibouti for its decision to deploy
troops together with the Burundian and Ugandan
troops, who are working under very difficult political
and security conditions. That reinforcement comes at
the right time, and it could help the Transitional
Federal Government to gain greater control of the
situation. We believe that the increase in AMISOM’s
troop strength to the level of 17,900 will have a major
impact on the ground, particularly given the sensitive
situation in the country. The international community
will need to provide sufficient and necessary support to
AMISOM so that it can carry out its mission
appropriately.

25

S/PV.6701

The successes achieved in recent months are the
result of enhanced cooperation and coordination
between the Somali authorities and various actors and
organizations, including the League of Arab States, the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the neighbouring countries. In that
regard, we hope that this cooperation will continue and
be strengthened so that it can bolster the sincere will of
the Somali authorities to restore security and stability.
The people of Somalia have suffered for decades
from being forgotten. They are at the point of despair
with respect to international solidarity, and the
authorities are looking for assistance sufficient to face
the challenges, so that the people can have a normal
life, under stable conditions, in a sensitive and
extremely strategic region.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish) Allow
me at the outset, Madam, to welcome you and to
congratulate you on your presiding over the Security
Council today. I wish also to thank you for having
convened this very important debate on an issue that
we have been dealing with on a continuing basis owing
to its dimensions and implications.
Mr. Lynn Pascoe’s report was very detailed and
very serious, and we thank him for it. We also express
our gratitude for the statements made by the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, and by the Ministers of
Kenya and Uganda, who have made important
contributions.
In his most recent report on Somalia
(S/2011/759), the Secretary-General draws our
attention to the fragility of the situation in the country
and stresses that we must consolidate the gains made
on various fronts. Thus, while keeping in mind the fact
that the restoration of security, political stability, the
rule of law and economic development are the primary
responsibility of the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG), it is imperative that the international
community provide support in the strengthening of
State institutions.
In terms of security, the work and the presence of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is
crucial to the stabilization of Somalia. For that reason,
there is an urgent need to ensure that the Mission has at
its disposal the resources and equipment necessary to
fulfil its mandate and to improve the living conditions
of the contingents. In that regard, we welcome the

26

recommendations adopted by the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union on 5 January last with
respect to future AMISOM operations. As many
speakers have noted today, those are key elements in
the development of a comprehensive strategy in
Somalia that would promote coordination between
security and political requirements, with a view to
stabilizing the situation.
The Council has acknowledged the urgent need to
ensure predictable, reliable and timely resources to
help AMISOM discharge its mandate. The Council
must therefore give careful consideration to the request
to authorize an increased number of troops for the
Mission as well as to other recommendations contained
in the African Union communiqué. As forces
authorized by the Council are being deployed, they
must also have the resources and equipment necessary
to fulfil their mandate in Mogadishu and beyond.
In order to consolidate the security and military
gains achieved, we must provide greater technical and
financial resources as well as training to the TFG
forces so that they are able to ensure the security of the
population. It is also crucial that there be a chain of
command within the militias associated with the TFG
and that they be truly subordinated to the TFG
authorities.
We cannot fail to recall that the humanitarian
situation remains very serious and that the fragility of
the situation requires sustained, coordinated efforts on
the part of the Organization and the international
community. We must ensure that emergency assistance
is increasingly linked to the establishment of
conditions conducive to ensuring food security and
long-term means of survival, so as to contribute to the
development of sustainable structures following the
crisis and to avert future emergencies.
In conclusion, I should like to acknowledge once
again the significant contribution made by the African
Union in the quest for peace in Somalia and to urge all
of the relevant players to continue to participate
constructively and comply with their obligations in the
implementation of the road map so as to make it
possible to comply with the timelines set in the context
of the finalization of the transition period by August
2012.
Mr. Zhukov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Allow me to welcome you, Madam, as
President of the Security Council at today’s meeting.

12-20465

S/PV.6701

We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General Pascoe and
Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner for the Peace and
Security of the African Union, for their briefings on the
situation in Somalia. We listened carefully to the
statements of Mr. Wetangula, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kenya, Mr. Kiyonga, Minister of Defence of
Uganda, and Mr. Mammadyarov, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Azerbaijan.
The year that is beginning should be critical in
the history of Somalia, both in terms of moving the
peace process forward and of nation-building. The
implementation of the road map and dealing with
Al-Shabaab should be coordinated and dynamic. That
requires the robust political will of Somalis and the due
support of the international community. Next, we need
to strengthen those positive trends. In that context, we
welcome the holding of the national consultative
conference on the future constitution.
Against that backdrop, unfortunately, there have
been tensions over the attempt to oust the speaker of
the Parliament. That kind of incident could impede the
unifying of political forces at the current critically
important stage. The criteria for consolidating the
Transitional Federal Institutions would be the timely
completion of the transitional period and laying the
basis for the further development of the country.
Success in tackling Al-Shabaab is a necessary
precondition for advancing the political process.
Despite the clear military progress in southern and
central Somalia, the recent clashes in Mogadishu show
that Al-Shabaab’s military capacity still exists. Efforts
need to be stepped up in that area.
We welcome the agreement by the African Union
on steps to extend the mandate, to strengthen the
military capacity and to work out the concept of future
operations of the African Union Mission in Somalia.
We welcome the readiness of Djibouti and Kenya to
provide troops to the African Union Mission, which
continue to be a key factor in solving the Somali crisis.
Such steps are in line with the work of the
international community and the African Union
towards normalizing the situation in Somalia, including
tackling extremism and piracy. Russia will continue to
support the African Union in its efforts to normalize
the situation in Somalia. Our position is that military
measures can be used only to complement the political
process. That therefore continues to be a challenge,
primarily for Somalis themselves.

12-20465

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burundi.
Mr. Niyonzima (Burundi): The Burundi
Government will never tire of expressing its gratitude
to the Security Council and the international
community for the multiform support that they gave to
our people during critical moments of the fratricidal
war. Indeed, without their invaluable assistance, we
simply would not have been able to put our country
back on the rails of peace and security.
The Burundi people therefore understand better
than many the meaning of peace and security. For the
Government of Burundi, there is no other way to show
our thankfulness than by sending our troops wherever
there is a threat to peace and security on this planet.
The Burundi Government also wants to thank the
African Union Commission for the wise and
constructive guidance to our countries.
While we watched the whole world standing up
to fight piracy in the international waters along the
coastal part of the Horn of Africa, the Somali unrest
has somehow been perceived, for quite some time, as a
Burundian and a Ugandan issue. However, the recent
visit of the President of the General Assembly and the
Secretary-General to Somalia was a political message,
sent not only to the region but also to the whole world,
that peace in Somalia is a concern of the international
community. We therefore commend the initiative of
other regional countries to get on board and join our
forces in combating the rule of a dangerous
fundamentalism.
The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) is not a peacekeeping mission. A
peacekeeping mission is normally deployed upon
agreement between belligerents. Instead, AMISOM is a
target. It is considered by some Somalis as an
occupation force. Today, as in the past, a military
commitment in Mogadishu has never been a
recreational tour. It is therefore not a secret if I say that
Burundi has paid dearly in terms of human sacrifice.
That situation triggered some internal fears and,
as part of a democracy, some political activists tried to
politically exploit the sad Burundian ongoing
experience in Somalia. But let me say it again — for
the Burundi Government, nothing will be strong
enough to divert or dilute our dedication to peace and
stability, not only in Somalia but also wherever our
contribution is needed.

27

S/PV.6701

The challenging situation in Somalia requires
more in terms of troops, logistics and, most important,
dedication. The Burundi Government supports the
expansion of AMISON, and remains flexible as to the
decisions of the African Union and the Security
Council.

The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

In conclusion, I would like to thank all for paying
tribute to Burundi for its effort and commitment in
Somalia.

28

12-20465
