UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/16
28 May 1998
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3887th meeting of the Security Council, held on 28 May 1998, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Georgia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral concerning the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, of 11 May 1998
(S/1998/375 and Add.1).
"The Security Council is gravely concerned by the recent outbreak of
violence in the zone of conflict, which has resulted in the loss of human
life and a significant outflow of refugees, and calls upon the parties to
observe strictly the Moscow Agreement of 14 May 1994 on a Ceasefire and
Separation of Forces (S/1994/583, annex I) (the Moscow Agreement) and also
the ceasefire protocol signed on 25 May 1998, as well as all their
obligations to refrain from the use of force and to resolve disputed issues
by peaceful means only.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned by the recent slowing of the
peace process. The Council calls upon the parties to display the necessary
political will to achieve substantial results on the key issues of the
negotiations within the framework of the United Nations-led peace process
and through direct dialogue, with full respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Georgia.
"The Security Council reaffirms the right of all refugees and
displaced persons affected by the conflict to return to their homes in
secure conditions, calls upon both sides to fulfil their obligations in
this regard, and welcomes in this context the efforts undertaken by the
members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), as set out in
document S/1998/372, in support of the return of refugees and of a
comprehensive political settlement.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned that the deteriorating
security situation in the Gali region gravely impedes the work of aid
workers, personnel of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia and of
the Collective Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent
98-14699 (E)

280598

/...

S/PRST/1998/16
English
Page 2

States. The Council calls upon the parties to honour fully their
commitments to take all measures in their power to improve the security
situation, including the creation of a joint mechanism for investigation
and prevention of acts that represent violations of the Moscow Agreement
and terrorist acts in the zone of conflict.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to consult both
sides on the basis of paragraphs 26, 48 and 49 of his report, in particular
on the concept of the self-protection unit outlined therein, and on other
options as appropriate, in close cooperation with the group of Friends of
the Secretary-General, bearing in mind the need to secure the consent of
both parties to the Secretary-General’s proposal. The Council also
requests the Secretary-General to report to the Council on the outcome of
those consultations as soon as possible and no later than 12 June 1998."

-----
