United Nations

S/PV.4092 (Resumption 2)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth Year

4092nd Meeting
Wednesday, 26 January 2000, 12.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holbrooke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Listre
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Chowdhury
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fowler
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Qin Huasun
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Miss Durrant
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mohammad Kamal
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kasse
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gurirab
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hamer
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gatilov
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Tekaya
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Yel’chenko
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir Jeremy Greenstock

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

00-26045 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The meeting was resumed on Wednesday, 26 January
2000, at 12.10 p.m.
The President: We have a very busy agenda, very
limited time and a presidential statement to issue.
Let me thank those nations that have agreed to
circulate their statements; I will ask the Secretariat to do so.
Those countries are Brazil, Cape Verde, Colombia, Eritrea,
India, Israel, Lesotho, Norway, Tanzania and the United
States. If any other nation wishes to distribute its statement,
we will be happy to do so.
Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): During its presidency of
the Security Council in September of last year, the
Netherlands organized a special meeting to help the Council
focus more closely on the daunting issues facing Africa at
the outset of what we hoped would be the “African
century”. Surely the current “month of Africa”, so
energetically sponsored by you, Mr. President, is an
auspicious first step at the start of this new century.
We were impressed by the attendance at this debate of
so many heads of State from the countries most
immediately involved in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Surely this bodes well for the future of that troubled
region. In particular, we hope that further talks will produce
a realistic timetable for the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement.
We have before us a very thoughtful and
thought-provoking report of the Secretary-General
(S/2000/30). It makes the point that the international
community’s intensified involvement in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is predicated upon the renewed and
strengthened commitment of the parties to the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. It makes it just as clear that there is
no realistic alternative to the Lusaka Agreement. It is
therefore all the more distressing that the Agreement is
being violated systematically. We urge the signatories to
end all military action in violation of the Agreement.
Priority attention needs to be accorded to improving
the disappointing performance of the Joint Military
Commission (JMC). The Netherlands supports the JMC
financially; in fact, international financial support for the
JMC is such that lack of resources cannot credibly be said
to be an obstacle to the JMC’s taking the key role foreseen
in the Agreement. The JMC needs to meet more frequently
to monitor the numerous ceasefire violations. The opening
of a permanent JMC secretariat should be considered in
order to facilitate a more hands-on approach. We call on all
2

4092nd meeting (Resumption 2)
26 January 2000
parties and the Organization of African Unity to renew
their efforts to improve the JMC’s effectiveness and
credibility. Without a reinvigorated JMC, the efforts of
the United Nations will fall on barren soil.
A new political arrangement is necessary inside the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including the
development of democratic and accountable State
structures which address the problems of multi-ethnicity
and power sharing. While we regret that the national
dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
taken so long to get off the ground, we look forward to
early results from President Masire’s endeavours as the
facilitator of this process. I would second the United
Kingdom Minister’s view that a starting date for this
dialogue should ideally be announced this week. The
Netherlands firmly pledges its financial support to the
process.
A key threat to the Lusaka Agreement is constituted
by the Interahamwe and former Rwandese Armed Forces,
whose activities, past and present, are at the root of the
conflict. Their disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration into society, though a monumental task, will
be a crucial step in the peace process. The restoration of
the territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will need to go hand in hand with the
accommodation of the legitimate security needs of its
neighbours. In fact, such is the involvement of regional
Powers in this conflict that in due course, an international
conference will need to address the question of peace,
stability, democracy and development in the Great Lakes
region as a whole.
The purpose of our current debate is twofold: apart
from reaffirming the parties’ commitment to Lusaka, it
will serve to inform the Council’s response to the
Secretary-General’s recommendations for the second
phase of the United Nations operation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Despite the obvious risks of
deployment in an environment of instability, the
Netherlands supports the dispatch of 500 observers, as
proposed in the Secretary-General’s report, if adequate
protection can be ensured. We must get it right this time,
and we must be willing to adopt the right mandate with
matching resources. The success of your efforts, Mr.
President, to bring the United States Congress on board
will, of course, be crucial to our ability to find these
resources.
The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has only aggravated the misery caused during a

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
long history of human rights violations. All over the
country, the parties to the conflict have been involved in
such violations. We call on the parties to respect human
rights and ensure the punishment of those who violate
them.
Finally, there are two important aspects that directly
and indirectly fuel the conflict: the arms trade and the
exploitation of natural resources.
The Council, in September last year under the
Netherlands presidency, devoted a special session to small
arms and called for measures to discourage arms flows to
countries in conflict. The Council, on that occasion, also
referred to the possibility of voluntary and regional
moratoriums to facilitate reconciliation. These
recommendations apply very specifically to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in view of the large quantities of
weapons on its soil. As a first step, we would call on
United Nations Member States that have not done so yet to
adopt the policy and the guiding principles of the European
Union Code of Conduct and refrain from arms exports to
the Great Lakes region.
The exploitation of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s economic resources by several parties helps to
continue the conflict, enabling them to finance military
expenditures. We need to redress this situation quickly and
prevent the illegal exploitation of these resources. Perhaps
it would be feasible for the Secretary-General to report
back to the Security Council on this aspect on the basis of
findings of a panel of experts, similar to the approach that
has been followed in the case of Angola. We support
wholeheartedly the very sensible suggestions made to this
effect by the ministers of France and, on an earlier
occasion, the United Kingdom.
The President: As this may be his last appearance
before the Security Council, we warmly welcome
Ambassador Qin Huasun.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation wishes warmly to welcome the
participation of the heads of States of so many African
countries; the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), Mr. Salim Salim; and Sir Ketumile
Masire to the Security Council’s consultations on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the
same time, we would like to thank you, Sir, for the efforts
you have made and for this innovative arrangement.

4092nd meeting (Resumption 2)
26 January 2000
To help the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo free themselves from the sufferings of war and
to bring peace to that country poses a serious challenge to
the international community, especially the Security
Council. The Chinese delegation has made repeated
appeals to the international community and the United
Nations to commit the necessary financial and human
resources as soon as possible to resolve the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, so as to avoid paying
an even higher price in the future. To resolve this
conflict, African countries and the international
community made unremitting mediation efforts and
brought together the various sides to the conflict to sign
last July’s Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. Regrettably,
however, the Agreement has not been effectively
observed or implemented. The long-awaited United
Nations peacekeeping operation has yet to be put in place,
even though the issue has been the subject of lengthy
discussion in the Council.
We are gratified to see the detailed report that the
Secretary-General has prepared on United Nations action
in the next phase. In the report, the Secretary-General
proposes that military observers and troops be sent to the
region. We hope that the Council will make full use of
this rare opportunity, while heads of State of the African
countries concerned are gathered here in New York, and
move promptly. We support the adoption by the Security
Council of the presidential statement before us and hope
that it will mark a new starting point for the support of
the international community for the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the deployment of
a United Nations peacekeeping operation there.
The Chinese delegation has listened with great
interest to all previous speakers, including the heads of
State of African countries, Secretary-General Kofi Annan
and the Secretary-General of the OAU, Mr. Salim Salim.
I now wish to take this opportunity to emphasize the
following points.
First, the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must be fully
respected and safeguarded. This is a prerequisite for
resolving the conflict.
Secondly, the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, as the
basis for resolving the conflict, should be implemented in
full and scrupulously. The Agreement is a worthy attempt
by the African people to resolve their conflicts. The
mediation efforts made by President Chiluba, the OAU

3

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4092nd meeting (Resumption 2)
26 January 2000

and the Southern African Development Community should
be respected and supported by all sides.

other representatives who have come here for this
extraordinary meeting.

Thirdly, the timely deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is an essential guarantee for resolving the conflict.
Having listened to the views of relevant African countries,
the Council should accelerate its consideration and
implementation of the Secretary-General’s proposal to send
up to 500 military observers and 5,500 troops to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The peacekeeping
mission should be given an appropriate mandate. This is
crucial under the current circumstances and will be a
critical test of the Security Council’s political will and
determination.

I also want to thank the representative of Egypt for
announcing that he, too, will circulate his statement. I
consider this a great act of friendship in the interests of
our effort, particularly coming from a country of such
enormous importance to all of us in Africa and around the
world.

Fourthly, all-inclusive national political dialogue is an
effective means to realize national reconciliation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the same time,
internal dialogue within the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will not be possible without a stable external
environment. The peace and reconciliation processes go
hand in hand. We welcome the appointment by
Secretary-General Annan of Sir Ketumile Masire, former
President of Botswana, as the Facilitator. We wish Sir
Ketumile every success.
Fifthly, eradicating poverty and ensuring economic
development with international assistance are the
fundamental way for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to achieve lasting peace and stability. In this connection, we
support the proposal that an international conference on
peace, stability, democracy and development in the Great
Lakes region be convened.
The road to peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will not be smooth, but we are confident that, so
long as the international community seizes its opportunities
and makes concerted efforts, and so long as the various
sides to the conflict engage in genuine reconciliation and
honour their commitments, an era of peace and stability
will soon begin for the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Great Lakes region.
The President: I thank the representative of China for
his kind words addressed to the American presidency.
I want to welcome to the Chamber the SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of African Unity, Mr. Salim
Salim; the Foreign Minister of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; the Minister of Cooperation of Uganda; and

4

Ms. Durrant (Jamaica): By convening this meeting,
the United States presidency has provided the Security
Council with an opportunity to reinvigorate the process
for peace and security in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and, by extension, in the Great Lakes region of
Africa.
Last week, the Council heard from former President
Nelson Mandela, who apprised us of the developments in
the Arusha peace process for Burundi. We recognize only
too well the interconnection between the Lusaka and the
Arusha processes and commend you, Sir, for your
foresight in making the linkage between two crisis
situations as the Council focuses on Africa this month.
It is against this background that we join previous
speakers in welcoming the participation in this meeting of
so many African leaders and the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU). Their presence
here underscores the important role which the United
Nations can play in bringing peace to the Great Lakes
region.
My delegation further wishes to thank the United
Nations Secretary-General for his comprehensive and
detailed report on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and for his valuable introductory
statement. In particular, we welcome his analysis and
recommendations, which should form the basis for action
by the Council. My delegation also wishes to express
appreciation to the Secretary-General and his special
representatives for their efforts to move the peace process
forward.
My delegation recognizes only too well the
difficulties and complexities that must be overcome in
order to achieve a durable peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We are aware of how seemingly
intractable the problems are, but no matter how difficult
it might seem to find solutions, the suffering of the
people involved impels us to use our best efforts to put an
end to their misery. We believe that, even where there

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
appears to be doubt and pessimism, the strength and
determination of a few can become a catalyst for the
movement towards peace.
My delegation has therefore been heartened by the
expressions of hope and the pledges of political will and
commitment made by all the African leaders in their
statements before the Council. We agree that it is vital to
create the conditions for lasting peace based on the full
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. The elements of
such a peace must include the security of borders of the
States concerned, their sovereignty and territorial integrity,
and their full enjoyment of their national resources.
In this connection, we support the call for the
immediate cessation of hostilities and reaffirm support for
the unity, stability and territorial integrity of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the
charter of Organization of African Unity. To this end, the
withdrawal of foreign troops from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo must take place in accordance with the
Lusaka Agreement.
Jamaica supports the pursuit of a national
inter-Congolese dialogue. This dialogue, we believe, is an
indispensable step towards national reconciliation and
lasting peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We are pleased that the former President of
Botswana, Sir Ketumile Masire, has accepted the
appointment as facilitator of that dialogue, and we wish him
success in his efforts — which deserve the material and
moral support of the international community.
The precarious security situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo continues to be a cause for concern.
The heightened military activity of armed groups and the
danger of large-scale violence among ethnic groups
seriously diminish the achievement of the goals of the
Lusaka Agreement. We urge those who believe that they
have a legitimate right to petition for justice and full
participation in the political governance of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to do so through the processes
provided at the bargaining table and not at the end of the
barrel of a gun, recognizing that there can be no military
solution to the conflict.
My delegation is deeply disturbed by the worsening
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, especially by the fact that increased insecurity in
the war zones is making it difficult for humanitarian aid
workers to have access to vulnerable populations. We have

4092nd meeting (Resumption 2)
26 January 2000
noted from the Secretary-General’s report that more than
960,000 persons are now mostly inaccessible. The
increasing number of internally displaced persons and
refugees has serious ramifications not only for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but also for the
neighbouring countries — with some 280,000 citizens of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo now being
refugees in the Republic of the Congo, Zambia and
Tanzania. We call on all the parties to the conflict to
respect the civilian and humanitarian nature of the refugee
camps and to act in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
We also wish to pay tribute to and encourage the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the World Food Programme and the nongovernmental humanitarian organizations involved in
caring for and facilitating the repatriation of refugees to
continue their work despite the difficulties encountered.
The Secretary-General’s report also highlighted the
critical food insecurity facing some 10 million persons in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the high levels
of chronic and acute malnutrition in children under five.
We urge the international community to respond
favourably to the United Nations Consolidated Appeal for
2000, and we note with deep regret that the low response
to the 1999 Appeal made it impossible for the United
Nations to provide life-saving intervention.
The Secretary-General’s report also draws attention
to reports of the victimization of children and their
recruitment as child soldiers. We agree with the
Secretary-General that in order to ensure that the lives of
children are protected, it will be necessary to act before
the fragile Ceasefire Agreement further erodes. In this
regard, the Secretary-General has pointed to the valuable
assistance that the civilian protection personnel authorized
under resolution 1279 (1999) could give, once they are in
place in ensuring a comprehensive approach to child
protection throughout all the stages of the making and
consolidating of peace and in complementing the work of
the United Nations Children’s Fund.
The Lusaka Agreement has allowed the
demobilization and rehabilitation of ex-combatants to
move forward, and we urge the parties to cooperate in
implementation of this, beginning with the vulnerable
groups: children, the handicapped and the chronically
disabled.

5

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
My delegation is concerned that inaction on the
part of the Security Council could result in continued loss
of life, further deterioration in the humanitarian situation,
and a reversal of the progress already achieved in the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. We therefore
believe that the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General’s report must be speedily acted upon.
We support the view that the Joint Military
Commission (JMC) has a key role to play and that it should
be established on a permanent basis in order to carry out its
functions. Efforts to coordinate its activities with those of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) should be continued.
Given the crucial role assigned to the JMC, it must be
provided with resources to support its operations. We must
acknowledge with appreciation the support already pledged
by several countries. Jamaica supports the expansion of
MONUC, as proposed by the Secretary-General, and the
eventual deployment of a peacekeeping mission. In this
connection, we believe that the forces involved must
operate under robust rules of engagement.
We remain firmly committed to the belief that
collective action is the best approach to addressing the
complex situation which obtains, and we wish to place on
record our appreciation of the efforts of the OAU, the
Southern African Development Community and President
Chiluba, which have resulted in significant strides towards
brokering peace in the Great Lakes region. This
notwithstanding, the Security Council cannot abdicate its
role in the maintenance of peace and international security.
The United Nations must continue to work closely with the
OAU in a coordinated way to promote mediation and
negotiations among the parties concerned and to support the
African leaders, who have sought to provide an African
solution to the crisis in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
Peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo will
not be achievable without addressing the security situation
of the entire Great Lakes region. Jamaica therefore fully
supports the holding of an international conference on peace
and security and development in the Great Lakes region, in
due course, under the auspices of the United Nations and
the OAU. It is our belief that only a holistic and integrated
approach to the crisis will result in lasting peace.
We believe that we must go forward from here
determined to make a difference in promoting peace and
security for the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the people of the Great Lakes region and the people
6

4092nd meeting (Resumption 2)
26 January 2000
of Africa. We share in the hope of those who believe that
peace and security are not only possible and attainable,
but important for the international peace and security of
us all.
The President: I would like to announce that two
more countries or organizations will waive their right to
speak. The first is Mr. Bouabid, from the International
Organization of la Francophonie, and I thank him. The
second is Japan. We will circulate both of their
statements.
Ambassador Yukio Satoh, to whom I am deeply
grateful, has asked me, however, to read two sentences
from his speech to all of you now because they are of
great importance.
“Japan is prepared to make an additional
financial contribution of $300,000 to promote a
national dialogue facilitated by Sir Ketumile Masire.
With the contribution of $200,000 already made last
November to the Joint Military Commission (JMC),
Japan’s financial contribution to the Lusaka peace
process now amounts to $500,000.”
I would ask Mr. Salim to bring this to the attention
of the facilitator as soon as possible. I think it will be
welcome news.
Mr. Yel’chenko (Ukraine): Ukraine entirely
associates itself with the judgement that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is the major challenge facing
Africa, the United Nations and the international
community as a whole. Nothing is more convincing in
this regard than the unprecedented high profile of the
Council’s meeting last Monday. Therefore, the
Government of Ukraine will support any endeavour that
can bring us closer to achieving success in coping with
the formidable task of the peaceful resolution of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is against this background that Ukraine praises the
initiative of the American presidency of the Security
Council in organizing this meeting, which already has all
grounds to become an extraordinary one.
We applaud and warmly welcome the leaders of the
countries that signed the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement,
whose very presence here gave an important signal that
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is an
achievable goal. Ukraine shares the dominant view that
the Lusaka Agreement represents the most viable basis for

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
the resolution of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Perhaps since the beginning of contemporary
international relations, diplomacy has produced hardly any
single perfect international treaties. The only technique for
achieving perfection — that is, for restoring peace,
resolving disputes or settling differences — has been the
strict implementation of the provisions of the treaties in
question. We are strongly convinced that in order to
achieve peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in the whole Great Lakes region the same
technique should be applied to the Lusaka Agreement.
Like the other members of the Security Council,
Ukraine is gravely concerned at the further deterioration of
the military and security situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and at the ongoing violations of the
ceasefire. We are also seriously worried about the
deepening of the humanitarian crisis in the region, which
we consider to be a direct result of the continuing disregard
of the Lusaka Agreement.
We strongly support the call for a renewed
commitment by the parties to that instrument. In that
connection, we are encouraged by the statements that heads
of State from the region made two days ago before the
Security Council. The Secretary-General is absolutely right
in concluding that such strengthened commitment is an
essential prerequisite for vigorous international action in
support of the Lusaka Agreement and for allocation by the
international community of the significant resources
required to that end.
At the same time, we also strongly believe that any
further hesitation on the part of the Security Council in
speeding up the United Nations deployment in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo would have a negative
effect on the peace efforts in that part of the world.
In that respect, we thank the Secretary-General for his
well-conceived recommendations for the next stage of the
deployment of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, submitted in his
report of 17 January 2000 (S/2000/30). Ukraine will
encourage the Security Council to take prompt action on
those recommendations. The deployment of United Nations
military observers will leave no excuse for further delays in
the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. We call on
the parties to reach an accord on a new, realistic and
workable calendar for implementation of the Agreement.

4092nd meeting (Resumption 2)
26 January 2000
The parties to the Agreement should pay special
attention to putting an end to the presence of foreign
troops in the Democratic Republic of the Congo when
that presence is inconsistent with the principles of the
United Nations Charter. Ukraine strongly maintains that
no consideration can justify measures taken in violation
of fundamental principles of international law, in
particular the principles of the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of States.
Furthermore, we would like to express our concern
at the reports of illegal exploitation of the economic
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
Security Council should be prepared to take concrete
measures to stop such illegal activities.
We recognize that the problem of armed groups in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo dangerously
affects the security of many States in Central Africa.
Particular emphasis has to be placed on the problem of
security on the eastern border of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We agree that launching a comprehensive
disarmament and demobilization process for the armed
groups operating in that country is a matter of urgency.
Ukraine also supports the initiative of the French
Government to convene at an appropriate stage an
international conference for the Great Lakes region to
address comprehensively all remaining root causes of the
current conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
some of which, as we know, go deep into history.
Recent events should not be forgotten either. That is
why, in our opinion, the report of the independent inquiry
into the actions of the United Nations during the 1994
genocide in Rwanda should become the subject of our
thorough consideration.
In conclusion, I would like to express our optimism
that this “week of the Democratic Republic of the Congo”
within the Security Council’s “month of Africa” will
produce very concrete results contributing to the
restoration of peace and security in the Central African
region. The presidential statement to be issued today is a
good first step. Quick Council action on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will meet the long-held
expectations of African countries and of the whole
international community, thus strengthening the credibility
of the Security Council. From what we heard on Monday,
I think there are good grounds for such optimism. Let us
work together to bring peace to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
7

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The President: I wish to thank the representative of
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for also yielding his place as
a speaker; we shall distribute the text of his statement.
Mr. Mohammad Kamal (Malaysia): In view of your
appeal for brevity, Mr. President, and as testimony to my
delegation’s readiness to cooperate with you as always, I
shall read out only excerpts from my prepared statement.
Six months have passed since the parties signed the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, but the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has not improved and
continues to be a serious cause for concern. The peace
accord is still very fragile. My delegation could not agree
more with the Secretary-General’s assessment that
“the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement remains the best
hope for the resolution of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo”. (S/2000/30,
para. 86)
We firmly believe that the future peace and stability of the
region rest on the successful implementation of the
Agreement. My delegation joins other Council members in
renewing the call on all the parties to uphold that
Agreement and to use the Joint Military Commission more
effectively to deal with allegations of violations of the
Agreement. The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo cannot be resolved without the full commitment and
cooperation of all the signatories. Having commended them
for their good judgement in signing the Agreement, we now
urge them to show greater political will and commitment to
make the process work. It is imperative that the parties
work together in good faith and contribute positively to the
smooth implementation of the Agreement.
As we remind the parties of their obligations and of
their commitment to the peace process, we should equally
remind ourselves of our own responsibilities here in the
Council. The Security Council should make good its
promise to act promptly with a view to deploying a fullfledged peacekeeping mission to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Were the United Nations to fail in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the ramifications would
almost certainly be far-reaching and wide-ranging. The very
credibility and authority of the Council would be in
question. How we respond to the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will be a litmus test of
the Council’s commitment to maintaining peace and
security in Africa. Time is of the essence, as a further delay
in the deployment of United Nations peacekeepers would
run the risk of unravelling the Lusaka Agreement.
8

4092nd meeting (Resumption 2)
26 January 2000
Malaysia welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral on further deployment of United Nations
personnel in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/2000/30). We agree fully with the view that any United
Nations force deployed in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo should necessarily be large and adequately
mandated to take up the task of monitoring the ceasefire
and verifying the withdrawal of all foreign forces. This is
in addition to the still unresolved question of who will
bear the responsibility of disarming all armed groups in
the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
While we support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation of an initial force of 5,537 officers and
men to protect military observers and civilian staff of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), we would like to
stress that this should be followed up quickly with a more
substantial presence.
The deployment of United Nations peacekeepers will
not in itself guarantee peace and security for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other countries in
the region. Those countries will have to bear the principal
responsibility for their own long-term security. Continued
support by the international community will be contingent
upon renewed and strengthened commitment by the
signatories to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. We
therefore call on the parties to cease military hostilities
forthwith and to fully ensure the security and freedom of
movement of United Nations personnel. The parties
should cease their hostile propaganda, in particular
incitements to attack unarmed civilians.
The conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo
has an external and an internal dimension. Clearly, the
final resolution of the conflict will have to take into
account both the legitimate security concerns of all the
States involved and respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of the Democratic
Republic of Congo. In our view, the role of the Joint
Military Commission is crucial to the success of the
ceasefire and the subsequent consolidation of peace. In
this regard, the Council should support the move to give
the Joint Military Commission the appropriate
enforcement authority.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its support for
the convening of an international conference on the Great
Lakes region, under the auspices of the Organization of
African Unity and the United Nations, to lay the
foundation for regional cooperation and durable peace. It
should address comprehensively all the relevant and

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
critical issues faced by the countries in the region. Such a
conference is timely now and should be given the necessary
impetus by the international community.
Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
Russia regards the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement as a real
basis for a political settlement of the problem in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for the restoration of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country and
for reaching consensus on ways to achieve national
reconciliation and unity and democratic development in the
country.
We attach great importance to close coordination
between the United Nations, the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and the Southern African Development
Community in the provision of assistance for the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement and in the
mobilization of international support. Russia welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Berhanu Dinka as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
region and of Mr. Kamel Morjane as Special Representative
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
At the same time, it is clear that the primary
responsibility for observing the ceasefire and for
implementing other specific commitments lies with the
parties that signed the Lusaka Agreement, which are
committed to taking the necessary steps to ensure the
effective work of the Political Committee and of the Joint
Military Commission.
We are sorry to see that, despite some positive
movement, there has still been no implementation of the
provision in resolution 1234 (1999) regarding the
withdrawal of uninvited forces from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, there are still massive violations of
the ceasefire, the humanitarian situation remains dramatic
and the national dialogue has not begun. We hope that the
facilitator appointed by the OAU, President Masire, will be
able to get things moving.
Russia supports a further expansion of international
efforts to find a settlement to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including deployment of a United
Nations mission in the country. The timing of such a
deployment should respond to the rate of progress in the
peace process and, when the necessary conditions exist,
should comprise a large-scale peacekeeping operation. The
necessary conditions are that the belligerents actually
respect the ceasefire, that the will to constructively resolve
disputes is clearly demonstrated and that the security of

4092nd meeting (Resumption 2)
26 January 2000
international personnel is assured. All of this is essential
to ensuring a successful operation. The failure of such an
operation would have extremely negative consequences
for the further development of the situation in the region,
and also for the authority of the United Nations and the
Security Council.
Because of the complex nature of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, any settlement will
necessarily also be complex. One of the key elements in
the process is finding the right political solution, one that
ensures security and the inviolability of the borders of all
the States in the region and that strengthens cooperation
between these States on the basis of the principles of nonintervention in the internal affairs of other States and the
non-use of force, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
The specific mechanisms and guarantees for ensuring
security and shared borders after the withdrawal of
foreign forces from the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo can be worked out within the
framework of the Lusaka Agreements on a bilateral and
regional basis with broad international support. In this
context, we support the idea of an international
conference on peace and security in the Great Lakes
region.
Russia will continue to provide assistance to the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in the context of the Lusaka Agreement and through
Security Council decisions. We are also willing to study
the possibility of Russian participation in international
efforts to respond to the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region as a
whole.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Portugal, which currently occupies the
Presidency of the European Union. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the European
Union — Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia
and Slovenia — and the associated countries Cyprus,
Malta and Turkey, as well as Iceland, align themselves
with this statement.

9

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The European Union welcomes your initiative, Mr.
President, to focus discussions of the Council during the
month of January on Africa, and today on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We also warmly welcome the
presence at this important meeting of the heads of State of
Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mozambique, Rwanda, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe. I
would also like to acknowledge the participation in this
meeting of ministers from the Governments of Belgium,
Burundi, Canada, France, Mali, Namibia and the United
Kingdom, as well as the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity.
This meeting of the Council clearly demonstrates that
there is the political will in the region and the international
community to advance peace and security in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the wider Great Lakes region.
But peace and security in the region are only achievable if
firmly rooted. The European Union believes that the Lusaka
Agreement is the most viable basis for a resolution of the
conflict.
The European Union regrets that adherence to the
provisions of the Lusaka Agreement by the parties has been
far from complete, and that implementation is way behind
schedule. Without a full and sustained commitment to the
Ceasefire Agreement, the international donor community, of
which the European Union represents a major part, will find
its ability to contribute to the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo limited.
The presence of the leaders of the States signatories to
the Lusaka Agreement in New York this week, however,
presents a critical opportunity for the parties to set this right
and make clear their commitment to the Agreement and its
implementation. We hope that one of the results of this
week’s discussions will be a clear and credible declaration
to this end. Such a declaration would offer a firm basis for
further deployment of the United Nations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
There are a number of other key targets for this week.
The European Union believes that progress must be made
to establish the essential institutions and channels that will
form the framework for the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement. In this connection, the European Union
considers that the Joint Military Commission has a crucial
role to play, and we encourage efforts towards integration
of its work with that of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
European Union also stresses the need to ensure a peaceful
and permanent process of disarmament, demobilization and
10

4092nd meeting (Resumption 2)
26 January 2000
reintegration of the militia groups currently operating in
the region. We also hope to see progress this week
towards an outline of how this will be achieved. Finally,
the European Union stands ready to give its support to the
national dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which it considers to be an essential element of
the reconciliation process. Funding by the European
Union is available to assist the political dialogue as soon
as the parties themselves show their firm readiness to
initiate the process. In this context, the European Union
welcomes the appointment of Sir Ketumile Masire as the
facilitator for the national dialogue and stands ready to
help him discharge his mandate. The European Union
stresses the need for the dialogue to begin at an early
date.
These are the objectives which we hope the parties
will work towards this week.
The European Union considers that the United
Nations, and the Security Council in particular, has a
crucial role to play in the peace process. It is the
European Union’s intention to provide the support needed
to ensure the success of MONUC in its second-phase
expansion and a subsequent third-phase peacekeeping
presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. For
the second phase, we welcome the recommendations of
the Secretary-General on the deployment of 500 military
observers with a United Nations force. In this regard, the
European Union stresses that it is essential to ensure
adequate United Nations military protection.
As is clear from the very highest level of
representation of the countries in the Great Lakes region
here today, a settlement of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo needs to be considered within a
regional framework. That is why the European Union
reaffirms its support for an eventual international
conference on security and cooperation in the Great Lakes
region to address and resolve the underlying causes of
conflict in the region. The European Union encourages
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and all African
countries concerned to begin preparatory work as soon as
the main elements of the Lusaka Agreement have been
implemented and announces its readiness to cooperate
with the parties by providing technical and financial
assistance in this regard.
The European Union remains deeply concerned at
the immense human suffering caused by the conflict to
the civilian population of the region, in particular the
dramatic situation faced by the large number of refugees

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
and internally displaced persons. We emphasize the
importance of access by humanitarian organizations to all
people in need. The European Union reiterates the
importance it attaches to the respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law, particularly regarding the
protection of children and the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of child combatants.
The European Union is fully committed to supporting
initiatives that will bring peace to Africa. It is also actively
engaged in assisting African countries to develop their
economies. However, assistance for the reconstruction and
rehabilitation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo can
be made only under the necessary conditions of peace and
security. The European Union therefore appeals to the
leaders gathered here today to take this historic opportunity
to bring peace to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
the wider region and to all its people.
The President: I welcome to the Security Council
once more our distinguished, dare I say beloved, SecretaryGeneral, Kofi Annan, who will be leaving in about two
hours for Moscow on a trip of great importance. We wish
him well and thank him for joining us at this point in the
process, and we applaud again his enormous efforts to
promote the cause of peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the important other issues he will take up
when he visits Moscow.
Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its appreciation
to the heads of State of Angola, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mozambique, Rwanda,
Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe, and to the Foreign
Ministers of Namibia, South Africa, Burundi, Canada
and the United States, the Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium, the Minister
Delegate for Cooperation and Francophonie of France,
the Minister of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom, and the Minister of
Armed Forces of Mali, who participated in its meeting
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 24
January 2000. The Council also expresses its
appreciation to the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), the
representative of the Chairman of the OAU, and the
OAU-nominated Facilitator of the Congolese national
dialogue. Their presence and their statements attest to
their renewed commitment to the Lusaka Ceasefire

4092nd meeting (Resumption 2)
26 January 2000
Agreement (S/1999/815) and to the search for a
durable peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region. Their presence in New York
also reinforces the progress made at the Maputo
Summit of 16 January 2000 and the Harare meeting
of the Political Committee of 18 January 2000. The
Council expects that this progress will continue at
the next Political Committee Meeting and Summit of
the Signatories to the Agreement.
“The Security Council urges all the parties to
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement to build on the
momentum of these meetings in order to create and
sustain the climate necessary for the full
implementation of the Agreement. It underlines the
importance of a revised implementation calendar for
the full and effective implementation of the tasks in
the Agreement.
“The Security Council reaffirms the territorial
integrity and national sovereignty of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including over its natural
resources, in accordance with the principles of the
Charters of the United Nations and the OAU. In this
regard, it reiterates its call for the immediate
cessation of hostilities and the orderly withdrawal of
all foreign forces from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in accordance
with the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. The Council
reaffirms its support for the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement and also reaffirms its resolutions 1234
(1999) of 9 April 1999, 1258 (1999) of 6 August
1999, 1273 (1999) of 5 November 1999 and 1279
(1999) of 30 November 1999.
“The Security Council welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General of 17 January 2000
(S/2000/30). The Council expresses its determination
to support the implementation of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. Accordingly, it has now begun
consideration of a resolution authorizing the
expansion of the present mandate of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) along the lines
recommended by the Secretary-General in that
report. It expresses its intention to act promptly on
this basis. It expresses its intention to consider at the
appropriate time preparations for an additional phase
of United Nations deployment and further action. It
welcomes the statements by the heads of State and
delegation in support of the proposals of the
Secretary-General. The Council welcomes the arrival
11

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, expresses
its support for his efforts, and urges all parties to
provide him with the assistance and cooperation he
will require to carry out his functions.
“The Security Council supports the establishment
of a coordinated MONUC/Joint Military Commission
(JMC) structure with co-located headquarters and joint
support arrangements. The Council believes this is a
vital step in enhancing the ability of the United
Nations to support the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.
In this regard, the Council urges Member States and
donor organizations to continue to provide assistance
to the JMC.
“The Security Council underlines the absolute
necessity of security and access for United Nations
personnel deployed in support of the Lusaka process,
and stresses that such a climate of cooperation is an
essential prerequisite for the successful implementation
of the mandate of MONUC in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Council calls on all
signatories to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement to
provide assurances of safety, security and freedom of
movement of United Nations and associated personnel,
and in this regard attaches importance to the statement
by the President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on the security of MONUC and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
“The Security Council stresses the importance of
the national dialogue as called for in the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement, and affirms that it must be an
open, inclusive and democratic process conducted
independently by the Congolese people under the
established facilitation. It further affirms that the
national dialogue is the best means for all Congolese
parties to address the political future of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
“The Security Council strongly supports the
designation of the former President of Botswana, Sir
Ketumile Masire, as the Facilitator of the national
dialogue as provided for by the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, and calls on Member States to provide
full financial and other support to his efforts and the
process as a whole. The Council welcomes the
declared readiness of the President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to begin the national dialogue,
and to guarantee the security of all participants.

12

4092nd meeting (Resumption 2)
26 January 2000
“The Security Council stresses the need for the
continued operation of United Nations and other
agencies’ humanitarian relief operations and human
rights promotion and monitoring under acceptable
conditions of security, freedom of movement, and
access to affected areas. The Council expresses its
serious concern over the humanitarian situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as well as the
shortfall in responses to the United Nations
consolidated humanitarian appeal. It therefore urges
Member States and donor organizations to make
available the necessary funds to carry out urgent
humanitarian operations in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
“The Security Council expresses its concern
that the presence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo of non-signatory armed groups that have yet
to be demobilized constitutes a threat to the Lusaka
process. The Council recognizes that disarmament,
demobilization, resettlement and reintegration
(DDRR) are among the fundamental objectives of
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.
“The Council underlines that a credible plan for
DDRR must be based on an agreed and
comprehensive set of principles.
“The Security Council expresses deep concern
over the illicit flow of arms into the region, and
calls upon all concerned to halt such flows.
“The Security Council values the continuing
leadership of the peace process by the President of
Zambia and the vital contribution of the Southern
African Development Community through its
Chairman, the President of Mozambique. It also
expresses its appreciation to the current Chairman of
the OAU, the President of Algeria, and to the
Secretary-General of the OAU for the organization’s
vital role in the Lusaka process. It urges them to
continue their essential efforts in close cooperation
with the Security Council and the
Secretary-General.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2000/2.
The next open meeting of the Security Council on
Africa will be on Monday, 31 January. President Chiluba
is going to remain in New York to make a final statement

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
of a comprehensive nature, going beyond the issues of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We invite other

4092nd meeting (Resumption 2)
26 January 2000
speakers to take part. I thank all those who have
participated, and we look forward to turning the gavel
over to our friends from Argentina next Tuesday.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

13
