S/PV.7586

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7586th meeting

Thursday, 17 December 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pressman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Santa Rosa
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mrs. Audouard
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-43467 (E)
*1543467*

S/PV.7586

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the outgoing Chairs of the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council according to the year
of adoption of the related Council resolutions: His
Excellency Mr. Mahamat Zene Cherif, Chair of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations; Her
Excellency Ms. Raimonda Murmokaitė, Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the
Central African Republic, and Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014); Her Excellency Mrs. Dina Kawar, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1521 (2003), concerning Liberia, and
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; His Excellency
Mr. Cristián Barros Melet, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1572 (2004), concerning Côte d’Ivoire, Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan, and
Chair of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals; and Her Excellency Mrs. Joy Ogwu, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2048 (2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Cherif.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this meeting to enable me, as
Chairman of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, to share with Council members some of our
thoughts on the activities of that Group.
During its chairmanship of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations in 2015, Chad has organized
nine thematic discussions on cross-cutting issues
related to peacekeeping operations. These have included
the following topics: traditional peacemaking versus
2/14

17/12/2015

peace enforcement; the safety and security of United
Nations peacekeepers: asymmetric threats; lessons
learned from the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM); the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali: a peacekeeping
operation in the context of the fight against terrorism;
bilateral and multilateral support for capacity-building
for troop- and police-contributing countries; lessons
learned from the Force Intervention Brigade of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO);
the importance of regional peacekeeping initiatives
in the context of partnerships; and strengthening the
strategic dialogue among the Security Council, troopand police-contributing countries and the Secretariat.
In addition to the meetings on these eight topics, the
Group also held a special meeting with the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations.
All of these issues are important and have been the
subject of intense discussions in the Working Group,
but my remarks will focus on only some of them so as
to highlight the most salient points.
It has emerged from various recent reports on
peacekeeping operations and from discussions held
at various levels that there is a clear gap between the
classical doctrine of peacekeeping and the realities
of today’s world. In that regard, while we understand
and respect the legitimate misgivings over the use of
force in peacekeeping, it should be noted that in certain
exceptional circumstances, the resort to the use of force
is inevitable. Despite the controversial nature of the
activities of the MONUSCO Force Intervention Brigade
in favour of peace in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo following the adoption of resolution 2098
(2013), the results of this intervention are instructive.
If United Nations doctrine cannot accommodate the
use of force, even when necessary and despite the radical
change in the context of peacekeeping operations, it will
be essential to strengthen partnerships with regional
and subregional organizations by availing them of the
means necessary to maintain or enforce peace in their
respective regions. In this light, it is time to strengthen
the strategic, operational and tactical partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
such as the African Union, including by addressing
the issue of financing African Union peace operations
authorized by the Security Council. AMISOM is an
example of trilateral cooperation among the United
Nations, the African Union and the European Union

15-43467

17/12/2015

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

that has had tangible results. This operation, initiated
by Africa and supported by external partners in the
financial, logistical and technical areas, is a model that
shows the way forward.
Furthermore, given the multiple risks and threats
that are increasingly facing peacekeepers, it is urgent
to strengthen their safety and security, particularly
against improvised explosive devices. In that regard, I
welcome the commitment of all States members of the
Security Council, and thank New Zealand in particular
for having organized, together with Chad and the
International Peace Institute, a workshop on this issue.
The maintenance of peace is a collective enterprise
to which all United Nations Member States should
contribute to the extent of their possibilities. As such,
we should focus particularly on strengthening the
capacities of countries contributing troops and police
personnel, which put their best men and women at the
disposal of the Organization. It is extremely important
for the wealthy countries that enjoy an advantage
in technology, information, equipment and training
experience to share with those that do not.
In addition, regarding the strategic dialogue among
the Security Council, troop-contributing countries
and the Secretariat, it is critical that these three actors
enhance their consultations in informal and formal
meetings. In that regard, the major difficulties of such
dialogue, which is deemed to be inadequate, are, on
the one hand, the lack of meaningful consultation with
troop-contributing countries before the formulation,
adjustment or replacement of mandates and the
drawdown of operations; and on the other, the inadequate
exchange of information relating to the aforementioned
aspects. In that regard, the troop-contributing countries
are deeply frustrated at not receiving the necessary
information, or draft resolutions and presidential
statements on peacekeeping operations, with enough
advance time to share their views on these aspects of
mission mandates. The Council must respond to these
legitimate concerns.
Lastly, I stress the need to pay attention to the work
and recommendations of the Working Group so that
they can be translated into deed.
I cannot conclude without expressing my gratitude
to all who have shared their views with the members
of the Working Group. I refer in particular to officials
of the Secretariat and the African Union Commission;
the Permanent Observer of the African Union, the

S/PV.7586

Permanent Observer of the European Union and the
Permanent Representatives of Uganda, Mali, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Bangladesh and New
Zealand; and the Deputy Permanent Representatives
of the United States of America, France, Malawi and
Japan.
I congratulate Senegal, which will assume the
leadership of the Working Group in 2016, and wish it
every success in its chairmanship.
The President: I thank Mr. Cherif for his briefing.
I also thank the Chadian delegation and Ambassador
Cherif for their leadership of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Kawar.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan): At the outset, I would like to
thank you, Sir, for providing me and the other outgoing
Chairs of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council
with an opportunity to take stock of our work and to
share some personal observations as we complete our
two-year terms as elected members of the Council.
Over the course of the past two years, Jordan has
had the honour to chair the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003) concerning Liberia
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which represent two of the longest-serving
Sanctions Committees, established respectively in
2003 and 2004.
With regard to the 1521 Committee concerning
Liberia, the sanctions regime has witnessed a number
of landmark changes during my tenure and that of
my predecessor, Prince Zeid Al Hussein. These
modifications were facilitated by the Security Council
and the 1521 Committee and by following best practices,
with a parallel track of close cooperation between the
Chair and the Permanent Representative of Liberia to
the United Nations in New York, and in collaboration
with the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL).
My delegation was also fortunate to have an enriched
understanding of the post-conflict peacebuilding
challenges faced by Liberia through my predecessor’s
chairmanship of the Liberia configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, as well as our commitment
to Liberia since its inception. Today, I pay tribute to
UNMIL and the 256 Jordanian police personnel who
still proudly serve therein even after withstanding
the toughest of circumstances, including the Ebola
epidemic.

15-434673/14

S/PV.7586

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

A major positive shift in the Liberia sanctions
regime took place on 2 September with the adoption of
resolution 2237 (2015), by which the Security Council
terminated the travel and financial measures set
forth in paragraph 4 of resolution 1521 (2003) and in
paragraph 1 of resolution 1532 (2004). Those measures
are therefore no longer applicable to any individual or
entity, and the 1521 sanctions list has been terminated.
By the same resolution, the Council decided, for a
period of nine months, to renew the arms embargo
against all non-governmental entities and individuals
operating in the territory of Liberia.
In the lead-up to the adoption of resolution 2237
(2004), there were a number of important developments
in the 1521 sanctions regime. On 21 July, the Security
Council Affairs Division of the Department of Political
Affairs presented to the 1521 Committee the main
findings set out in the Secretary-General’s update
on the progress made by the Government of Liberia
in implementing recommendations on the proper
management of arms and ammunition, including
enacting the necessary legislative frameworks and on
facilitating the effective monitoring and management
of the border regions between Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire,
pursuant to resolution 2188 (2014).
That presentation followed several important
developments in the Committee in 2014, namely, the
Committee’s agreement on 11 July 2014 to recommend
to the Security Council that the Council request the
Secretary-General to conduct an assessment mission to
Liberia as an outcome of the review of the measures
of the sanctions regime in Liberia, in accordance with
paragraph 4 of resolution 2128 (2013), as well as the
Committee’s consideration, on 12 November 2014, of
the report of the assessment mission concerning the
Liberia sanctions regime, annexed to the letter dated
29 September that same year from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Council. We believe that
such assessment missions are part of the best practices
that sanctions committees, and the Security Council
itself, should strive to streamline across all sanctions
regimes from their inception until their termination.
Last but not least, as Chair of the 1521 Committee,
my engagement with the Government of Liberia was
positive in both identifying remaining challenges and
finding solutions to overcome them. I will encourage
the Ambassador of Ukraine, as incoming Chair of the
1521 Committee, to continue engaging the Government
of Liberia, the penholder and the experts in identifying

4/14

17/12/2015

ways of assisting Liberia to address the few challenges
that remain towards the total lifting of the arms
embargo.
Turning to the 1533 Committee, concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the situation in the
country remains fragile, with the eastern provinces
continuing to suffer from a plethora of predatory armed
groups. Some progress has been achieved on the ground,
notably the military operations conducted by the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC), supported in part by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and its Force
Intervention Brigade against the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF) in North Kivu. The Committee’s
designation of the ADF for sanctions in June 2014
dovetailed with the efforts of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO
to target that armed group. It is also encouraging that
Jamil Mukulu, the ADF leader who was placed on
the Committee’s sanctions list in October 2011, was
arrested in Tanzania in July this year and subsequently
extradited to Uganda.
However, there is still plenty of work to be done in
terms of combating the involvement of both the armed
groups and FARDC fringe elements in the trafficking of
natural resources, restoring State authority throughout
the country and creating space for peacebuilding and
national dialogue. It is troubling that so many armed
groups, with no more than several hundred combatants,
have been able to prey on the civilian population in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo for so long.
The numerous predatory actors in North and South
Kivu survive thanks to the widespread availability
of small arms and ammunition, their ability to traffic
natural resources, such as the three T’s — tin, tantalum
and tungsten — charcoal, timber and alluvial gold,
with State and private actors in the region, as well as
their propensity to abuse and pillage civilians. In that
connection, I must say that, during my visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, I was privileged to
take a helicopter ride over Virunga National Park, where
we actually saw the cars of those who were involved in
the act of smuggling. That is a common occurrence.
We have spoken too long about the need for
proper weapon-stockpile management in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo; there have to be
tangible and transparent results. To make any progress
on the ground, weapons, whether pilfered from

15-43467

17/12/2015

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Government stocks or possibly trafficked from abroad,
must no longer be freely available. There must also be a
more forensic approach with a view to identifying and
choking off many of the predatory armed groups, which
have little if any political agenda and are in fact criminal
gangs. As such, we need to follow the money and
consider assessing sanctions on downstream companies
outside the Democratic Republic of the Congo that are
illicitly sourcing natural resources such as tin, tantalum
and tungsten, as well as gold, from areas controlled by
armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo, thereby helping to sustain the same criminal
elements who destabilize the east. We also may need
better tools to track the movement of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s natural resources from the
sites where they are mined all the way across the
border to the international markets in order to support
legitimate mining and trading that can provide jobs and
revenues to the Congolese people and to penalize the
illicit trafficking that fuels conflict. I must add here
that, during our visit to some of the mines, I saw 5-yearold children who were actually involved in gold mining
because it brought more money to their families than
going to school. These are very serious problems that
are affecting the future generation.
Despite these challenges, I am pleased to note
that, with the help of the international community,
the capacities of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to respond to security threats
have increased, and there has been some progress in
the fight against impunity for human rights violations
committed by armed groups and elements of the
FARDC and Congolese police. Given the importance
of this collaborative approach, during my tenure and
that of my predecessor, there was a focus on sharpening
the engagement of the Committee with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and with the countries of the
Great Lakes region. In that connection, I visited the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda
from 24 to 29 May. It was the first occasion in which
a Chair of the 1533 Sanctions Committee travelled to
the Great Lakes region since the establishment of the
sanctions regime, in 2004. During my visit, I was able
to collect first-hand information about the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
the neighbouring States to learn how to assist those
States in capacity-building, in addition to improving
the effectiveness of sanctions provisions. I also
personally conveyed the requests and concerns of the
1533 Committee and the Group of Experts. The main

S/PV.7586

message for me was that it was only with the help of
the Committee and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that we are able to move on to
the next step.
In addition to my travel to the region, the 1533
Committee held two formal meetings in 2015 to exchange
views with the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
with States of the region on the implementation of the
sanctions regime, and in particular on the reports of the
Group of Experts. That exchange of views has helped the
Committee to gain a more in-depth perspective on the
relevant issues. Earlier this week, for example, members
of the Committee heard the Permanent Representative
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo echo what the
Minister of the Interior told me in a meeting during my
visit to Kinshasa in May, namely, that even though the
embargo as of the adoption of resolution 1807 (2008)
in March 2008 no longer applied to the Government,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities were
of the view that the embargo still affected their ability
to procure the weapons they need in a timely manner.
While such issues might be addressed through a
reiteration of the relevant paragraph of resolution 1807
(2008) in the next Council resolution on Democratic
Republic of the Congo sanctions, it is clear that the
Committee will need to continue its close collaboration
with the country’s authorities to underline that the
sanctions regime is in place to protect the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, rather than to hinder it.
During my tenure as Chair of the 1533 Committee,
I also sought out opportunities for the Committee to
benefit from the insights of other partners. Indeed,
as part of the 12 meetings convened in the 20142015 period, the Committee heard briefings from a
number of external partners, including the Executive
Secretary of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, MONUSCO, the United Nations Mine
Action Service and the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
The Committee also sent over 80 letters to Member
States during the course of 2014 and 2015, sharing and/
or requesting information. In some cases, Member
States were forthcoming with information; in many
others, however, States failed to respond to the Chair’s
letters despite repeated follow-ups by the Chair. We
just discussed this matter in the Committee earlier this
week in connection with letters that I sent on 8 May to
the delegations of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of

15-434675/14

S/PV.7586

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of
Tanzania as regards the findings and recommendations
of the 2014 report of the Group of Experts.
In two cases, pursuant to an initiative of the
President of the Security Council, the President and I
held joint bilateral consultations with the Member States
concerned with a view to underlining the importance
of the Committee’s requests for information. Yet the
fact remains that none of the Member States concerned
has responded to my letters of 8 May, some of which
encouraged the Governments of those States to
undertake investigations in connection with the Group’s
findings and recommendations. Going forward, it
may be useful to put more creative thought into how
Member States can be encouraged to cooperate with the
sanctions committees and the expert panels; otherwise,
the credibility of the Security Council and its sanctions
resolutions, adopted under Chapter VII as mandatory
measures, will continue to be called into question.
Along these lines, given that the same sanctions
regime has now been in place for such a long period
of time, it may be an appropriate time for some
stocktaking. I alluded to this need for reflection during
my statement to the Council on 14 July (see S/PV.7484),
following my visit to the Great Lakes region in May.
To reinforce the continued credibility of the
sanctions regime in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes region, my discussions
with the regional States affirmed the need for more
sanctions designations, particularly for predatory actors
who abuse civilians and traffic natural resources. No
individual has been designated by the Committee since
December 2012, and I have made efforts in that regard
to encourage members of the Committee to revisit the
confidential annexes that have been submitted by the
Group of Experts in tandem with its final reports and
to submit to the Committee the names of individuals
and entities for possible sanctioning. There should be
no perception among Member States, particularly those
in the Great Lakes region, that the importance of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo sanctions regime is
waning and that the Council is less concerned about the
climate of impunity, particularly in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I hope that my visit to the Great
Lakes region was a signal that, on the contrary, we
are looking closely at the sanctions regime, and I trust
that the incoming Chair will undertake another visit to
the region to follow through and undertake pledges in

6/14

17/12/2015

addition to engaging those States and their assistance
needs.
In closing, I would like to conclude by expressing
my profound appreciation to the members of the
Committees I presided over for their collegiality and
spirit of cooperation. I also wish to extend my sincere
thanks to the Panel of Experts on Liberia and the
Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as their previous and current members,
for the diligent work accomplished in contributing to
compliance with the sanctions regime. Those Groups
of Experts are tasked with investigating complex issues
in difficult political and security environments, often
at great personal cost. The 1521 and 1533 Committees
have endeavoured over the past two years to offer all
possible assistance to support the Panel’s and Group’s
work, including during my visit to the Great Lakes
region in May, and took into serious consideration the
findings and the recommendations made by the Panel
and the Group on the most effective ways to implement
the sanctions regime.
Last but not least, I would like to pay tribute to
MONUSCO, its work and all its efforts on the ground.
Allow me, in the name of my country, to thank my
Jordanian compatriot Armed Forces serving therein
for their unwavering commitment towards establishing
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
their sacrifices in fulfilling mission goals, particularly
during very challenging circumstances.
The President: I thank Mrs. Kawar for her
briefing. I also thank the Ambassador of Jordan and
the Jordanian delegation for their excellent leadership
of these important Committees.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Murmokaitė.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to present the
outgoing Chairs’ views on the work done in steering the
Council’s subsidiary bodies. I have had the privilege
to set up and preside over two sanctions committees:
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014) concerning Yemen, as well as the CounterTerrorism Committee. I am afraid my text will be rather
long because those are three bodies to which we have
dedicated a lot of effort and passion.

15-43467

17/12/2015

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

I would first like to touch upon some of the
working methods and good practices in the work of the
subsidiary bodies that I presided over and then move on
specifically to the Counter-Terrorism Committee. With
regard to the working methods, lessons learned and
suggested good practices, whether with the sanctions
committees or other subsidiary bodies, we have sought
to promote transparency and openness. While the
work is done among the 15 members of the Security
Council, we believe it would defeat the purpose for
respective bodies to keep it all to themselves. Because
even if it is the 15 members that deliberate and make
decisions, all States Members of the United Nations
are expected to implement the sanctions regimes and to
report accordingly. In both areas we have considerable
problems, as my colleague, the Jordanian Ambassador,
referred to.
For that to happen, the entire United Nations
membership needs to understand clearly what the
subsidiary bodies are doing and what is expected of
them in particular. From the outset, we have therefore
insisted on open briefings to Security Council members
on the work of the bodies we presided over. We have
also organized the first-ever open briefing to the wider
United Nations membership on the Yemen sanctions
regime, and I wish I had organized a similar one on
the Central African Republic sanctions regime. I am
well aware of the scepticism from some quarters within
the Council on the merits of such openness. To that, I
can only say that my delegation is happy to see more
and more chairs of subsidiary bodies choosing open
Council briefings on their work. To us, that is proof that
we have chosen the right path. Better compliance and
implementation can come only through such openness
and better communication.
To that end, we have also issued regularly press
statements on the work of the sanctions committees
aimed at sensitizing the wider audience on the work
we do. Such statements may not be the most exciting
read, but they allow to better disseminate relevant
information, develop better understanding of the aims
of and expectations from the respective committees
and can remind the spoilers that we are watching very
closely and are ready to take further action. We have
also considered introducing Chair’s statements where
appropriate, but I would leave that idea for the incoming
Chairs to consider.
In the case of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
we have used the Chair’s discretion to organize a series

S/PV.7586

of open briefings and thematic meetings on specific
counter-terrorism and counter-violent extremism
issues, which have seen large audiences and active
participation. We think it is a good practice that should
continue because if counter-terrorism efforts are to
be effective, we need the engagement of all United
Nations membership. With the terrorist threat as grave
as ever and even more serious than before, work behind
close doors must be combined with transparency and
inclusiveness.
A related issue is access to information. Again, it
matters if we want sanctions regimes to be implemented
and have an impact on the ground. In that respect, we
welcome the efforts taken by the Secretariat to improve
the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions lists by
standardizing the formats and creating a consolidated
list. Such lists and other related information should
be readily available in all official languages of the
Organization. How can we speak about the Yemen
sanctions regime, for example, if the information is
not available in Arabic? The Secretariat has done some
work on making the sanctions committee websites
more user-friendly, but there is clearly scope for further
improvements in that respect. Introducing simplified
user-friendly matrixes of exemptions requests is
another improvement, which we implemented with the
Central African Republic sanctions regime, and I think
it represents a good way forward.
My next point concerns outreach and engagement
with a diverse range of actors concerned. Again, my
colleagues have spoken on some of those issues from
their own perspective. From the very outset, we have
sought to engage the respective countries — Yemen
and the Central African Republic — their neighbours,
and other interested partners, inviting them to formal,
informal and informal informal meetings, which we
held regularly at our Mission. We have also provided
informal briefings to countries concerned on the
work of the Committees. Such interaction is vital for
the sanctions regimes to work, and needs to be done
consistently and persistently. For example, as a result of
engaging with the Central African Republic Transitional
Authorities on the arms embargo, including by videoteleconference with Government authorities in Bangui,
the Committee’s guidelines were amended, for the first
time, to allow the Central African Republic itself to
submit arms embargo exemption requests. However,
the Committee remains of the opinion that lethal arms
cannot be provided until there are credible assurances
regarding proper storage of and accountability for

15-434677/14

S/PV.7586

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

weapons and until proper vetting and restructuring of
the Forces armées centrafricaines has taken place. Such
was also the view I heard from representatives of the
African Union (AU) and the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) during my visit on the
ground.
I believe that geographical contacts need to be
expanded beyond the immediate neighbourhood
because sanctions trails tend to take us to quite
distant destinations from time to time with serious
consequences for compliance. Involving regional
organizations should be further explored, and I thank
the AU, ECCAS and the mediator’s office in Bangui for
being ready and willing to engage on the issues related
to the sanctions regime.
We have also sought to expand the range of briefers,
both in sanctions committees and in the CounterTerrorism Committee. To that end, we have organized
briefings by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflicts, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS), the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights; INTERPOL, the International
Civil Aviation Organization and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. On the Central African
Republic, we have suggested that Kimberly Process
representatives be involved. We have not done that, but
I think it is important because about 1 million people
in the Central African Republic depend on the diamond
industry. We have also suggested engagement with
the Peacebuilding Commission country configuration
on the Central African Republic and the International
Criminal Court, as we see clear links between the work
of the sanctions committees and those bodies. I can
only regret that we could not proceed along those lines,
owing to the individual objections.
In the case of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
again, emphasis was placed on expanding the
geographical, as well as regional and thematic
engagement. I am pleased to note that we organized
the first-ever briefings by the European Union and the
Council of Europe, and expanded contacts with NATO
on very practical matters, such as the early response
to terrorist attacks and foreign terrorist fighters. We
have also involved the World Tourism Organization,
the World Health Organization and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and engaged

8/14

17/12/2015

with the International Civil Aviation Organization and
INTERPOL, in particular, on a regular basis, because
those organizations have very practical and accessible
tools that could allow countries to reduce the threat
of foreign terrorist fighters travelling. Unfortunately,
those tools are dramatically underutilized by countries,
and I believe that work should continue to bring to the
attention of Member States the tools that are readily
available.
Concerning coordination and synergy building, I
believe that we have also taken innovative and practical
steps in that respect. On Yemen, in June 2014, the 2140
Sanctions Committee held a common meeting for the
first time with the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities and the CounterTerrorism Committee, because there are overlapping
and common interests that had to be discussed in the
context of Yemen in its fight against terrorism. As
terrorist groups continue to benefit from instability
in the country, another result-oriented meeting of
that kind, I believe, is in order. We also initiated joint
meetings between the Central African Republic and
Yemen sanctions committees and the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, with biefings from
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui. We are very satisfied with the cooperation
that we have received on the part Malaysia in its
capacity as Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict.
While such joint formats are practical in saving
resources and reducing the burden placed on the
briefers, they also enable to combine forces in seeking
better responses to the problem at hand. I believe that
travel to the countries concerned — the Ambassador of
Jordan has spoken extensively of her recent trip — is
a most useful tool. I regret having been unable to visit
Yemen because of conditions on the ground. I would
suggest that the incoming Chairs undertake annual
visits, where possible. My visit to the Central African
Republic from 25 to 28 August provided an important
opportunity to receive feedback on the ground from
a wide range of actors, including the Transitional
Authorities, diplomatic missions, senior management
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
mining authorities, the United Nations family,
UNMAS, aid workers on the ground, and local civil
and opinion leaders. During my visit, I also met with
representatives of ECCAS, the African Union and the
15-43467

17/12/2015

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Office of the Mediator. The visit also served to pave
the way for improved communication and collaboration
between the Panel of Experts and the Central African
Transitional Authorities. It also helped to better
understand existing misconceptions with regard to the
sanctions regime, as well as local expectations. My
suggestion for the future would be for the Chairs to
include not only the country concerned in their visits,
but also some key actors in the region while on such
trips.
With regard to what could be improved, we believe
that there is a clear need for a dedicated capacity on
sanctions regimes within the Secretariat. For the
time being, Secretariat work is rather patchy in that
regard, depending as it does on the enthusiasm of
individual staff members. We extend our huge thanks
to David Biggs, whose advice and initiative have been
a tremendous help in our work on the Central African
Republic Sanctions Committee. However, I believe that
that should be a standard practice and not depend on
individual good will, passion or enthusiasm, especially
with regard to the huge need for capacity-building
mobilization, because, besides the lack of political will,
it is often the lack of capacity that prevents countries
from complying. We need to design ways to help the
countries concerned, especially focusing on capacitybuilding with multiplier effects on the ground.
There are additional concerns, including the lack
of compliance and reporting, and the Ambassador of
Jordan has just spoken extensively on that subject.
Despite all the explanation and outreach work that
we have carried out informally in our mission, that
has been a constant source of concern. In the case of
the Central African Republic, sanctioned individuals
have been travelling freely, and on some occasions
their travel has been facilitated by Member States of
the region, despite repeated communication on the
part of the Chair and the Panel of Experts and the
express requests of the Transitional Authorities of the
Central African Republic, including the Transitional
President herself. We call on all the States concerned
to abstain from any further actions that interfere
with the extremely fragile transition process in the
Central African Republic and to respect the will of the
Transitional Authorities and the people of the Central
African Republic in that regard. Spoilers should not
be allowed to travel freely, and messages of incitement
should not be allowed to be aired from outside the
country. It hurts the transition and, above all, it hurts
the people of the Central African Republic. As long as

S/PV.7586

the conflict in the Central African Republic continues,
it will hurt the neighbouring countries too. There are
therefore regional consequences to non-compliance.
I continue to call for more resolute action on the part
of Committee with regard to sanctions designations.
The Panel has provided a total of 25 detailed statements
of cases involving individuals and entities that, in the
Panel’s view, meet the designation criteria set by the
Security Council. Only five individuals and one entity
have been sanctioned to date. Today, the Committee is
to conclude its consideration of two additional names
for designation, but I believe that we should send a
stronger message at this particularly crucial moment in
the history of the Central African Republic, ahead of
the elections, as spoilers continue to interfere with the
transition and lives continue to be lost in the Central
African Republic.
On Yemen, I regret to note that the Committee
acted too little and too late when the processes on
the ground were spinning out of control. I also regret
the unintended humanitarian consequences that have
been hitting the civilian population and the lack of
reporting on sanctions implementation, including
on the implementation of the arms embargo. Cutting
off the flow of financial resources to the sanctioned
individuals, in the case of Yemen, also requires more
effort. With regard to both Yemen and the Central
African Republic, I sincerely thank all countries
for their cooperation with the respective Panels of
Experts, enabling visits and information-gathering on
the ground. It has been a tremendous help. I hope that
full and continued cooperation with the Panels will be
extended in the future.
Finally, I would like to say a few general words
on sanctions, which are very much in line with what
the Ambassador of Jordan has said. Sanctions are not
a cure-all, but they do have a role to play in tackling
impunity and restraining perpetrators, especially
wherever and whenever other means of bringing the
perpetrators to account may not be at hand. Imposing
sanctions is a way of telling the rapists, murderers,
abusers, child recruiters and spoilers of fragile political
processes that the world, and the Council in particular,
are watching and are ready to step up and put an end to
the harm that they inflict. It is especially important, as
I have already stated, in cases in which there is no other
recourse to accountability and justice.
I would like to turn to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, specifically. We live in a world where

15-434679/14

S/PV.7586

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

business as usual is no longer an option. My delegation
has sought to make the Committee more proactive,
forward-looking and operational in its work, while at
the same time seeking to promote greater interaction,
coherence and synergies among the various counterterrorism actors within the United Nations system.
We have worked to identify specific measures that
States need to take in order to further strengthen their
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005)
and 2178 (2014), including measures to address the
aforementioned issues, trends and developments. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) has completed detailed assessments of
the progress made by 39 States in implementing
resolution 1373 (2001) on measures introduced by
States to strengthen counter-terrorism legislation,
financial monitoring regimes, border control and law
enforcement mechanisms, criminal justice systems,
international cooperation, human rights mechanisms
and strategies to prevent and counter violent extremism.
In accordance with resolution 2178 (2014), CTED has
also prepared five analytical reports for the Council on
foreign terrorist fighters.
We have strengthened our engagement with civil
society and academia, including through the launch of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Research Network. Our
interaction with our Network partners has deepened
our analytical capacities and strengthened our ability
to identify new and emerging terrorism threats and
developments and to advise Member States on how to
deal with them. In order to raise awareness of the main
challenges arising from new and emerging terrorism
issues, as well as the good practices developed to
address them, the Committee, assisted by CTED,
has convened a number of special meetings and open
briefings.
In July, in accordance with the presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/23, the Committee held a
special meeting in Madrid on stemming the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters. At this very moment, the
Committee is holding a special meeting on preventing
terrorists from exploiting the Internet and social media.
Among other innovations that we sought to include were
the first high-level political regional visit conducted
by myself, the CTED Executive Director, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel and the
African Union Special Representative for CounterTerrorism to Mali and the Niger at the beginning of this
year, following which I transmitted a letter directly to
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs and
10/14

17/12/2015

the Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF) Office, conveying the Committee’s
request that the CTITF and United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre give priority consideration to the
list of capacity-building projects identified. We also
focused on vulnerable regions in a targeted way. We
convened two such meetings on the Horn of Africa and
Central Asia.
I believe that such regional approaches could be
continued, in addition to individual country assessments
and individual approaches. We have also sought to bring
the Committee’s work up to date by shortening the time
between country visits and reporting, because what
good does it do to discuss today a visit or assessment
that took place two or three years ago? I have also
introduced specific proposals to activate the role of the
Vice-Chairs of the Committee.
During my period as Chair, I have worked with
members of the Committee, CTED and other United
Nations system partners to improve the speed and
efficiency with which capacity-building assistance is
delivered, reaching out to the Department of Political
Affairs and CTITF, in particular. As part of our
continuing efforts in that area, the Committee recently
held its first retreat with key United Nations partners.
Participants included CTITF, the Rule of Law Unit
in the Executive Office of the Secretary-General,
the Assistant Secretary-General for Information and
Communications Technology, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the Office of Legal Affairs, the
1267 (1999) Committee, the Department of Safety and
Security, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Department of Public Information, International
Monetary Fund, INTERPOL, the International
Organization for Migration and the World Bank. The
discussions focused, inter alia, on the effective delivery
of counter-terrorism strategies and measures, the
assessment of their impact on ground, shortening the
road from assessment to assistance and the improved
delivery of capacity-building.
Looking ahead, as a matter of priority the Committee
and CTED must continue working with Member States
on the implementation of the recommendations of
the analytical reports on foreign terrorist fighters,
as well as the priority recommendations identified
during the Committee’s two special meetings. The
Committee will also need to devote particular attention
to a number of emerging thematic issues, including the

15-43467

17/12/2015

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

problems associated with children and adolescents in
the terrorism environment, and the diversification of
terrorism financing. Compliance with human rights
and the rule of law has always been and should remain
a key pillar of the Committee’s and CTED’s efforts.
I would like to take this opportunity to convey
my most sincere thanks and appreciation to all those
who have worked with and supported us during the
implementation of our mandate: the Secretariat; the two
Panels of Experts, in particular the Panel of Experts of
the Central African Republic Committee; the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic; every country
with which we have interacted during the past two
years; my colleagues within the Council; my own team,
which has done its utmost; and the interpreters, who
have suffered through the rapid delivery of my remarks
today.
In conclusion, I encourage the incoming Chairs to
do their jobs with their hearts. It cannot be bureaucratic
task. We deal with the most vulnerable and fragile
countries, where tremendous tragedies are taking place
at the individual and community levels. I do not think
that doing it in a bureaucratic frame of mind is the right
way to go. Only with the full engagement of both the
heart and mind in this work can a difference be made.
The President: I thank Ms. Murmokaitė for her
briefing. I also thank the Ambassador of Lithuania and
the Lithuanian delegation for their vigorous leadership
of these committees.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Barros Melet.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I am
thankful for this opportunity to address the Council
in my capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte
d’Ivoire, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2013) concerning South Sudan, and the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
with a view to sharing my insight and thoughts on these
three subsidiary bodies. I will start with my work as
Chair of the 1572 Committee concerning Côte d’Ivoire.
My November 2014 visit to the country was
undoubtedly the highlight of my tenure as Chairman.
The opportunity to meet with the highest authorities
of Côte d’Ivoire on the ground, including President
Ouattara and his chief ministers, to visit the diamondproducing areas near the Liberian border, and to
witness first-hand the work carried out by the United

S/PV.7586

Nations via the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (UNOCI) were enriching experiences that
greatly facilitated my work. Meeting my counterparts
strengthened the channels of cooperation. Hearing
their comments and concerns on the implementation
of the sanctions regime was essential to improving
the effectiveness of the work of the Committee and its
secretariat team. As a result of that visit, I proposed
to the Committee certain actions that allowed us to
streamline its work, in particular the consideration of
requests for notification and exceptions of the current
sanctions regime. Processing times were shortened
thanks to the close cooperation between the secretariat
of the Committee and the Permanent Mission of Côte
d’Ivoire to the United Nations.
The work of the Panel of Experts that advises the
Committee also benefited from that visit. Although
there was a certain distrust concerning its work prior
to the visit, cooperation between the Government in
Abidjan and the Panel of Experts deepened thereafter.
The work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of UNOCI was instrumental in that
regard. An important lesson learned is that if we wish
to have an intelligent sanctions regime, we should not
allow too much time pass before visiting the country
that is the object of sanctions. The reality on the ground
is subject to change, and visits make it possible to avoid
misconceptions. I believe that Côte d’Ivoire has made
significant progress in re-establishing democracy,
territoriaol control, security and development that
should spur the Council to consider lifting the sanctions
regime in the short term.
During my two years as Chair of the Côte d’Ivoire
Sanctions Committee, the list of sanctioned individuals
has grown shorter; the embargo on diamonds has
been lifted, and the arms embargo regime has been
substantially modified. I appeal to Council members to
consider these elements during the upcoming renewal
of sanctions. Côte d’Ivoire has a level of development
and national capacity that allow it, with the support of
the United Nations and the international community,
to confront certain challenges it faces alongside
any other developing country, but that do not, in my
opinion, affect international peace and security and
do not justify the continuation of the sanctions regime
mandated by the Security Council. As pointed out by
other Committee Chairs, there is a time to impose
sanctions and a time to lift them. The reduction of
sanctions should be evaluated and does not imply any
detachment or reduced vigilance on our part.

15-4346711/14

S/PV.7586

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

I will now discuss my work as Chair of the
2206 South Sudan Sanctions Committee. Since its
establishment nine months ago, our task has been to meet
the challenge of establishing conditions conducive to its
proper functioning, beginning with the negotiation of
guidelines — a process that is not without its challenges
and during which we encountered the factors limiting
the Chair when defining the Committee’s course of
action. In addition, during that period the Committee
agreed to add six individuals to the sanctions list.
In that initial and essential phase, the Committee met
with representatives of INTERPOL, the United Nations
Mine Action Service, the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and on Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well
as with representatives of South Sudan and countries
of the region, in order to understand their challenges
and needs as we implement the agreed sanctions. The
object of those meetings was to establish channels of
communication and cooperation that may contribute to
the work of the Committee.
I stress the importance of the meetings with
the country concerned, countries of the region and
representatives of regional organizations. It is a good
practice that should become a permanent fixture in
the work of the various committees and repeated
throughout the year in order to build trust and generate
frank discussion. Without the commitment of the
international community, especially neighbouring
countries, the implementation of any sanctions regime
will be difficult.
We acknowledge the work of the Panel of Experts
and its monthly and mid-term reports. Its final report,
which is expected shortly, will be considered by the
incoming Chair in January. We also appreciate the
agreement reached by the Committee with INTERPOL
to exchange information between that body and the
Committee and its Panel of Experts. In the same vein,
the practice of open briefings for the presentation of
the Chair’s reports, as we did in the 2206 Committee,
should be the general rule. It contributes to the
transparency of the work of the Committee, promotes
State understanding of the sanctions regime, and
reminds us that these are individual rather than
collective measures.
The imposition of sanctions is one of many tools
at our dispoal, though perhaps not the best, to move
the international peace and security agenda forward.
The establishment of a sanctions framework should
12/14

17/12/2015

therefore be accompanied by the necessary monitoring
of its implementation by the Council. Otherwise, they
do not serve their purpose and undermine the actions
of the Council. The Council should, in a united and
consistent way, demonstrate and reaffirm that sanctions
regimes ultimately seek to create conditions conducive
to international peace and security in the countries
concerned, ensure accountability and the protection of
civilians, and combat impunity.
My work and that of my team would not have been
possible without the support of other members of the
Committee and the secretariat. I would like to express
my gratitude to everyone, in particular Kiho Cha, David
Biggs, Manuel Bressan and their respective teams.
With regard to our work as the Chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
we were involved in a special moment — the closure of
the ad hoc tribunals and the launch and closing of the
first review process of the initial phase of the Residual
Mechanism. It was with great pleasure that we took part
in the closing of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, whose progress and challenges faced in the
contribution to the fight against impunity we noted, in
addition to those of the International Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia and the Mechanism itself.
As set out in the annual reports of Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals — and will continue
to be — the Group’s work has also been reflected in
resolutions, presidential statements and press releases
and various reports of the Security Council. All of them
serve to demonstrate the determination of the Group to
move forward on issues that are of major interest to the
international community. We are aware of the diverse
positions with regard to the fulfilment of the mandates
of the Tribunals. In that regard, we have fostered
a permanent dialogue among all the stakeholders
involved, with the appropriate level of flexibility, in
order to seek convergence and respond in the most
appropriate way to the various realities that we have to
deal with.
It was particularly rewarding to serve as a
facilitator, along with my team, in each of the general
discussions that were held regarding the main concerns
of the Working Group. My recommendation in that
satisfying task is to maintain or even increase such
dialogue, especially with the officials of the Tribunals
and the Mechanism, at a critical time for the successful
culmination of the functioning of the Tribunals and
of their proper accountability. Chile is convinced that
15-43467

17/12/2015

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

cooperation with the completion strategy is one of the
direct ways of contributing to international justice in
situations where there are crimes against humanity.
That is why our commitment remains unwavering.
I would like to conclude by reiterating our gratitude
to all those who have contributed to the work of the
Tribunals, with a particular mention of the constant
support of the Secretariat and the Office of the
Assistant-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs.
I should now like to make a few comments that
apply to all the subsidiary bodies I have chaired.
We should not disregard due process when we
discuss Security Council sanctions. It is a matter both
of principle and of practical concern, for a lack of due
process can complicate the implementation of sanctions
in some States and regions. The Council should bolster
the mandate of the Office of the Ombudsperson, which
is currently valid for the 1267 (1999) Committee and
the 1989 (2011) Commitee, and expand them to other
subsidiary bodies. The adoption of resolution 1730
(2006) and the establishment of a focal point for
delisting represent a major step forward, although many
improvements stillll need to be made.
The diversity of this organ should be reflected in
various Panels of Experts, and we call on those Panels
to fully apply the principles of gender balance and
equitable geographical representation.
We value these kinds of meetings, as well as the
formal and open wrap-up sessions in this Chamber, with
the participation of all Council members and including
an official record and interpretation. However, we note
with concern the tendency to confuse wrap-up sessions
carried out by the Council with the informal briefings
that should be conducted by the President. Both have
different formats and objectives. The first involves the
work of the Council, and second that of the presidency,
which reports on its work. It is only through wellknown formats and clear rules that we will guarantee
tthe ransparency and accountability of this organ.
Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to
those who extended support to me throughout my
chairmanship. I urge the Security Council to continue
working to put an end to impunity, but always hand in
hand with due process. I would also like to express the
best of luck to the countries that will succeed me in my
role as Chair of the two subsidiary bodies and of the
Working Group.

S/PV.7586

The President: I thank Mr. Barros Melet for his
briefing. I also thank the Ambassador of Chile and his
delegation for their leadership of those two important
committees and of the Working Group.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ogwu.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): My first words must be
to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity for
stocktaking and to brief the Council as Chair of the
Security Council Committees established pursuant to
resolution 2048 (2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau, and
resolution 1518 (2003), concerning Iraq.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
2048 (2012) convened twice in informal consultations
to exchange views on the situation in Guinea-Bissau.
Most recently, it was briefed on the findings and
recommendations contained in the report (S/2015/619)
of Secretary-General on the progress made with regard
to the stabilization and restoration of constitutional
order in Guinea-Bissau. That has been the fulcrum of
peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau.
I believe that the implementation of the sanctions
regime, despite its limited scope, has indeed contributed
to the achievement of the desired objective, namely, the
pursuit and achievement of a lasting political solution
in Guinea-Bissau. In my view, continuous monitoring
will remain necessary in the short run to accurately
assess the journey towards stability and development.
I believe that giving consideration to the
recommendations of the Secretary-General will enhance
the effectiveness of the Council in administering the
sanctions regime in Guinea-Bissau. Maintaining the
sanctions regime will send a clear message to the
people of Guinea-Bissau that those who impede the
process of peace and security will be held accountable,
without exception — not only for their actions, but the
Council stands ready to adopt additional measures and
designations as and when required.
We observe a yawning gap in the Committe, namely,
the absence of a panel of experts. We believe that the
establishment of a panel of experts will go a long way
to support the work of the Committee and enhance its
effectiveness. That would not only ease the monitoring
of established benchmarks, but also facilitate the
surveillance of threats to stability and reconciliation.
Clear benchmarks that would determine readiness for
the lifting of sanctions should include the completion of
the retirement and demobilization processes for military

15-4346713/14

S/PV.7586

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

personnel; the full re-establishment of civilian control
over the military; the completion of the reconciliation
process; and the establishment of an effective and
efficient judicial system. Those are all components of
security sector reform.
We also believe that the time has come for the
Council to review the situation with respect to the
11 sanctioned individuals to determine if they still
meet the listing criteria. In the same vein, a periodic
review of the sanctions regime should be undertaken to
determine its effectiveness.
There is no doubt that the continued engagement
of the international community will remain vital not
only during, but especially in the aftermath of the
recovery period. Concerted action by the Economic
Community of West African States, the African
Union, the European Union, the United Nations and
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries will
also be vital during this time.
Concerning the 1518 Committee, we have a spate
of communications in connection with the sanctions
list, which currently stands at 86 individuals and 208
entities. That is the second largest list of all Security

14/14

17/12/2015

Council sanctions regimes, after the Al-Qaida sanctions
list.
Unlike my other colleagues, my burden has been
lighter. And that explains the brevity of my report.
Nevertheless, I want to take this opportunity to convey
my immense gratitude to all the members of both
Committees for their assistance and their cooperation
during the course of our stewardship. I would also like
to acknowledge the sustained support of the Secretariat.
The officials who worked with us consistently
demonstrated a high level of professionalism and
were always available to facilitate the activities of the
Committees. We are greatly indebted to all of them.
The President: I thank Mrs. Ogwu for her
briefing. I also thank the Ambassador of Nigeria and
her delegation for their important leadership of those
committees.
On behalf of the Security Council, I take this
opportunity to express appreciation to all of the
outgoing Chairs for the manner in which they have
discharged their important responsibilites on behalf of
the Security Council.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

15-43467
