316 (IV) . Advisory social welfare
services
The General Assembly
l. Authorizes the Secretary-General to place
on a continuing basis, rather than on the present
year-to-year basis, the advisory social welfare
services originally authorized by its resolution
58 (I)4 of 14 December 1946;
2. Directs the Secretary-General :
(a) To include an amount for these services in
the budget of the United Nations in the future;

( b) For I 950, to continue this work at approximately the same level of expenditure on the part
of the United :-J ations as in 1949;

3. Requests the Economic and Social Council
to review the terms of resolution 58 (I), in the
light of the provisions of paragraph 1 above and
in the light of the discussions and suggestions
made in the Third Committee of the General
Assembly, and to recommend to the next regular
session of the General Assembly any modifications
which it may consider necessary therein.
243rd plenary meeting,

17 November 1949.

SI 7 (IV). Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and
o.f the Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others
The General Assembly
Approves the following Convention, and proposes that each Member of the United Nations
and each non-member State which the appropriate
organ of the United Nations may invite to <lo so
become a Party thereto.
264th plenary meeting,

2 December 1949.
Annex

Text of the Convention
PREAMBLE

Whereas prostitution and the accompanying evil of
the traffic in persons for the purpose of prostitution
are incompatible with the dignity and worth of the
human person and endanger the welfare of the individual, the family and the community,
Whereas, with respect to the suppression of the
traffic in women and children, the following international instruments are in force:
I. International Agreement of 18 May 1904 for
the Suppression of the White Slave Traffic, as
amended by the Protocol• approved by the General
Assembly of the United Nat ions on 3 December 1948,
2. International Convention of 4 Mav 1910 for
the Suppression of the White Slave ·Traffic, as
amended by the above-mentioned Protocol,
3. International Convention of 30 September 1921
for the Suppression of the Traffic in Women and
Children, as amended by the Protocol• approved by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on 20 October 1947,
4. International Convention of 11 October 1933
for the Suppression of the Traffic in Women of Full
Age, as amended by the aforesaid Protocol,
• See Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
during the second part of its first session, page 93.
• See Official Records of the third session uf the General Assembly, Part I, Resolutions, page 165.

Whereas the League of Nations in 1937 prepared
a draft Convention' extending the scope of the abovementioned instruments, and
Whereas developments since 1937 make feasible
the conclusion of a convention consolidating the
above-mentioned instruments and embodying the substance of the 1937 draft Convention as well as desirable alterations therein;
Now therefore
The Contracting Parties
Hereby agree as hereinafter provided:
ARTICLE 1
The Parties to the present Convention agree to
punish any person who, to gratify the passions of
another:
I. Procures, entices or leads away, for purposes of
prostitution, another person, even with the consent of
that person ;
2. Exploits the prostitution of another person, even
with the consent of that person.
ARTICLE 2
The Parties to the present Convention further
agree to punish any person who :
1. Keeps or manages, or knowingly finances or
takes part in the financing of a brothel;
2. Knowingly lets or rents a building or other place
or any part thereof for the purpose of the prostitution
of others.
ARTICLE 3
To the extent permitted by domestic law, attempts
to commit any of the offences referred to in articles
1 and 2, and acts preparatory to the commission
thereof, shall also be punished.
ARTICLE 4

To the extent permitted by domestic law, intentional participation in the acts referred to in articles
1 and 2 above shall also be punishable.
To the extent permitted by domestic law, acts of
participation shall be treated as separate offences
whenever this is necessary to prevent impnnity.
ARTICLE 5

In cases where injured persons are entitled under
domestic law to be parties to proceedings in respect
of any of the offences referred to in the present
Convention, aliens shall be so entitled upon the same
terms as nationals.
ARTICLZ 6

Each Party to the present Convention agrees to
take all the necessary measures to repeal or abolish
any existing law, regulation or administrative provision by virtue of which persons who engage in or
are suspected of engaging in prostitution are subject
either to special registration or to the possession of a
special document or to any exceptional requirements
for supervision or notification.
ARTICLE 7
Previous convictions pronounced in foreign States
for offences referred to in the present Convention
shall, to the extent permitted by domestic law, be
taken into account for the purpose of:
1. Establishing recidivism;
2. Disqualifying the offender from the exercise of
civil rights.
ARTICLE 8

The offences referred to in articles 1 and 2 of the
present Convention shall be regarded as extraditable
offences in any extradition treaty which has been or
• See Official Records of the second session of the
General Assembly, Resolutions, page 32.
• See League of Nations Official Journal, 18th Year,
No. 12, page 955.
