UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/70
21 November 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3463rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 21 November 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Angola", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the signing of the Protocol of Lusaka
by representatives of the Government of Angola and UNITA in Lusaka on
20 November 1994. This Protocol together with the Bicesse Accords should
lay the foundation for lasting peace in Angola. Having signed the
Protocol, Angola’s parties must continue to demonstrate their commitment to
peace through the full and timely implementation of this detailed peace
agreement. Most importantly, the cease-fire required by the Protocol must
be respected.
"The Security Council acknowledges the tireless efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye,
which have been so vital in reaching this agreement. The Security Council
also commends the role of the observer countries to the Angolan peace
process and the constructive interventions by leaders throughout Africa.
Finally, the Security Council thanks President Frederick Chiluba and the
Government of Zambia, which graciously hosted these negotiations.
"The Security Council notes with concern the reports that the fighting
in Angola is continuing. The Council reminds the parties of the
responsibility they bear to respect fully the cease-fire agreement which is
to go into effect on 22 November 1994. The Security Council looks forward
to a report from the Secretary-General that the cease-fire has become
effective, thereby allowing the deployment of UNAVEM II military and police
observers to reinforce United Nations monitoring capabilities in Angola.
"The Security Council remains seized of this matter."

-----

94-45999 (E)

211194
