A /76/PV.55*

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

55th plenary meeting

Thursday, 20 January 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 142 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of
the expenses of the United Nations (A/76/636,
A/76/636/Add.1 and A/76/636/Add.2)
The President: I would like, in keeping with
established practice, to invite the attention of the General
Assembly to documents A/76/636, A/76/636/Add.1 and
A/76/636/Add.2. Document A/76/636 contains a letter
from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the General Assembly, in which he informs the
Assembly of Member States in arrears in the payment
of their financial contributions to the United Nations
within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
I would like to remind delegations that, under
Article 19 of the Charter,
“A Member of the United Nations which is in
arrears in the payment of its financial contributions
to the Organization shall have no vote in the
General Assembly if the amount of its arrears
equals or exceeds the amount of the contributions
due from it for the preceding two full years. The
General Assembly may, nevertheless, permit such
a Member to vote if it is satisfied that the failure
to pay is due to conditions beyond the control of
the Member.”
In documents A/76/636/Add.1 and A/76/636/
Add.2, the Secretary-General informs the President
of the General Assembly that, since the issuance of

his communication contained in document A/76/636,
Antigua and Barbuda and the Sudan have made the
payment necessary to reduce their arrears below the
amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter. I would
like to further inform Members that since the issuance
of document A/76/636/Add.2, the Congo has made
the payment necessary to reduce its arrears below
the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
This information will be reflected in document
A/76/636/Add.3, to be issued.
May I therefore take it that the General
Assembly takes note of the information contained in
these documents?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 12 (continued)
Sport for development and peace: building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal
Solemn appeal made by the President of the
General Assembly (A/76/648)
The President: I have the honour to make the
following solemn appeal in connection with the
observance of the Olympic Truce.
“The ancient Greek tradition of the ekecheiria,
or ‘Olympic Truce’, born in the eighth century
B.C., serves as a hallowed principle of the Olympic
Games. In 1992, the International Olympic
Committee renewed this tradition by calling upon
all nations to observe the Truce.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-23510 (E)

*2223510*
* Reissued for technical reasons 26 August 2022.

A/76/PV.55

“Through its resolution 48/11, of 25 October
1993, the General Assembly urged Member States
to observe the Olympic Truce from the seventh day
before the opening to the seventh day following the
closing of each Olympic Games. This appeal was
renewed in the Millennium Declaration.
“In the 2005 World Summit Outcome, our
leaders emphasized that ‘sports can foster peace
and development’, and encouraged the General
Assembly to foster a dialogue and agreed proposals
for a plan of action on sport and development.
“On 3 November 2005, the General Assembly
held a plenary debate on the agenda item entitled
‘Sport for peace and development’, and also
adopted, with universal support, resolution 60/8,
entitled ‘Building a peaceful and better world
through sport and the Olympic Ideal’, deciding to
consider this item every two years in advance of
each Summer and Winter Olympic Games.
“The
2030
Agenda
for
Sustainable
Development acknowledges sport as an important
enabler of sustainable development, recognizing
the growing contribution of sport to the realization
of development and peace in its promotion of
tolerance and respect and the contribution that
it makes to the Sustainable Development Goals,
including the empowerment of women and young
people, individuals and communities, as well as to
health, education and social inclusion objectives.
“To this end, on 2 December 2021, the General
Assembly adopted resolution 76/13. In that
resolution, the Assembly urged Member States
to observe the Olympic Truce individually and
collectively, within the framework of the Charter of
the United Nations, throughout the period from the
seventh day before the start of the XXIV Winter
Olympic Games until the seventh day following the
end of the XIII Paralympic Winter Games, to be
held in Beijing in 2022.
“The Olympic movement aspires to contribute
to a peaceful future for all humankind through
the educational value of sport, in particular youth.
The Games will bring together athletes from all
parts of the world in the greatest of international
sport events as a means to promote peace, mutual
understanding and goodwill among nations and
peoples — goals that are also part of the founding
values of the United Nations.
2/29

20/01/2022

“As an expression of these common objectives,
the International Olympic Committee has decided
to fly the United Nations flag in the Olympic
stadium and the Olympic villages. The United
Nations system and the International Olympic
Committee have strengthened their mutual
cooperation and support through joint endeavours
in such fields as human development, poverty
alleviation, humanitarian assistance, health
promotion, HIV and AIDS prevention, child and
youth education, gender equality, peacebuilding
and sustainable development.
“I welcome the leadership of Olympic and
Paralympic athletes in promoting peace and human
understanding through sport and the Olympic
ideal, and the commitment made by various States
Members of the United Nations to developing
national and international programmes that promote
peace and conflict resolution and the Olympic
and Paralympic values through sport and through
culture, education and sustainable development.
“As President of the General Assembly at its
seventy-sixth session, I solemnly appeal to all
Member States to demonstrate their commitment
to the Olympic Truce for the Olympic and
Paralympic Games Beijing 2022 and to undertake
concrete actions at the local, national, regional and
world levels to promote and strengthen a culture
of peace and harmony based on the spirit of the
Olympic Truce.
“Referring to the original tradition of the
Olympic Truce practiced in ancient times, as
described in resolution 76/13, I also call upon
all warring parties of current armed conflicts
around the world to boldly agree to true mutual
ceasefires for the duration of the Olympic Truce,
thereby providing an opportunity to settle
disputes peacefully.”
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
take note of the solemn appeal in connection with the
observance of the Olympic Truce?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 12?
It was so decided.
22-23510

20/01/2022

Agenda item 16 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/76/L.30)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel to introduce draft resolution
A/76/L.30, which was submitted by Israel together
with Germany.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): Chaim lived in a small village
in Transylvania with his wife, Bracha, and eight
beautiful children. They lived simply; after all, what
more do you need than a loving family and a tight-knit
community? Everyone in the village knew Chaim. He
was a farmer, and he was so strong that whenever a
wagon would get stuck in the mud in the winter, people
would ask for his help to pull it out with his bare hands.
But in the spring of 1944, the small village and
their simple way of life ceased to exist. The Nazis
brutally forced Chaim, Bracha, his wife, their eight
children and 160,000 other Transylvanian Jews into
cramped ghettos. But before anyone could get settled,
they were all packed tightly into cattle cars, with barely
enough space to breathe. And then, when the trains
finally came to a stop, Chaim and his family were met
by shouting soldiers and barking dogs. “Raus! Raus!”,
they yelled — “Out! Out!”
Immediately upon arrival, Chaim was separated
from his family, his young children, his babies torn
from his arms and his sweet Bracha dragged away from
him. If only he had known what was about to happen to
them, he would have kissed each one of them and told
them how much he loved them. But how could he have
known? How could he, who could have imagined that
such evil existed? Bracha and seven of their children
were sent straight to the gas chambers. Innocent
children, Chaim’s sweet, innocent children, choking to
death on a gas used to kill insects and rats. It was over
in minutes, their young lives extinguished forever.
The Nazis kept Chaim alive temporarily for the
sole purpose of doing back-breaking labour for their
despicable regime. But Bracha and her children were
eight victims out of 6 million other Jewish men, women
and children murdered throughout the Holocaust in
the most horrific ways imaginable. How do we know
this? How do we know about the sheer magnitude of the
atrocities, the incomprehensible numbers, the systematic
genocide aiming to wipe out an entire people?

A/76/PV.55

While the survivors and their liberators have spent
years telling their stories, the Nazis left their own
irrefutable proof. The Nazis took so much pride in their
well-oiled killing machine that they made the effort,
at least at the beginning of the war, to keep careful
records of their crimes, making the Holocaust the most
meticulously documented genocide in history.
Nevertheless, we now live in an era in which fiction
is becoming fact as the Holocaust becomes a distant
memory. And as this happens following the greatest
crime in human history, now comes the greatest coverup in human history. As the number of Holocaust
survivors diminishes, Holocaust denial is growing at
a terrifying speed. But this is not a new phenomenon.
Within mere decades of the Holocaust, perverse
publications were already labelling the Holocaust a
fabrication — the 6 million swindle, the hoax of the
twentieth century and the drama of European Jewry, to
name just a few.
The Holocaust was still a gaping wound for
humankind, and already claims were being made
that it was all a lie. But how can you refute the
irrefutable? The gas chambers still stand. The footage
of Einsatzgruppen killing squads murdering thousands
remains archived. The testimonials of so many survivors
have been recorded.
In the face of such clear evidence, Holocaust denial
evolved and changed its form. It is said that a lie that is a
half-truth is the blackest of lies, and so Holocaust denial
became Holocaust distortion. Millions died, yes, but
6 million? People were killed, but systematic genocide?
Concentration camps existed, but gas chambers? The
Jews were targeted, but were they not to blame?
While those distortions and lies differ from denial,
they both stem from the same source of bigotry,
hatred and vehement anti-Semitism. This newer form
of fabrication and Jew hatred is not spread only by
extremists and fringe groups. Nations with seats in this
Hall openly deny the Holocaust, casting doubt on its
occurrence and praising its perpetrators. Some have
even run cartoon contests seeking the best cartoon
mocking the Holocaust. In fact, those that most blatantly
deny that Jews suffered a genocide are the ones now
threatening Jews with another genocide.
Joseph Goebbels, Hitler’s chief propagandist, once
said, if you tell a big lie enough times, people will
eventually come to believe it. Today this pandemic of
distortions and lies uses social media to spread across

22-235103/29

A/76/PV.55

the globe in the blink of an eye. Countless Facebook
groups are dedicated to debunking the Holocaust. The
hashtag #HoloHoax unashamedly trends on Twitter.
Tik-Tok videos mocking victims of the Holocaust
are growing in popularity. YouTubers claiming that
stories about crematoria are fabricated have terrifying
followings. Those posts, tweets and videos are viewed
hundreds of thousands of times, and their impact is
difficult to comprehend.
Only 54 per cent of the world’s population has heard
of the Holocaust, with a third of those sceptical of the
facts. Some of them believe that the deaths have been
exaggerated, while others believe that the Holocaust is a
complete myth. Listen to this shocking fact: only a third
of young Europeans, the people living on the continent
where this unimaginable evil occurred, can explain
what the Holocaust means, what the Holocaust is. If
this is the state of the world at a time when Holocaust
survivors are still with us, what does the future hold?
As the number of survivors dwindles, the younger
generations are being indoctrinated on social media to
doubt reality and trust deception. And as the Internet
turns into a vile breeding ground of deceit, social media
platforms are shirking their responsibility. Despite their
importance, those platforms do little to combat this sick
phenomenon. And as this darkness grows, they place
the blame elsewhere. “It’s not our responsibility; we are
only service providers”, we hear from media executives.
We recognize those words. We have heard them
before. As responsibility is dodged, evil grows. When
there is no accountability, evil triumphs. Social media
giants can no longer remain complacent in the face of
the hate spread through their platforms.
Beyond defining Holocaust distortion and denial,
draft resolution A/76/L.30 is a commitment to ensuring
that this phenomenon will be tolerated no more. As
Israel’s ambassador, this draft resolution is my most
important initiative, not only because I represent the
Jewish State, not only because I am a Jew, but because
I am the grandson of Holocaust survivors.
Chaim, a farmer who lived in a small village in
Transylvania, a man who pulled wagons from the mud
with his bare hands, a man whose wife and children
were torn from his arms and murdered in the gas
chambers, was my grandfather. It was my family that
was exterminated on that terrible day.
4/29

20/01/2022

My grandfather Chaim was never able to share with
us what he went through in Auschwitz. Every time he
began to speak about his experience, he would break
down in tears. For me, the Holocaust is the story of my
family, and it is my personal duty to share this story
with the world.
We have with us in this Hall today guests of honour.
Holocaust survivors Toby, Sammy, Hilda, Norbert and
Rena have joined us for this historic occasion. Each one
of them has an inspiring story of survival to tell — an
inspiring story of how, in the face of all odds, they are
in this Hall with us today to share their experience.
In addition to these survivors, Dr. Albert Bourla,
Chief Executive Officer of Pfizer, Inc. has also joined
us. Dr. Bourla, the man behind the miracle vaccine,
is the child of Holocaust survivors whose survival
was also a miracle. Just imagine how the world would
look today if history had played out differently for the
Bourla family. Now try to imagine how different the
world would look today if the 6 million had survived.
Our guests are in this Hall to be witnesses to the
moment that we commit ourselves to commemorating
their stories while combating the attempts to erase
them. They understand better than all of us that sharing
their stories and the stories of their families not only
honours the memory of the victims, but also ensures
that history will never repeat itself.
To these survivors, I say: No one will erase our
stories. No one will erase our past. No one will distort
our history. I will never let this happen. We will never
let this happen.
This moment is our pledge to these survivors
that the atrocities of the Holocaust will never be
forgotten, and the facts will no longer be distorted. This
Organization was founded in the wake of the greatest
crime ever perpetrated. It was founded upon the ethos
of “never again”, and its very essence was to prevent
such atrocities from ever being repeated — against us,
the Jews, or against anyone else.
Holocaust denial has spread like a cancer. It
has spread under our watch. It has spread because
people have chosen to be irresponsible and to avoid
accountability. The time has come for this Organization
to return to its roots. The time has come for all of us to
right a historic wrong.
Israel, the Jewish State, is proud to have led and
facilitated such a crucial draft resolution, and I would
22-23510

20/01/2022

like to thank my friend, Ambassador Antje Leendertse,
the Permanent Representative of Germany, as well as
the German Government, for co-facilitating it with us.
One of our core values as Jews is to heal a fractured
world, and I urge everyone in this Hall today to join us
in doing that. I thank the more than 100 sponsors, and I
implore those who have not yet co-sponsored the draft
to follow suit.
When Nazi mass murderer Adolf Eichmann stood
on trial in Israel, the Attorney General opened the
prosecution with these moving words:
“When I stand before you here... I am not
standing alone. With me are 6 million accusers.
But they cannot rise to their feet and point an
accusing finger.”
I too stand in this Hall today with 6 million accusers.
Yet while this draft resolution preserves the memory
of the 6 million victims of the past, its goal is also to
protect the victims of the future.
Today marks 80 years since the infamous Wannsee
Conference, the meeting at which 15 high-ranking Nazi
officials were presented with the final solution — the
plan to exterminate the Jewish people. No day is more
fitting for the United Nations General Assembly to show
its unanimous support for such an apt draft resolution.
Our fight to ensure the memory of the victims whose
fates were sealed 80 years ago is a fight that must be
fought as a united body. After all, being vigilant about
history today helps prevent the tragedies of tomorrow.
I thank the Assembly from the bottom of my heart.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/76/L.30.

A/76/PV.55

intentions have still continued in felon minds. Most
notably, the Israeli regime is the symbol of both those
dreadful motives and has applied them in its policies
and practices for well over seven decades, and it
continues to do so now.
Resolution 34/103, adopted 14 December 1979, “[r]
esolutely condemns imperialism, colonialism, neocolonialism, apartheid, racism including Zionism”.
Also, in its resolution 3151 (XXVIII) of 14 December
1973, the Assembly condemned, inter alia, the unholy
alliance between the racism of the former South Africa
and Zionism. Furthermore, the Political Declaration
and Strategy to Strengthen International Peace and
Security and to Intensify Solidarity and Mutual
Assistance among Non-Aligned Countries, adopted
on 30 August 1975, severely condemned Zionism as a
threat to world peace and security and called upon all
countries to oppose this racist and imperialist ideology.
The Declaration of Mexico on the Equality of
Women and their Contribution to Development and
Peace, endorsed by the International Women’s Year
Conference in 1975 also called for “the elimination of
colonialism and neo-colonialism, foreign occupation,
Zionism, apartheid and racial discrimination in all
its forms ...”.
Despite these outstanding calls by the international
community, the Israeli regime, with its racist and
expansionist ideology, policies and practices, has
remained the only apartheid regime in the world. The
draft resolution before us does nothing to promote the
culture of peace. Indeed, the main drivers of the Israeli
regime presenting this draft resolution are its usual
racist beliefs and mischievous intentions to pursue its
expansionist interests through all means.

Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
am taking the floor to explain my delegation’s position
regarding document A/76/L.30. We strongly reject
the deceitful attempt by the Israeli regime, the main
sponsor of draft resolution, to misuse the concepts
affiliated with agenda item 16, “Culture of peace”.

That regime has routinely attempted to exploit
the past suffering of Jewish people as a cover for the
crimes it has perpetrated over the past seven decades
against the countries of the region, including all of its
neighbours, without exception. So far, it has committed
all four core international crimes and, on certain
occasions, it has committed them simultaneously. Its
brutal crimes against the Palestinians include massacre,
assassination, ethnic cleansing, collective punishment,
inhumane blockade, demolition of houses and forced
eviction, and they continue.

The fires of the Second World War, which brought
untold sorrow to humankind, were spread through two
main drivers: racism and expansionism. These sinister

During the Second World War, my country hosted
many refugees from certain European countries. My
Government has continuously condemned genocide,

Before giving the floor for explanations of position,
I would like to remind delegations that explanations are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.

22-235105/29

A/76/PV.55

including on racial, ethnic or religious grounds, as
a crime against humanity. In our view, there is no
justification for genocide of any kind and under any
circumstances. Nor can there be any justification for
policies or practices, like those undertaken by the Israeli
regime, to exploit past crimes as a pretext to commit
or justify new genocides or crimes. The occupation of
Palestine and parts of Syria and Lebanon, as well as
the continued grave systematic violation of the human
rights of the Palestinians, including their inherent right
to self-determination and to establish an independent
State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, constitute
a crime against humanity and cannot be justified in
any way. Rather, the Israeli regime and all its officials
are responsible for such crimes, and the perpetrators
of such crimes must be held accountable and brought
to justice.
The international community should take strong
action against the regime’s crimes and not allow
it to pursue its illegitimate goals by manipulating
humanitarian sentiments.
Moreover, the text before us proposes an awkward
approach to historical studies. Many heinous cases of
genocide throughout history, including in the course
of the Second World War, require a thorough and
comprehensive examination in order to prevent their
recurrence. Imposing an obstructive approach on such
an examination will certainly not serve that purpose.
Undoubtedly, addressing such historical events requires
a proportionate degree of research, scrutiny and rigour.
The seriousness and sincerity of that endeavour will
indeed be undermined by rendering political judgments
on such events and prohibiting any inquiry on their
characteristics, scope and extent.
For the reasons elaborated above, my delegation
fully dissociates itself from draft resolution L.30 in its
entirety, including the definitions contained therein,
and notes that this text should not be considered or
quoted in future as a consensus-based text.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the delegation of Israel for having
taken the initiative to draft and adopt a resolution
against Holocaust denial, which we wholeheartedly
support. Germany participated as the facilitator of the
negotiation process, and this is a very significant and
welcome development.
The mass murder of Jews, known in history as the
Holocaust, was one of the most tragic events of the
6/29

20/01/2022

Second World War. It encompasses a range of crimes
that defy comprehension, perpetrated by Nazi Germany
and its allies from a number of European countries.
The draft resolution (A/76/L.30) being adopted
today is important in systematizing the work being
done by United Nations Member States to keep alive
the memory of the Holocaust and all the victims of
the Nazis. The document also contributes to efforts to
counter attempts to falsify the history of the Second
World War, and it recalls that on 20 January 1942,
representatives of the Nazi party and other high-ranking
German officials met at a conference in Wannsee to
discuss their inhuman designs. At the same time, Nazi
Germany launched a new offensive in the immediate
vicinity of Moscow, near the town of Rzhev. In months
of bloody fighting, 1.3 million people in the Red Army
were either killed and wounded, and in the whole war
with Nazi Germany, the Soviet nation lost 27 million of
its citizens.
The memory of the victims of the Second World
War and the victory over a common enemy is sacred for
us. That is why we will never accept attempts to falsify
and distort the truth about the Second World War and
the alliance between countries that fought against
Hitler. We will not allow the desecration of memorials
to liberating soldiers, nor will we allow the glorification
of Nazism or the proliferation of neo-Nazism. Such
actions are a threat to peace and humanity.
We consider it fundamentally important to reveal
the truth about the victims of the Holocaust, the
genocide of the Soviet people and other crimes of Nazi
Germany and its allies. Russia, Israel, Germany and
other countries and authoritative non-governmental
organizations are doing a great deal of work in this area.
Soviet soldiers stood firm in this war. They won,
among other things, to ensure that the plans outlined at
Wannsee could never again come to pass.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/76/L.30, entitled “Holocaust denial”. I
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of
22-23510

20/01/2022

A/76/PV.55

draft resolution A/76/L.30: Andorra, Angola, Benin,
Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
Côte d’Ivoire, El Salvador, Eswatini, Gabon, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Liechtenstein, Madagascar, the Federated States
of Micronesia, Myanmar, Nigeria, Norway, Palau,
Paraguay, the Republic of Moldova, Samoa, Senegal,
Serbia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Uganda and Vanuatu.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.30?
Draft resolution
(resolution 76/250).

A/76/L.30

was

adopted

The President: We will now hear statements after
the adoption of the resolution.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): Eighty years ago,
senior Nazi officials gathered in Berlin, the capital of
Germany, to plan the implementation of the Holocaust,
the worst crime in human history. The so-called
Wannsee Conference led to the systematic establishment
of death camps and, ultimately, war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide. Nearly 6 million Jews
were murdered, 1.5 million of them children, alongside
a large number of persons belonging to other minorities
and target groups of the Nazi ideology.
Today, the General Assembly is sending a strong
and unambiguous message against the denial or the
distortion of these historical facts. I am pleased that the
entire membership is united in sending this important
message — together and with one voice.
I would like to thank Israel for its trusting
cooperation in co-facilitating resolution 76/250 with
us. I thank the numerous sponsors for their support and
all Member States for their constructive participation
in the informals. With their help, we managed to agree
on a text that is substantial, focused and balanced. I
also thank the President of the General Assembly for
convening this meeting today, on the very day that marks
the eightieth anniversary of the Wannsee Conference.
Germany joined this initiative immediately after
the new Government took office in Berlin last month.
It is Germany’s historical responsibility to keep the
memory of the Holocaust alive, and we are fully aware
that we carry a special obligation in this regard.

Keeping the memory alive is a diverse task
that comes in many forms. One important element,
however, is to relentlessly oppose any attempt aimed at
diminishing, distorting or denying the historical facts,
because, as we put it in the resolution, ignoring historical
facts increases the risk that they will be repeated.
It is disturbing that Holocaust denial and distortion
have been on the rise again in recent years, especially
online. Therefore, in the resolution we go beyond
simply condemning the denial of the Holocaust.
While acknowledging the efforts made so far, we call
on Member States and United Nations specialized
agencies, but also on social media companies, to take
active measures against this disturbing trend.
In one week from today, we will commemorate
Holocaust Remembrance Day. I believe that the
resolution we have just adopted is a significant
contribution towards keeping the memory of the
victims alive, and to making sure that the horrors of the
past will never repeat themselves.
Never again.
The President: I would like to announce that the
list of speakers for statements after adoption of the
resolution has been closed.
I give the floor to the representative of the European
Union, in its capacity as observer.
Mr. Gonzato (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
Member States on resolution 76/250.
The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of
North Macedonia, Serbia, Montenegro and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Georgia and
Liechtenstein align themselves with this statement.
As today marks 80 years since the Wannsee
Conference, this resolution is timely, as it reminds us of
the darkest chapter of Europe’s history, but also of the
importance of joint efforts to fight Holocaust denial or
distortion today.
The European Union is a project rooted in the
history of the European continent. The Holocaust took
place on European soil and was the most abhorrent
crime in history. Nearly 6 million Jews, 1.5 million of
whom were children, as well as millions of members
of other nationalities, minorities and vulnerable

22-235107/29

A/76/PV.55

groups, were killed in German Nazi concentration and
extermination camps. The Holocaust was a turning
point in our history, and its legacy is woven deeply into
the DNA of the European Union. Remembering the
Holocaust is a cornerstone of our values.
Our remembrance of Europe’s tragic past should
continue to drive us forward in facing the challenges of
today, including creating open, inclusive and tolerant
societies and communities, and promoting democracy
and human rights.
We applaud Israel and Germany for their exemplary
cooperation on this important resolution. We wish
to thank the co-facilitators for the positive way in
which the negotiations were conducted. We engaged
constructively from the outset and the large majority of
our proposals were taken on board.
The European Union’s strong support is reflected
in the early co-sponsorship of all of our Member States.
We are very pleased that this resolution could be
adopted by consensus today.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): The United States is proud to co-sponsor
resolution 76/250 to combat the scourge of Holocaust
denial. We appreciate the work our Israeli and German
colleagues did to put forward this text, and we are
pleased to see the overwhelming support of Member
States, including those who added their names to
co-sponsorship today. It has been 15 years since the
United Nations adopted a resolution (resolution 60/7)
on this crucial topic. Today’s resolution could not have
come at a more important moment. And I want to take
this moment to welcome the presence of survivors in
the Hall today to witness this historic day.

20/01/2022

so important that we consistently remember and speak
out against the hatred that spurred the Holocaust. It is
part of our sacred obligation to honour the memory of
the millions of Jews and other victims who perished in
it, by ensuring that we continue to say, again and again,
“Never again. Never again”.
This resolution affirms our commitment to
educating the next generation as a means to prevent the
repetition of the terrible atrocities of the past, and it
reaffirms values and principles core to the founding of
the United Nations, an institution built in the wake of
the Holocaust and the Second World War. Adhering to
the pledge of “never again” is our charge.
Today and every day, we must all keep up a
vigorous guard against Holocaust denial, anti-Semitism
and hate in all of its forms. We must learn from our
history to move forward together in peace, and we must
do everything in our power to push this institution to
live up to its founding promise.
Mr. Klíma (Czech Republic): The Czech Republic
aligns itself with the European Union (EU) statement
and in its national capacity wishes to add the following.
The Czech Republic warmly welcomes the initiative
of Israel to present resolution 76/250, on Holocaust
denial, and congratulates Israel and Germany on its
successful negotiation. The Czech Republic is proudly
among the co-sponsors of this resolution, together with
more than 100 Member States.
As we are marking today 80 years since the
Wannsee Conference, this initiative is most timely. The
Holocaust, as the biggest crime in our history, needs to
be condemned in the strongest terms, but also never to
be forgotten.

Last weekend, members of Congregation Beth
Israel in Colleyville, Texas, were held hostage by a
gunman who reportedly used anti-Semitic language
during the attack. As I was briefed on the attack and
watched the news unfold, it was difficult not to recall
the tragic loss of 11 lives in the attack on the Tree of
Life synagogue in Pittsburgh just a few years ago.

Only through education and a deep knowledge
of history can we learn from the past. That will help
us recognize new threats and stem hatred before it
can overpower us again. We must seek the sources of
and factors in Holocaust denial. Accountability must
be a part of ensuring that such horrific crimes never
happen again.

And while we were relieved that in Colleyville
the hostages escaped and survived, we know that a
pernicious rising tide of anti-Semitism has led to deadly
violence in the United States and elsewhere around the
globe. We must root out anti-Semitic hatred and the false
narratives that go hand in hand — in our communities,
in our countries and in our institutions. This is why it is

The Czech Republic remains committed to
preventing and combating anti-Semitism. We support
international platforms dedicated to developing
specific proposals for legislative measures and
educational programmes. We congratulate Sweden on
having organized the International Forum on Holocaust
Remembrance last year in Malmö. The Czech Republic

8/29

22-23510

20/01/2022

will host a follow-up International Terezin Declaration
Conference, which has been endorsed by 47 countries.
That ministerial event will be organized in the frame
of the upcoming Czech presidency of the Council
of the European Union this November. Its aim is to
achieve progress in rectifying injustices from the time
of the Holocaust, support educational programmes for
young people and raise funds to combat anti-Semitism,
xenophobia and hatred online and offline.
We welcome the recently published, first-ever EU
Strategy on combating anti-Semitism and fostering
Jewish life. At the national level, we are working on the
Czech national strategy for combating anti-Semitism.
It is important to have legislative measures to
ensure a safe and accountable online environment and to
shorten the time between the appearance of anti-Semitic
texts or hate speech on the Internet or social media
and their removal. International cooperation and the
sharing of good practices in those areas are essential.
Last but not least, the involvement of young people is
crucial. Their new, fresh ideas can fill the Internet with
positive content if they are motivated enough through
education, grant projects and attractive competitions.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): I wish to express my
country’s strong support for resolution 76/250,
on Holocaust denial, and thank the delegations of
Israel and Germany for this timely and very much
needed initiative.
Poland subscribes to the statement delivered by the
delegation of the European Union. In addition, I have
the honour to offer the Assembly some general remarks
in my national capacity.
Fighting and preventing Holocaust denial has
special importance for Poland. Among the millions of
Jewish victims who were exterminated as a result of the
implementation of the murderous anti-Semitic ideology
of German Nazism, 3 million were Polish citizens.
The
interconnections
between
Holocaust
denial, anti-Semitism and hate crimes motivated by
anti-Semitism are obvious. In order to effectively fight
them, we need to fight them all, including by creating
tools that enable us to identify and fight the growing
disinformation and distortion of the truth about the
time of the Second World War. The resolution at hand,
which for the first time defines Holocaust denial and
distortion at the United Nations level, serves this
important purpose.

A/76/PV.55

Second only to the Jewish people, we, the Poles,
took upon ourselves a special duty to help preserve the
memory of the Holocaust. That is the case because a
vast part of that tragedy took place on Polish territory
occupied by Nazi Germany. That is the case because
more than 80 years ago, we were the first victims of
the attack by Nazi Germany and showed resilience in
creating the largest resistance movement in the whole
of war-torn Europe and in building a fully functioning
underground State. That is the case because millions
of Polish citizens lost their lives as a result of the
implementation of Nazi ideology. That is the case
because many of us risked our lives to help and rescue
Jewish victims and to raise the alarm in the rest of
the world about the truth of the Holocaust. That is the
case because in an effort to pass on the truth to future
generations, we continue to preserve the sites of former
German Nazi concentration and extermination camps
as museums and memorials.
It is therefore extremely important to us that the
resolution honours those who fought the Nazis and who
liberated German Nazi concentration and extermination
camps, those who sought to rescue the victims of the
Holocaust and those who are engaged in preserving
places that memorialize the tragedy of the Holocaust.
It is also of great significance to me personally, as I am
privileged to have Righteous among the Nations among
my family members.
We owe it to the victims to fulfil that obligation
to remember, especially given the dwindling numbers
of Holocaust survivors. But so long as survivors are
still among us, it is to their voices that we should
respectfully listen most of all. Our role is to preserve
the truth, fight its denial and distortion, and educate
future generations. The resolution on Holocaust denial
provides us with ample tools to do just that.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): The Holocaust is a
common tragedy and a source of guilt for humankind
as a whole. More than one and a half million Ukrainian
Jews were killed during the dark times of modern
history. Millions of Ukrainians sacrificed themselves
and made a tremendous contribution to the victory over
Nazism by their exemplary heroism in the struggle
for the liberation of their native soil and the countries
of Europe.
In the Book of Isaiah, which is so important to both
Jews and Christians, one can read:

22-235109/29

A/76/PV.55

“To all of them I erect a monument in my house and
in my walls. I give them a name worth more than
sons and daughters: I give them an eternal name
that will never be erased”.
The monument and the name: Yad Vashem
in Hebrew.
As a grandson of a survivor of the Buchenwald
concentration camp, I had the privilege to visit the
Monument to the Children in Yad Vashem in Israel
last summer. The dark main room of the memorial is
completely mirrored and reflects the light of only five
candles. The reflection of those lights produces the
illusion of space, which symbolizes the approximately
1.5 million children and youngsters who died during
the Holocaust.
As one moves through the room in the sparse light
of the candles, the names of the children killed and
their age and place of death are recited on a looped
tape recording. The recording takes about three months
to list all those who perished. One hears Ukraine,
Ukraine, Ukraine … . One also hears the names of
other European countries and leaves the dark, candlelit
room totally devastated but equally deeply determined
to work hard to prevent such tragedies from ever
happening again.
It is the duty, in my opinion, of every Ambassador
to the United Nations and every official of the United
Nations to visit Yad Vashem so as to reflect the
experience in their daily work. I fully subscribe the
words of Secretary-General António Guterres spoken
during his visit to Yad Vashem in 2017:
“the Holocaust was not a crazy initiative of a group
of paranoid Nazis, but it was the combination of
millennia of persecution and discrimination of the
Jewish people in what today we call anti-Semitism”.
I thank Secretary-General Guterres for those
words. He is one of only three Secretaries-General to
have visited Yad Vashem in what will soon be eight
decades of the existence of the United Nations.
In October last year, around the world, the
international community commemorated the eightieth
anniversary of the massacre of Babyn Yar — one of
the most heinous manifestations of the Holocaust
perpetrated upon the territory of Ukraine. On 6 October
2021, the events dedicated to commemorating the
eightieth anniversary were held at the Babyn Yar
Holocaust Memorial Centre. At that time, the President
10/29

20/01/2022

of Ukraine, together with the leaders of Israel and
Germany, and hundreds of other guests from around
the world, gathered together, as Babyn Yar remains
symbolically one of the deepest unhealed wounds for
Jews, Ukrainians, Roma and others. It is a sacred place
that awakens and preserves historical memory.
Ukraine reaffirms its strongest condemnation of all
forms of Nazism. Ukraine condemns Stalin’s cooperation
with Nazism. Ukraine condemns neo-Nazism and other
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance. We are proud to co-sponsor the
resolution 76/250, and we find it morally egregious to
poison this historic moment with attacks that single out
particular countries members of the General Assembly.
Mr. Stefanile (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of the European
Union, in its capacity as observer, and I would like to
add the following remarks in my national capacity.
We welcome the adoption by consensus — on the
day that marks 80 years since the infamous Wannsee
Conference — of this important resolution (resolution
76/250), which we co-sponsored early. This initiative is
timely and needed, as we witness worrying and growing
examples of Holocaust denial and distortion through the
use of information and communication technologies.
Ignoring the historical facts of those terrible events
increases the risk that they might be repeated. As the
Italian writer and survivor of Auschwitz Primo Levi
put it,
“It happened; therefore it can happen again...”.
This is why 27 January has been designated by the
United Nations as the annual International Day
of Commemoration, in memory of the Victims of
the Holocaust.
Italy strongly rejects and firmly condemns any
denial or distortion of the Holocaust as a historical
event and commends the International Holocaust
Remembrance Alliance for its important contribution
to the preservation of the memory of the Holocaust. By
laying down, for the first time in the General Assembly,
a definition of Holocaust denial, today’s resolution
provides us with a fundamental tool to safeguard the
truthful memory of the most appalling and tragic crime
in history.
Mr. Hadjichrysanthou (Cyprus): Cyprus fully
subscribes to the statement of the European Union.
We strongly welcome the fact that the international
22-23510

20/01/2022

community has unanimously taken the step to condemn
any denial of the Holocaust.
The resolution that has just been adopted by
the General Assembly today (resolution 76/250) is
important for the preservation of the integrity of
historical truth, for combating attempts to sanitize
history through revisionism, for ensuring accountability
and for fighting impunity in respect of atrocities, and
for the prevention of genocide. Above all, it fulfils a
moral obligation towards the victims, for whom denial
equals revictimization.
The message we give today is one that the
distortion of historical facts will not be tolerated. We
must honour this collective commitment in the face of
such challenges as the passage of time and the demise
of Holocaust survivors.
I shall conclude in this regard by underscoring
that denial of the Holocaust, or any other genocide, is
reprehensible and only condemns us to repeating history.
Mr. Lam Padilla (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala has the honour of co-sponsoring this
important resolution (resolution 76/250), and I have the
personal privilege of expressing our brotherhood with
the Jewish people as a result of the catastrophe and
terrible tragedy that was the Holocaust and genocide
committed against them by the Nazi regime in the
Second World War, taking into account the importance
that my country attaches to the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and all
international instruments that establish that every
person has the right to enjoy his fundamental rights,
and giving special attention and relevance in this regard
to the human right to freedom of thought, conscience
and religion.
In the same vein as resolution 76/250, Decree 12-2018
of the Congress of the Republic of Guatemala, dated
19 April 2018, declared 14 May as the Day of Friendship
between the Republic of Guatemala and the State of
Israel. Since that date the Guatemalan Ministry of
Education carries out activities that commemorate the
friendship, cooperation and help between peoples, based
on mutual respect, tolerance and non-discrimination on
the basis of ethnic, cultural or religious origin.
Resolution 76/250, which, again, we are honoured
to co-sponsor, has a content of singular importance,
especially in this General Assembly Hall, where, we,

A/76/PV.55

the States Members of the United Nations, remind
ourselves of the global commitment we have made
to remembering the Holocaust, the worst crime in
the human history and to fighting against Holocaust
denial, recalling the unspeakable human suffering
caused by intolerance, xenophobia, discrimination and
anti-Semitism against the Jewish people, to whom we
reiterate our solidarity.
We especially honour the memory of the victims. It
is difficult for me to even imagine that this magnitude
of evil could occur in the world. It is our responsibility
to defend freedom of thought, conscience and religion
so that an atrocity like the Holocaust will never be
repeated — never again.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): We would like to join
others in thanking Israel and Germany for introducing
this important resolution (resolution 76/250).
As others have said, collectively, we recall that 80
years ago today, the Wannsee Conference, in which
the so-called final solution of the Jewish question was
discussed and coordinated, resulted in the systematic
establishment of the shameful Nazi death camps.
Today, across the globe, as the Israeli ambassador
so accurately described earlier, there are malicious
people who actively deny the historical reality of the
Holocaust and seek to minimize the extent of the
atrocities committed.
I accompanied Queen Elizabeth II to the site of the
Bergen Belsen concentration camp during her State
visit to Germany in 2015. There, we heard first-hand
what the survivors of that camp had endured, and we
heard from the liberators of Belsen what they had seen
70 years earlier.
These are the words of a British Broadcasting
Corporation
journalist
accompanying
those
liberating troops:
“… Here over an acre of ground lay dead and dying
people. You could not see which was which… The
living lay with their heads against the corpses and
around them moved the awful, ghostly procession
of emaciated, aimless people and with no hope
of life.”
Fifty thousand Jews were murdered in BergenBelsen, and that is just one part of the puzzle of the
horror of the Holocaust. This is reality. Denying and
distorting the Holocaust is a form of anti-Semitism.

22-2351011/29

A/76/PV.55

We must not stand by when others revise history
to erase the horror of the mass murder of the Jewish
people. The United Kingdom looks forward to chairing
the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance
in 2024, and we are proud to have been the first
country to adopt the Alliance’s working definition of
anti-Semitism. We actively encourage other States to
adopt it too. In 2025, the United Kingdom will open a
new Holocaust memorial and learning centre to stand
as a constant reminder of why we must be relentless in
the fight against Holocaust denial and anti-Semitism.
We are proud to cosponsor this resolution today.
We do so because we must remember, because we
must stand firm with the truth and we must say clearly
“never again”.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
country’s delegation makes this statement on behalf of
the Group of Arab States, as Egypt chairs the Group
for January.
The Arab Group confirms that it aligns itself
with the international consensus on resolution 76/250,
entitled “Holocaust denial”, given our proper human
and ethical feeling as well as the gravity and danger
of the horrific crime of the Holocaust. That crime is
a black page in the history of humankind and should
remain alive in the global conscience so that it is never
repeated against any people, ethnicity or religion. We
can only ensure that through sincere and intensive
efforts by the international community to strengthen
the culture of peace, tolerance, recognition of the
suffering of others and return rights to their owners,
including the right to self-determination and mutual,
safe and peaceful coexistence.
As the Arab Group reiterates its condemnation
of the Holocaust, it also reiterates its rejection of all
other crimes of genocide and human tragedies. We
underscore that crimes of the past should be a reason
for further respect for international law, international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
The Arab Group expresses the hope that the same spirit
of consensus that we have seen today with regard to
the adoption of this resolution will also be seen when
we adopt other resolutions on discrimination against
people on the basis of religion, ethnicity or any
other consideration.
Serious action to combat intolerance, hate speech,
extremism and terrorism is a duty and a necessity for
12/29

20/01/2022

the international community in order to ensure a better
future for humankind.
Mr. Pilipenko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
adoption of resolution 76/250, on Holocaust denial, on
the eightieth anniversary of the Wannsee Conference
and just in advance of International Holocaust
Remembrance Day is an occasion for all of us to once
again recall the tragic events of world history that
remain an unhealed wound in the memory of our nation
and the whole of the international community.
Belarus feels the pain of the Holocaust as its own.
Our country went through all of the horrors of Hitler’s
genocide. Mass murders began virtually as soon as
German troops arrived in Belarus and continued until
the Republic was finally liberated. The Nazis organized
260 concentration camps and places of mass murder
on the territory of Belarus, and more than 70 Jewish
ghettos became the final resting place for more than
800,000 people. Among them were not only Jews from
Belarus, but also citizens of many European countries.
They arrived dying of hunger, brought by train from
across Europe to Belarus for extermination. We still
cherish the memory of the soldiers of the Red Army.
They fought the brown plague and organized the
evacuation of the Jewish population of Belarus.
We also remember the heroic acts of ordinary
citizens of Belarus who helped Jews survive in very
difficult conditions under Nazi occupation — saving
them from certain death and, often, becoming victims
of the Nazis themselves because of their actions. For
the people of Belarus, the memory of the Holocaust
tragedy is therefore holy, and maintaining that memory
is an objective of national significance.
The first memorial to the victims of the Holocaust
was built in Belarus as long ago as 1947, on the site of
the inmates of the Minsk ghetto. Across Belarus, more
than 500 memorials to the dead have already been built,
and new ones are being built all the time, including
with the participation of our foreign partners.
In recent years, Belarus has returned to a very
underresearched subject, namely, the genocide of the
Belarusian people, and a corresponding law was also
adopted on the genocide of the Belarusian nation. New
historical information is always being discovered, and
previously unknown mass burial sites have also been
found. Work is also ongoing to identify and rebury
the victims.
22-23510

20/01/2022

In order for society to have an objective relationship
to the historical past and to maintain and strengthen
the unity of Belarusian people, 2022 was officially
declared the Year of Historical Memory in Belarus.
It is clear that protecting true historical memory is
impossible without the involvement of all generations
and the active involvement of young people. That is
why 27 January, International Holocaust Memorial
Day, was added to the calendar of important memorial
dates adopted every year by the Ministry of Education.
On that day, the victims of the many death camps and
ghettos that were founded in occupied Belarus are
remembered in our schools. New generations should
remember the lessons of the past in order to not allow a
similar tragedy to be repeated in the future and to value
peace, stability and tranquillity.
Belarus is also making significant efforts in the
international arena to promote initiatives to prevent a
repeat of the tragic events and to maintain historical
truth. Unfortunately, we must note that there are still
attempts by some countries to falsify the history of the
Second World War, to exonerate the crimes of the Third
Reich and to glorify Nazi executioners and their allies.
Belarus thinks that is unacceptable. True to the
memory of the victims of Nazism, we will continue
to combat those efforts in an ongoing manner. That
is one of our promises as candidate for a post as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council for
2024 and 2025.
In conclusion, we would like to note that, in today’s
modern, unstable world, each of us should make every
effort to combat neo-Nazism and the falsification
of history in order to fight against intolerance and
discrimination. That is the only way to maintain shared
peace and security and to form a dignified community
of truly united nations.
Mr. Mohd Nasir (Malaysia): My delegation joined
the consensus on resolution 76/250, on Holocaust
remembrance. We condemn the Holocaust. The
Holocaust serves as a reminder of human tragedy and
the heinous crime of genocide, which remains today a
dark chapter in human history. The Holocaust reminds
us of the dangers of racial discrimination, xenophobia
and prejudice.
Historical books review that the roots of the
Holocaust were planted much earlier than the infamous
Wannsee Conference, which convened on 20 January
1942, 80 years ago. It began with subliminal messaging

A/76/PV.55

through speech and the media, as well as the use of
cartoons to disparage, alienate and target a group of
people based on their race and faith. In the aftermath
of the Second World War, we told ourselves that we
would learn from history and ensure that tragedies
like the Holocaust would never reoccur or be repeated.
It is among the reasons why the United Nations was
established to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war.
Sadly, the world today has yet to live up to the
words and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations,
which we hold close and dear. The moral failures of the
past remain. In some cases, those failures have allowed
the United Nations to be sidestepped. We must learn
from the Holocaust and subsequent human tragedies
and ask: “Does the world need another Holocaust before
the United Nations really lives up to its raison d’être?”
I hope not.
The international community through the United
Nations must intensify efforts to enhance and promote
the culture of peace. The United Nations must push
for greater efforts to combat racism, intolerance and
xenophobia in all their forms. Malaysia hopes that the
United Nations and the international community will
also support other important resolutions, conferences
and activities that are similar to the spirit of resolution
76/250, in calling for the elimination of racism,
intolerance, hate speech and other prejudices that
warrant international attention and action.
The President: We have heard the last speaker for
this item.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 16.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that, at its
second plenary meeting on 17 September 2021, the
General Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (a) of
agenda item 23 to the Second Committee. To enable the
Assembly to take action expeditiously on the document,
may I take it that the Assembly wishes to consider
sub-item (a) of agenda item 23 directly in plenary
meeting and proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 76/506 B).

22-2351013/29

A/76/PV.55

20/01/2022

Agenda item 23 (continued)

Agenda Item 116 (continued)

Groups of countries in special situations

Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections

(a) Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries
Draft decision (A/76/L.32)
The President: The General Assembly will
now take action on draft decision A/76/L.32. In this
connection, I give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of draft decision A/76/L.32, the
General Assembly would decide to further postpone
the Fifth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries to a date to be decided at the
earliest possible time. The adoption of the draft decision
would not entail any budgetary implications with regard
to the programme budget. Upon a further decision by
the General Assembly on the date of the Fifth United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries,
the Secretary-General would reassess the budgetary
implications and advise the General Assembly in
accordance with rule 153 of its rules of procedures.
Furthermore, in accordance with established practice,
the date of the Fifth United Nations Conference would
be determined in consultation with the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management.
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft decision A/76/L.32, entitled “Fifth United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft decision A/76/L.32?
Draft decision A/76/L.32 was adopted (decision
76/551).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 23
Mr. Salovaara (Finland), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
14/29

(b) Election of the Executive Director of the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme
Note by the Secretary-General (A/76/638)
The Acting President: As stated in the SecretaryGeneral’s note (A/76/638), the General Assembly, in
its resolution 56/206 of 21 December 2001, decided
to transform the United Nations Centre for Human
Settlements into the secretariat of the United Nations
Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat). In the
same resolution, the Assembly also decided that the UNHabitat secretariat should be headed by an Executive
Director at the level of Under-Secretary-General, to be
elected by the Assembly for a term of four years upon
nomination by the Secretary-General after consultation
with Member States.
On 22 December 2017, the General Assembly, in
its decision 72/413, on the nomination of the SecretaryGeneral, elected Maimunah Mohd Sharif of Malaysia
as Executive Director of UN-Habitat, at the UnderSecretary-General level, for a term of office of four
years. Ms. Sharif took up her duties on 20 January
2018 and, accordingly, her term of office ended on
19 January 2022.
In the light of the provisions of resolution 56/206,
the Secretary-General proposes to the General
Assembly that the term of office of Ms. Sharif as
Executive Director of UN-Habitat be extended for two
years, beginning on 20 January 2022 and ending on
19 January 2024.
Accordingly, may I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to re-elect Ms. Maimunah Mohd
Sharif as Executive Director of the United Nations
Human Settlements Programme for a term of office of
two years, beginning on 20 January 2022 and ending on
19 January 2024?
It was so decided (decision 76/415).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 116?
It was so decided.
22-23510

20/01/2022

Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: I invite the attention of the
General Assembly to draft decision A/76/L.31 and draft
amendments A/76/L.33/Rev.1 and A/76/L.34/Rev.1,
circulated under agenda item 109, entitled “Countering
the use of information and communications technologies
for criminal purposes”.
Members will recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting,
on 17 September 2021, the General Assembly decided
to allocate agenda item 109 to the Third Committee to
enable the Assembly to take action expeditiously on
the documents.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to consider
agenda item 109 directly in plenary meeting and
proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided. (decision 76/506 B).
The Acting President: In that connection, since
the draft amendment was circulated only this morning,
it would be necessary to waive the relevant provision of
rule 78 of the rules of procedure, which reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objections, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees with my proposal to waive rule 78 of
the rules of procedure.
It was so decided.
Agenda item 109 (continued)
Countering the use of information and
communications technologies for criminal purposes
Draft decision A/76/L.31
Draft amendments (A/76/L.33/Rev.1 and
A/76/L.34/Rev.1)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation to introduce
draft decision A/76/L.31.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
Russia submitted draft decision A/76/L.31, entitled

A/76/PV.55

“Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive
International Convention on Countering the Use of
Information and Communications Technologies for
Criminal Purposes”.
Our document aims to maintain the modalities
approved by resolution 75/282 to convene sessions
of the Ad Hoc Committee. The order of meetings, in
both New York and Vienna, was the result of a long
negotiation process. We cannot allow the time and
effort it took for the General Assembly to reach joint
compromise solutions to be in vain.
The Secretariat has not clearly determined whether
it is possible to hold a meeting at Headquarters in New
York, given the current circumstances. As a result,
the Ad Hoc Committee could not commence its work
within the agreed deadline.
However, as we can see, other in-person meetings
are being held in the normal way. Today’s meeting here
and a number of other meetings planned for January
confirm that fact. We are convinced that the coronavirus
disease situation should not mean that processes have
to stagnate or that we cannot take action on what
has already been agreed upon. We are interested in
convening the first substantive meeting in New York as
soon as possible.
Meanwhile, the amended version submitted by
the Dominican Republic (A/76/L.33/Rev.1) includes
more questionable elements. Now it mentions not only
reviewing agreements that have already been reached,
but also changing the general approach to organizing and
holding meetings at Headquarters. Moreover, priority
is given to such criteria as “space and conditions” and
“health conditions”. We cannot not begin to understand
what those would mean.
However, we are convinced that this is a very
negative precedent, not only for the Ad Hoc Committee
but also for other subsequent meetings. Member
States risk losing any control over the proceedings.
The Secretariat would be able to decide unilaterally
whether a specific meeting should be held or not.
Thus, such selective approaches to the convening of
meetings, whereby some would be considered more
important than others, will be reaffirmed and further
developed. Unlike the Dominican Republic’s proposal,
the Belarusian proposal (A/76/L.34/Rev.1.), like the
Russian one from the very beginning, does not go
beyond a technical solution and does not change any

22-2351015/29

A/76/PV.55

modalities for the Committee that have already been
agreed upon.
We encourage all States that are interested in the
successful and smooth functioning of the Committee
in line with resolution 75/282, adopted by consensus,
I repeat — by consensus — to support the Russian
proposal contained in draft decision A/76/L.31 and
the Belarusian proposal contained in draft amendment
A/76/L.34/Rev.1.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Dominican Republic to introduce
draft amendment A/76/L.33/Rev.1.
Mrs. Cedano (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): The Dominican Republic has participated
enthusiastically in the efforts of the international
community at the United Nations to draft a new
international instrument on cybercrime. We have
consistently expressed our determination to work with
all Member States to draft an international treaty that
will represent each and every one of us, guided by the
principles of transparency, impartiality and inclusion.
For our country, compliance with the mandate
given by the General Assembly to the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes
is an extremely high priority.
Given the current situation, which has compelled
us to postpone the first substantive session of the Ad
Hoc Committee as a result of the severe impact of the
pandemic in New York and elsewhere in the world, the
decision we take today must be one that provides us
with the utmost certainty.
That certainty must be based on the information
available as to when that first substantive session can
be held in person with the least possible risk to the
health of participants. That is why we must adopt the
most realistic proposal in order to ensure that, in a few
weeks’ time, we will not find ourselves in the same
situation we are in today and compelled to postpone the
session once again.
Overnight, the pandemic has replaced what is
desirable with what is possible. Whether we like it or
not, that is our new reality. Despite those constraints
and in the spirit of consensus that must guide our work,
as soon as we learned of draft amendment A/76/L.34/
Rev.1, submitted by Belarus, we decided to incorporate
16/29

20/01/2022

its main elements in draft amendment A/76/L.33/
Rev.1, submitted by our delegation. However, we also
take into account the possibility that, prior to 18 April,
there may not be rooms available in New York for the
Committee’s first substantive session.
Therefore, draft amendment A/76/L.33/Rev.1,
which I have the honour to introduce on behalf of the
Dominican Republic and its co-sponsors, focuses on
four main aspects.
First, it proposes the postponement of the first
substantive session of the Ad Hoc Committee, scheduled
to be held from 17 to 28 January 2022, as a result of the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
Secondly, it addresses the concern of delegations
represented only in New York to participate in the
voting on organizational matters that will be conducted
during the first substantive session of the Ad Hoc
Committee by proposing to hold a one-day meeting in
New York, preferably before 28 February.
Thirdly, it proposes that the first substantive
session of the Ad Hoc Committee be held in New York
no later than 18 April, health and physical distancing
permitting, and, if that is not possible, that it be held
on the date and at the venue already reserved for the
second substantive session of the Ad Hoc Committee,
that is, from 30 May to 10 June in Vienna, retaining the
rest of the schedule as agreed, with the addition of only
one final substantive session to be held in New York,
in addition to the concluding session scheduled to be
held in New York to adopt the draft convention in the
months available before the convening of the seventyeighth session of the General Assembly in 2024.
Fourthly, and of equal importance, it explicitly
includes the point that a minimum of 11 weeks should
be left between the substantive sessions of the Ad
Hoc Committee with a view to protecting the right of
smaller delegations to contribute on an equal footing to
the drafting process for the new convention.
The draft amendment addresses practical
considerations, ensures respect for the principles of
inclusiveness and transparency during the negotiation
process and preserves the agreements reached in the
course of the many informal consultations held in
Vienna. We therefore ask that Member States vote in
favour of draft amendment A/76/L.33/Rev.1.
Finally, we wish to assure all delegations that the
draft amendment is submitted in a constructive spirit
22-23510

20/01/2022

and with the aim of addressing essential long-term
issues so that the Ad Hoc Committee can formally
begin its work as soon as possible, in accordance with
resolutions 74/247 and 75/282.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belarus to introduce draft amendment
A/76/L.34/Rev.1.
Mr. Evseenko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
proposal of Belarus submitted in draft amendment
A/76/L.34/Rev.1 is to find a compromise, and we
propose that the first meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee
be held no later than 18 April. In that way, we will not
review the agreements reached earlier but retain the
possibility of being flexible in outlining the new dates
for the first session of the Committee, to be held in New
York, given the coronavirus disease situation.
The proposal by the Dominican Republic submitted
in draft amendment A/76/L.33/Rev.1 was reviewed, but
we think that our proposal is still relevant, and we think
that the Dominican Republic proposal includes some
internal contradictions. For example, it is not clear
whether the proposal to hold a meeting on 28 February
complies with resolution 75/282. The criteria for
holding the meeting — namely, provided that the health
conditions and space permit it to be held — do not make
it clear how we would work in the future and for all
future activities of the General Assembly.
It seems to us that the proposal of the Dominican
Republic would lead to an unclear precedent for
everyone, not only for the Ad Hoc Committee but also
for other bodies within the United Nations.
The Acting President: Before we take action
on draft decision A/76/L.31 and draft amendments
A/76/L.33/Rev.1 and A/76/L.34/Rev.1, I wish to outline
how we will proceed.
Delegations wishing to make a statement in
explanation of vote before the voting on the draft
decision and/or the draft amendments will be invited to
do so shortly in one intervention.
Thereafter, the Assembly will proceed to consider
draft amendment A/76/L.34/Rev.1, submitted by
Belarus, which proposes an amendment to draft
amendment A/76/L.33/Rev.1 submitted by the
Dominican Republic. The Assembly will then consider
draft decision A/76/L.33/Rev.1 submitted by the
Dominican Republic, which proposes an amendment
to draft decision A/76/L.31, submitted by the Russian

A/76/PV.55

Federation. Finally, the Assembly will consider draft
decision A/76/L.31, submitted by the Russian Federation.
Are there any comments?
I hear no objections; we shall proceed accordingly.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I have two oral
statements to make under rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly. The first oral
statement is as follows.
Under the terms of draft decision A/76/L.31 as
amended by draft amendment A/76/L.33/Rev.1 as
amended by draft amendment A/76/L.34/Rev.1, the
General Assembly would decide that the Ad Hoc
Committee shall hold its first negotiation session in
New York no later than 18 April 2022.
In relation to the requirements for the activities
of the Ad Hoc Committee referred to in resolution
75/282, which were included in the report on revised
estimates resulting from resolutions and decisions
adopted by the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth
session (A/76/372), the adoption of the draft decision
as amended and further amended would not entail any
budgetary implications with regard to the programme
budget in 2022.
The Secretary-General indicated that the resource
requirements for 2023 and 2024, as presented in the
report on revised estimates, would be included in the
proposed programme budget for 2023 and 2024. The
impact on the schedule of the sessions of the Ad Hoc
Committee to be held in 2023 and 2024 resulting from
the adoption of draft decision A/76/L.31, as amended
by draft amendment A/76/L.33/Rev.1 as amended by
draft amendment A/76/L.34/Rev.1, remains unknown
at this stage.
The decision relating to the schedule of all sessions
remains the prerogative of the Ad Hoc Committee.
Any change in resource requirements for 2023 and
2024 emanating from changes in the schedule for the
sessions of the Ad Hoc Committee in 2023 and 2024
as compared to the assumptions made in the report on
revised estimates would be communicated if and as
applicable to the respective intergovernmental body
deciding on such changes, in accordance with rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. The

22-2351017/29

A/76/PV.55

budget proposal to the General Assembly for 2023 and
2024 would reflect any such changes.
Furthermore, in accordance with the established
practice, the dates of the sessions of the Ad Hoc
Committee would be determined by the Ad Hoc
Committee, in consultation with the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management in
New York and the Conference Management Service of
the United Nations Office at Vienna.
This concludes the first oral statement.
The second oral statement, also made in accordance
with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, is as follows.
Under the terms of draft decision A/76/L.31 as
amended by draft amendment A/76/L.33/Rev.1, the
General Assembly would decide to postpone the first
session of the Ad Hoc Committee scheduled to be held
in New York from 17 to 28 January 2022; that the Ad
Hoc Committee shall convene at least six sessions of
10 days each, to be held no less than 11 weeks apart;
that the Ad Hoc Committee shall hold a one-day
meeting in New York as soon as possible, preferably
before 28 February 2022, for the purpose of addressing
organizational matters; that the Ad Hoc Committee
shall hold its first negotiation session in New York no
later than 18 April 2022, health conditions and space
permitting; and that, if health conditions and space do
not permit the holding of a meeting in New York by
April 2022, the Ad Hoc Committee shall hold its first
negotiation session in May 2022, and the sequencing of
the meetings shall then be as follows: the first, third and
fourth sessions shall be held in Vienna and the second,
fifth and sixth sessions in New York, with a concluding
session to be held in New York.
In relation to the requirements of the activities of
the Ad Hoc Committee referred to in resolution 75/282,
which were included in the report on the revised
estimates resulting from the resolutions and decisions
adopted by the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth
session, the adoption of the draft decision as amended
would not entail any budgetary implications with regard
to the programme budget in 2022.
The Secretary-General indicated that the resource
requirements for 2023 and 2024, as presented in the
report on revised estimates, would be included in
the proposed programme budgets for 2023 and 2024.
The impact on the schedule of the sessions of the Ad
18/29

20/01/2022

Hoc Committee in 2023 and 2024 resulting from the
adoption of draft decision A/76/L.31, as amended by
A/76/L.33/Rev.1, remains unknown at this stage.
The decision relating to the schedule of all sessions
remains the prerogative of the Ad Hoc Committee.
Any change in the resource requirements for 2023 and
2024 emanating from changes in the schedule of the
sessions of the Ad Hoc Committee in 2023 and 2024
as compared to the assumptions made in the report on
the revised estimates would be communicated, if and
as applicable, to the respective intergovernmental body
deciding on such changes, in accordance with rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. The
budget proposals to the General Assembly for 2023 and
2024 would reflect any such changes.
Furthermore, in accordance with the established
practice, the dates of the sessions of the Ad Hoc
Committee would be determined by the Ad Hoc
Committee in consultation with the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management in
New York and the Conference Management Service of
the United Nations Office in Vienna.
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote before the voting, may
I remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its member States.
The European Union and its member States reiterate
their support for the efforts of the Chair of the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information
and Communications Technologies for Criminal
Purposes and of the Secretariat in the current context,
particularly in view of the difficulties and uncertainties
in the context of a global pandemic. Unfortunately, we
are facing a situation of force majeure.
The European Union and its member States share
the flexibility, the constructive spirit and the will of
all delegations to look at all the possible options in
order to permit the first formal session of the Ad Hoc
Committee to be held as soon as possible, despite the
current health situation.
As we have said many times throughout this
process, the European Union and its member States
22-23510

20/01/2022

would like to recall once again that our main objective is
to ensure that the negotiation process is open, inclusive
and transparent — and therefore legitimate and also
predictable. That involves doing everything possible
to ensure that as many countries and stakeholders as
possible can attend the formal negotiation session, which
should start as soon as possible, without jeopardizing
the health of the participants. That also involves
allowing sufficient time between formal sessions so
that all delegations, including the smallest ones, can
prepare and submit their contributions and participate
effectively in the negotiations. Therefore, we do not see
any viable option other than the one proposed by the
Dominican Republic in draft amendment A/76/L.33/
Rev.1.
In its letter of 19 January, the Secretariat confirmed
that there were no meeting rooms available in New
York for a two-week session until April and that it was
not yet in a position to provide a clear indication of
how the situation would evolve in the coming months
until August.
We recognize that holding an entirely virtual
meeting, even following a first day of in-person
meetings in New York, is not an acceptable alternative
for many delegations. Given the current constraints
and objective modalities available to us and given the
various proposals on the table, the European Union and
its member States can fully support only the proposal
of the Dominican Republic, that is, that we address the
organizational issues during a one-day “zero session”
in New York and then, if health conditions and the
availability of meeting rooms allow, hold the first
formal session no later than 18 April.
More important, the proposal of the Dominican
Republic includes a scenario in the event that the
global pandemic situation does not permit that session
to be held on that date, which would mean beginning
the discussions in May in Vienna in order to allow
sufficient time for translation and to respect the time
frame foreseen in resolution 75/282.
Finally, the proposal also ensures that there is an
adequate period of at least 11 weeks between formal
sessions to ensure the inclusiveness of the whole process
and to give delegations time to prepare and organize for
each session.
We would also like to stress once again the
importance of a predictable process and ensuring
that the first substantive session can be held as soon

A/76/PV.55

as possible under good conditions. That is why we
call on all Member States to support draft amendment
A/76/L.33/Rev.1, submitted by the Dominican Republic,
and to vote against draft amendment A/76/34/Rev.1,
submitted by Belarus.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
use of information and telecommunications for criminal
purposes often transcends geographical boundaries,
which, as a global problem, affects us all, requiring an
urgent, effective and united response. Any delay to act
accordingly will provide criminals more opportunities
for expanding their pernicious activities and will only
create loopholes for criminals to enjoy impunity and
evade the administration of justice, in particular by
exploiting the ambiguities and existing challenges in
international judicial cooperation among States.
Given the vital importance of an expedited and
collective response to such crimes, my delegation
welcomes any initiative that can lead to the immediate
implementation of resolution 74/247 and the
operationalization of the arrangements and the very
purposes envisaged in resolution 75/282 concerning
the convening of the first session of the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes.
We understand the concerns emanating from the
spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), but
the pandemic has also created conditions that have led
to the development of, and rise in, crimes, especially
new forms of crimes in cyberspace, COVID-19 should
therefore not be assumed as an obstacle that prevents us
from tackling those crimes; rather, it should be among
the very reasons for taking action against such crimes
right away.
That is why we believe in the continuity
of proper business within the United Nations
system, in particular the Ad Hoc Committee. My
delegation strongly supports the holding of inclusive
and meaningful negotiations within the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes
as soon as possible. As we are now present in this Hall,
we can also participate in the Ad Hoc Committee, while
meeting relevant health protocols, as we have done
since the outbreak of the pandemic.

22-2351019/29

A/76/PV.55

20/01/2022

My delegation commends the constructive proposal
made by the Russian Federation in draft decision
A/76/L.31 and the draft amendments (A/76/L.34/
Rev.1) put forward by Belarus, which are consistent
with resolution 75/282. We, as sovereign States, should
decide how to proceed, and the Secretariat should
provide suitable facilities for holding the meeting, as it
has always done so attentively.

While we are aware of the impact that the
coronavirus disease pandemic has had on the
opportunity to start the process, Venezuela also
believes that the global situation heightens the need to
combat cybercrime, which has increased over the past
two years, while deeming it necessary to maximize
the Organization’s efforts to move forward as soon as
possible in establishing a schedule for the process.

In the light of that and given the urgent need to
immediately commence the first session of the Ad
Hoc Committee for an effective response to the
pressing challenges of crimes committed through the
use of information and communications technology,
we underline that any further delay in the convening
of the first meeting not only is of no benefit to the
international community but also would lead criminals
to jeopardize the rule of law, to the detriment of all.
We therefore invite all Member States to decide with
a view to facilitating and expediting the convening
of the first session as promptly as possible. It would
be regrettable if the politicized views of a few were
to affect judgments on the vital significance and very
essentiality of the commencement of that process.

In that regard, Venezuela wishes to express its
support for the proposals put forward by the Russian
Federation and Belarus to start the work of the Ad Hoc
Committee as soon as possible, which preserve the
spirit of resolution 75/282, giving the highest priority
to the process, even in the complex context of the
current situation.

Mr. Poveda Brito (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela takes the floor to explain its position
on draft decision A/76/L.31 and draft amendments
A/76/L.33/Rev.1 and A/76/L.34/Rev.1, which are
before the General Assembly, aware of the importance
of moving forward without delay in the negotiations
on a United Nations comprehensive international
convention on countering the use of information and
communications technologies for criminal purposes.

Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): We, like others,
are absolutely committed to the process of the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes,
and we are fully supportive of the Chair and, in
particular, the Secretariat as we try to work through
what are clearly difficult circumstances to critically
find a solution that meets the condition, set in our
previous resolution 75/282, of balance between New
York and Vienna.

The inclusiveness and transparency of the
Organization are a guarantee for all States to participate
in an open and robust process that takes into account
the various regional, national, cultural, economic and
political realities and rapidly unites a comprehensive
and legally binding commitment among all Member
States regarding this crucial issue, whose implications
and scope know no borders.
In that regard, Venezuela has actively, decisively
and constructively supported all initiatives taken within
the United Nations to move that process forward. We
reaffirm our commitment to continuing to contribute
to a future convention through this space and our
national experience.
20/29

Finally, Venezuela expresses its gratitude for
the international efforts under way to strengthen
cooperation in countering cybercrime. We reaffirm our
willingness to continue to contribute in a constructive,
solid and decisive manner to combating that scourge
and to the process towards the future adoption of a
convention on an issue of great importance to the entire
international community.

However, it is important to remember that we have
been in such a situation before. We have sat in this
Hall and demanded that meetings on cybercrime take
place on certain dates, and those dates have not been
logistically possible. We had to come back to the Hall
and set new dates. That is what we should now try to
avoid as far as we can. I think that it is really important
that when we take this decision today, we take it on
the basis of sound common sense and good logistical
thinking vis-à-vis what is actually possible.
The Secretariat works for us. It knows what we are
trying to achieve, and it is clearly working incredibly
hard to deliver that in line with the original resolution.
But it is currently saying that it cannot facilitate that
22-23510

20/01/2022

A/76/PV.55

on the timeline that we requested. It is right that we
come back and reconsider that, but what should we do?
Essentially, we have two choices today. We have a choice
between the Belarusian draft amendment A/76/L.34/
Rev.1 and the Dominican Republic draft amendment
A/76/L.33/Rev.1. They are two very different options.
One is an absolute demand from Belarus that the
negotiating session take place on a particular date. The
other, put forward by the Dominican Republic, is a
much more sensible request that the session take place
on that date if it can, but that we have an insurance
policy, or a fallback option, if that cannot be delivered.

York in January, February or March. We take note of
that information and, given the context of the pandemic,
fully support the Chair’s decision to postpone the first
formal session of the Ad Hoc Committee.

Because the United Kingdom believes in common
sense, we will support the Dominican Republic’s
solution, and we will vote today for the Ad Hoc
Committee to convene as expeditiously as the
Secretariat can make that happen — ideally on the first
date offered. But, if that is not possible, we recognize
that that cannot be done, and we will vote for the option
that gives us the fallback of beginning the process in
Vienna. That is not ideal. We would have the zero day
here to work through the organizational issues, but the
first substantive session would take place in Vienna,
and we would support that.

On predictability, if it is not possible to hold the
first session in New York between now and 18 April, the
proposal to consider holding the first session in Vienna
between the end of May and the beginning of June
also offers a certain predictability, which is important
for Switzerland. That proposal answers a number of
concerns. We have a fixed date for the first session,
with rooms already reserved. We will be honouring the
timeline that we agreed, and we will be respecting the
health of delegates and United Nations staff.

The United Kingdom will vote against the
Belarusian draft amendment. We will vote in favour
of the Dominican Republic draft amendment, and, if
it is adopted, we will vote in favour of draft decision
A/76/L.31.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
We have a number of proposals before us for the
organization at the first session of the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes.
Switzerland thanks the Dominican Republic for draft
amendment A/76/L.33/Rev.1 and its co-sponsors for the
following four reasons: the realities of the pandemic,
flexibility, predictability and the importance of
proper preparation.
On the realities of the pandemic, the Omicron
variant has led to a sharp increase in the number of
cases around the world since December. New York has
not been spared by the new variant. In the month of
December, the city saw a 30 per cent increase in daily
cases. On that basis, various communications from
the Secretariat state that it is not able to guarantee
sufficient staff to service additional meetings in New

Regarding flexibility, draft amendment A.76/L.33/
Rev.1, put forward by the Dominican Republic,
proposes that if the health situation and the availability
of conference services allow, the first session will
be held no later than 18 April. The draft amendment
therefore enables us to take any possible opportunity,
should it arise, if health conditions and logistics allow.

In conclusion, my delegation highlights the
importance of having time to prepare. With sufficient
time between sessions, allowing for proper preparation,
it will be an inclusive process that gives all delegations
the opportunity to take part in the process.
According to the information we have, 10 weeks
are necessary for the translation of documents into the
United Nations official languages. We therefore welcome
the proposal put forward by the Dominican Republic,
which allows for enough time between sessions.
For all those reasons, Switzerland co-sponsored the
draft amendment proposed by the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Mack (United States of America): First and
foremost, we would like to express our appreciation
to the Chair of the Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate
a Comprehensive International Convention on
Countering the Use of Information and Communications
Technologies for Criminal Purposes and the Secretariat
for their efforts to find safe and inclusive methods for
us to continue to undertake our important work.
The United States shares the frustration and
disappointment expressed by many delegations today
that the pandemic has yet again stymied our efforts to
move forward in this process. We were prepared for
the meeting this week, as scheduled, and would have

22-2351021/29

A/76/PV.55

considered a variety of formats acceptable to hold it on
time. We did not want to postpone it.
We must also recognize the unique circumstances
that we are all currently facing, with many United
Nations staff and fellow diplomats taken ill by the
coronavirus disease or isolating due to close exposure.
Some of our friends and colleagues have become
gravely sick. We cannot ignore that fact.
The General Assembly just took the difficult decision
to postpone the fifth United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries, a very important conference
that helps to guide United Nations work in support of
the economic development of least developed countries
and occurs only once a decade, by consensus. Other
important meetings, such as the Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and the meeting of the Committee on
Non-Governmental Partners, were also postponed. We
took those hard decisions in recognition of the current
pandemic-related health and safety precautions. It is
unfortunate that some delegations seem to believe that
such precautions pertain to delaying the priorities of
only some, and not all.
As we consider our next steps, we must not allow
this setback to undermine the core values that we hope
all Member States share. We should set dates that
ensure an inclusive schedule so that all Member States
can contribute equally to this important work.
We trust the Chair and the secretariat of the Ad
Hoc Committee and the Secretariat at Headquarters
when they tell us that there is not a block of physical
meeting space available for a two-week period, with
sufficient staffing, for a New York-based meeting to
be held before our scheduled session in August. We
also take them at their word that the United Nations
is facing staffing challenges, given the pandemic
conditions impacting all of us globally. For that reason,
we support the Dominican Republic’s draft amendment
A/76/L.33/Rev.1, which is a technical proposal to begin
substantive negotiations during our planned meeting in
Vienna at the end of May. Given the current limitations,
that is the earliest possible time we can get started.
However, we recognize the strong interest in
beginning this process in New York and respect the
delicate balance that we struck in May on the location
of each session. We also appreciate the Dominican
Republic’s efforts to take on board the concerns
expressed by Belarus in putting forward its draft
22/29

20/01/2022

amendment, contained in document A/76/L.34/Rev.1, by
orally revising the Dominican Republic’s proposal. We
therefore welcome the Dominican Republic’s revision
to allow for us to hold our first session earlier in New
York should health conditions and schedules allow.
We appreciate that the Dominican Republic has also
specified a minimum length of time between sessions
to guarantee that Member States have adequate time
to contribute and prepare for each negotiation. That
ensures an inclusive structure for our process, while
still allowing us to begin earlier than May if conditions
in New York allow.
We, like everyone, would like to start negotiations
earlier, as envisioned by the Belarusian draft
amendment. However, realistically, we know that that
is not possible given the limitations presented by the
pandemic and the United Nations schedule. When
asked about the potential to hold an initial negotiation
in New York in February or March, the Secretariat
made clear that, after a careful review of the calendar of
conferences, it could not identify a two-week meeting
slot. The Secretariat had not been asked about the
possibility for such a meeting in April, but the answer
is likely the same — hence the importance of including
flexibility in today’s decision.
We cannot vote in favour of an unrealistic proposal
that will only have us back in this Hall in a few months
to again debate this process. We need to start thinking
about building the substance of our treaty, as opposed to
our meeting schedule and other logistical details. Only
the Dominican Republic’s proposal, as orally revised,
will allow us to do that.
The United States will vote against the Belarussian
draft amendment and urges all delegations to do
the same. We will vote in favour of the Dominican
Republic’s proposed amendment as the only feasible
way forward. We call upon all delegations to join us in
doing so.
We hope that, after a path forward is established
today, we can focus on an inclusive process where the
voices of many will be listened to and heard. Only
through such inclusivity can our future negotiations
result in a treaty that we can all support.
Mr. Falzeta Zanini (Brazil): Brazil’s long-standing
position on cybercrime is one that emphasizes the need
for a convention to counter the use of information
and telecommunications for criminal purposes — an
22-23510

20/01/2022

instrument that should be negotiated with transparency
and inclusivity and gathers the whole membership
under the same endeavour.
I believe it is true to say that not only Brazil but
also the vast majority of the membership was ready
to start the negotiations this week. Aeroplane tickets
had been issued and rooms had been booked. But to
hold a two-week in-person meeting when coronavirus
disease cases are at an all-time high in New York
would be imprudent. Moreover, we are hopeful that
the postponement will be short and will not change the
essence of the negotiation process.
Turning to the action before us today, draft
amendments A/76/L.33/Rev.1 and A/76/L.34/Rev.1
both mention that the Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate
a Comprehensive International Convention on
Countering the Use of Information and Communications
Technologies for Criminal Purposes shall hold its first
session in New York no later than 18 April. However, in
yesterday’s letter, the Secretariat ruled out the possibility
of holding the first negotiating session in New York
during the months of February or March. That provision
leaves few dates to hold the session at the beginning of
April. In line with that, Brazil decided to co-sponsor the
Dominican Republic’s draft amendment, contained in
document A/76/L.33/Rev.1, due to its greater flexibility
if the 18 April deadline proves impossible to meet. In
that case, the first session will take place in Vienna by
the end of May, thereby making the adoption of a new
draft resolution unnecessary.
Ms. McIntyre (Australia): I take the floor to
explain Australia’s position on the three draft proposals
before us relating to agenda item 7 on countering the
use of information and communications technologies
for criminal purposes.
Like others, Australia is committed to a transparent,
inclusive and productive negotiation process of the
Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive
International Convention on Countering the Use of
Information and Communications Technologies for
Criminal Purposes to elaborate a cybercrime convention,
and we strongly support the Chair’s leadership of this
process. We are also committed to ensuring that all
countries can equitably and constructively engage in a
process that is so important to us all. In doing so, we
have to remain pragmatic when faced with the realities
associated with progressing that work during a global
pandemic and make decisions that are grounded in fact.

A/76/PV.55

As others have said, the modalities agreed by
consensus in resolution 75/282 strike a carefully
negotiated balance on the location, sequencing and
spacing of negotiating sessions. Australia considers
that that balance should be upheld and protected.
The technical amendment to draft decision
A/76/L.31, proposed by the Dominican Republic
in document A/76/L.33/Rev.1 and co-sponsored by
Australia and approximately 40 other States, upholds
that careful balance. It does so while also ensuring that
we do not further compromise the health and safety of
our delegations and United Nations staff, noting the
already grave impact of the pandemic on many.
The Dominican Republic’s draft amendment
balances speed, safety and certainty. It would ensure
that we start the substantive work of the Ad Hoc
Committee the moment it is practicably possible to do
so, allowing us to continue exploring options to hold the
first session in New York during the next few months,
subject to the practical realities of prevailing conditions
at United Nations Headquarters and with due regard for
the Secretariat’s advice on health and safety.
Should, however, conditions in New York not allow
a meeting by 18 April, the draft amendment provides
a fallback option of holding a one-day organizational
meeting in New York and holding the first negotiating
session in Vienna. That ensures certainty; it relies
upon rooms already booked and meeting dates
already scheduled. Belarus’s proposal (A/76/L.34/
Rev.1) provides no such fallback option or certainty.
That is why we cannot support it. We do not want to
find ourselves back here in the General Assembly
renegotiating this in a few weeks’ time if the pandemic
causes further disruptions to scheduling proposals.
The Dominican Republic’s proposal would
also preserve the pace of negotiations envisaged
in resolution 75/282 and elaborated in the Ad Hoc
Committee’s proposed meeting schedule and road
map. Most importantly, it would protect against any
erosion of the gaps between the formal negotiating
sessions. Australia considers that those gaps will be
just as important as the sessions themselves. They
are necessary to give all States time to consult, to
meet informally with stakeholders, to prepare draft
convention texts, to develop proposals and to consider
the proposals of others. Shorter gaps will particularly
disadvantage smaller or less well-resourced delegations
and have to be avoided.

22-2351023/29

A/76/PV.55

20/01/2022

An appropriate period of time between formal
sessions is crucial to give the Secretariat time to
consolidate and translate the submissions made by
States. Again, that is an important element of inclusivity
and promotes the ability of all States to remain engaged
in negotiations. We therefore cannot support Belarus’s
draft amendments with the proposal for a condensed
time frame between the Ad Hoc Committee’s first and
second negotiating sessions.

information from the New York and Vienna secretariats
with regard to the availability of conference rooms to
hold the sessions would have been extremely useful for
our discussions. The response from the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management to the
Chair of the Committee sent yesterday was a step in the
right direction. We hope that that clarity and certainty
can be reflected in decisions on holding other in-person
meetings in United Nations forums.

Australia has co-sponsored the Dominican
Republic’s proposal as it is a sensible, balanced
and inclusive way forward, and we consider that
it appropriately reflects the common interests and
objectives of all Member States. To recap, it allows the
Committee to start its work as soon as possible while
also providing contingencies so that we do not have to
come back here to the General Assembly if the pandemic
causes further disruptions. We call on all other States
to support the Dominican Republic’s proposal.

Mr. Al Khalil (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Syrian Arab Republic would underscore
that the danger posed by cybercrime is increasing day
by day because of the growing use of information and
communications technologies by criminal networks
and terrorist groups for criminal and terrorist purposes.
That undermines the stability of States and their
infrastructure as well as their institutions, especially
their social and cultural fabric along with their
economic and social development.

Moreover, going forward in the substantive
discussions, Australia urges all countries to focus
on what we can all do to bring us back together. It is
our view that what ultimately unites us — that is, our
commitment and efforts to prevent, address and counter
cybercrime — will vastly outweigh the few issues that
divide us.

The widening of the digital divide among States
definitely undermines the capabilities of many States to
prevent and fight those crimes and bring the perpetrators
to justice. The Syrian Arab Republic believes that the
instruments of criminal law currently applicable at
the regional and international levels are insufficient
to address the illegitimate use of information and
communications technologies in criminal and
terrorist acts. Currently, there is no international
convention in that context, except for the Council of
Europe Convention on Cybercrime, which does not
include the use of information and communications
technologies in terrorist acts. My country’s delegation
therefore welcomes the holding of meetings by the
Ad Hoc Committee as soon as possible in order to
establish a comprehensive international convention on
addressing the use of information and communications
technologies for criminal purposes. Accordingly, we
support the draft decision put forward by the Russian
delegation (A/76/L.31). We also support any initiative
to hold meetings of the Ad Hoc Committee as soon
as possible.

Mr. Ríos Sánchez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation will vote in favour of the draft amendment
put forward by the Dominican Republic, contained in
document A/76/L.33/Rev.1. We believe that that text
provides Member States and the Secretariat with the
flexibility necessary to meet the pandemic-related
challenges we are facing.
We see the draft amendment as a way of
appropriately following up on resolution 75/282,
bearing in mind the force majeure reasons that
led us to postpone the first session of the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes,
which should, according to the resolution, have taken
place in January.
We also recognize that in the revised version, the
draft amendment proposed by the Dominican Republic
welcomes the timeline proposed in the Belarusian
text (A/76/L.34/Rev.1). We deplore the fact that in
this process we have set aside deliberations within the
Ad Hoc Committee. Similarly, having had specific
24/29

(spoke in English)
We call on all Member States to defend the validity
of the governmental decision-making process at the
United Nations and to support the convening of the
Committee as soon as possible.
Ms. Minale (Ethiopia): I take the floor to express
Ethiopia’s view and to convey our concern in regard to
22-23510

20/01/2022

A/76/PV.55

the organization of the meeting of the first substantive
session of the Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate
a Comprehensive International Convention on
Countering the Use of Information and Communications
Technologies for Criminal Purposes. I should like
primarily to thank the Chair of the Committee for her
tireless efforts to bridge the differences on the modalities
of the meeting generated by the global pandemic.
We attach great importance to having a
global instrument on the use of information and
communications technologies for criminal purposes.
It is also our hope that the process of the Ad Hoc
Committee will come up with a convention that applies
and remains relevant throughout time and in various
contexts. That very purpose requires inclusivity in the
Ad Hoc Committee process.
As one of the more than 40 countries that do
not have a representation in Vienna, it is critical for
my delegation that all meetings allotted to New York
happen in New York. The first substantive session is
critical in setting the tone for the entire process, and we
are not prepared to have it somewhere else.
Our full participation therein and preparations
therefor depend on the assumption we had based on
resolution 75/282. On that basis, we cannot support a
proposal that could possibly change the venue of the
first substantive session, which, in our view, is critical,
as it sets the tone for subsequent engagements.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): At this stage, before
the General Assembly proceeds to take action on
documents A/76/L.31, A/76/L.33/Rev.1 and A/76/L.34/
Rev.1, I would like to address the co-sponsorship of
those three documents, one by one.
First, on draft decision A/76/L.31, I should like
to announce that since the submission of the draft
decision and in addition to the delegations listed in the
document, Nicaragua has also become a co-sponsor.
Let me then proceed to A/76/L.33/Rev.1. I should
like to announce that since the submission of that draft
amendment, and in addition to the delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become

co-sponsors of the draft amendment: Albania, Brazil,
Chile, Cyprus, Fiji, Israel, Liechtenstein, Montenegro,
North Macedonia, the Republic of Korea, Romania and
the United Kingdom.
Finally, let me turn to the co-sponsors of A/76/L.34/
Rev.1. The co-sponsors are listed in the document.
The Acting President: As I mentioned earlier, we
will first take action on draft amendment A/76/L.34/
Rev.1, submitted by Belarus.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Grenada, India, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Mali,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Senegal, Serbia, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mauritius, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Angola, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Botswana, Central African
Republic, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Egypt,
Ghana, Guyana, Haiti, Indonesia, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Madagascar, Malaysia,

22-2351025/29

A/76/PV.55

Maldives,
Mauritania,
Mexico,
Mongolia,
Morocco, Nepal, Pakistan, Paraguay, Philippines,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Singapore, South Africa, Suriname, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Yemen
Draft amendment A/76/L.34/Rev.1 was rejected by
60 votes to 42, with 49 abstentions.
The Acting President: Since the draft amendment
contained in document A/76/L.34/Rev.1 is not adopted,
we shall now proceed to take action on draft amendment
A/76/L.33/Rev.1.
In the absence of a request for a recorded vote on
the draft amendment, may I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt the draft amendment contained in
document A/76/L.33/Rev.1?
I give the floor to those representatives who have
asked to speak on a point of order.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): May I correct your assertion, Mr. President,
that no one requested a vote on the draft amendment
(A/76/L.33/Rev.1) submitted by the delegation of the
Dominican Republic. The Russian delegation did,
as I said in my statement. The draft amendment is
unacceptable to us, and that is why we have asked for
a vote on it.
Mr. Komara (Guinea) (spoke in French): I should
like to draw your attention, Mr. President, to the fact
that owing to a technical problem, my delegation was
not able to participate in the voting.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested on draft amendment A/76/L.34/Rev.1.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
26/29

20/01/2022

Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama,
Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, South Sudan,
Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay
Against:
Belarus, Burundi, Cambodia, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
India, Libya, Mali, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Serbia, Syrian Arab Republic,
Turkey, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Chad, China, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt,
Ghana, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Nepal, Oman,
Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen
Draft amendment A/76/L.33/Rev.1 was adopted by
86 votes to 18, with 45 abstentions.
The Acting President: Since the draft amendment
contained in document A/76/L.33/Rev.1 is adopted,
we shall now proceed to take action on draft decision
A/76/L.31, as amended.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
decision A/76/L.31, entitled “Ad Hoc Committee to
Elaborate a Comprehensive International Convention on
Countering the Use of Information and Communications
Technologies for Criminal Purposes”, as amended.
The Acting President: I now call on the
representative of the Russian Federation on a point
of order.
22-23510

20/01/2022

Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to request a vote on A/76/L.31,
as amended.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burundi, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro,
Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Uganda, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Zambia
Against:
Belarus, Cambodia, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, India, Libya,
Mali, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Russian Federation,
Senegal, Serbia, South Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Turkey, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belize,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, China, Cuba, Djibouti,
Egypt, Ghana, Haiti, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Nepal, Pakistan,
Peru, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Tajikistan, Togo, Tunisia, United

A/76/PV.55

Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen
Draft decision A/76/L.31, as amended, was adopted
by 92 votes to 18, with 41 abstentions (decision
76/552).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Djibouti and Haiti
informed the Secretariat that they had intended to
vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote after the voting, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Wallace (Jamaica): I have the honour to
deliver this statement in explanation of vote on behalf
of the 14 member States of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM).
CARICOM attaches very high importance to
this process and, as a result, wishes to reiterate our
commitment to the work of the Ad Hoc Committee to
elaborate a convention on the use of information and
communications technologies for criminal purposes
for adoption at the seventy-eighth session of the
General Assembly.
We deeply regret the turn of events that have
resulted in the inability of the Committee to engage
in its first negotiating session from 17 to 28 January
2022, as agreed, and the need for the reconsideration
of arrangements to limit the loss of momentum in the
advancement of deliberations on the future convention.
While we understand the circumstances giving rise to
these new considerations, we underscore that this process
must be grounded in equity and inclusivity, ensuring
the legitimacy of the process as truly multilateral.
Therefore, it is in good faith that CARICOM
member States supported the revised amendment to
decision 76/552, which was presented by the Dominican
Republic and which takes a practical approach to the
situation in the absence of specific information on
the availability of meeting rooms in New York for the
proposed period. We maintain our position that every
effort must be made to convene the first session in New
York by 18 April 2022 before any further consideration
is given to hosting this session in Vienna.
CARICOM would like to reiterate our concerns
about the difficulties of participating in Vienna, where

22-2351027/29

A/76/PV.55

none of our countries are represented. Member States
would agree that the first session is of particular
importance and sets the tone for the negotiations.
We take this opportunity to remind the General
Assembly of paragraph 13 of resolution 75/282, on the
modalities of the process. It reads:
“Urges Member States to provide voluntary
extrabudgetary financial contributions to the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to
ensure funding to enable the participation of
representatives of developing countries, especially
those that do not have resident representation in
Vienna, in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee,
including by covering their travel costs and
accommodation expenses”.
We also remind Member States of the undertakings made
in that regard at the time of adoption of the modalities.
CARICOM looks forward to the convening of
a one-day meeting in New York in the near future
to concretize outstanding organizational matters so
that the Committee can continue its engagements,
with equitable representation, in its informal and
intersessional consultations.
Mr. Kayalar (Turkey): At the outset, we would like
to thank the delegation of the Dominican Republic for
trying to find common ground vis-à-vis the divergence
of opinion on the rescheduling of Ad Hoc Committee
meeting, which resulted from a force majeure.
We would like to clarify that Turkey does not
oppose the necessary postponement and rescheduling
of Committee sessions. Yet the singling out of a one-day
and the separation of that meeting from the main
session has caused concern. We would like to underline
that the decision on the participation of other relevant
stakeholders is a matter of substance that should not
be addressed against the background of procedural
rules alone.
Ms. Fitri (Indonesia): My delegation takes the floor
to explain its position on the adoption of the proposals
today under agenda item 109.
My delegation places high importance on the work
of the Ad Hoc Committee to elaborate a convention
with the aim to address the critical need to tackle global
threats posed by criminal groups misusing information
and communications technology platforms.
28/29

20/01/2022

Our delegation was ready to start our work this
month, as previously planned. Unfortunately, as the
Secretariat’s ability to provide conference services and
facilities was impacted by coronavirus disease cases,
many United Nations meetings, including the Ad Hoc
Committee, had to be rescheduled.
My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
thank the Ad Hoc Committee Chair, Her Excellency
Ms. Faouzia Boumaiza Mebarki of Algeria, for her
tireless efforts in leading the Committee to explore
options and find possible solutions through various
informal consultations in a transparent and inclusive
manner. She has our delegation’s full support in the
discharge of her duties. We also thank the Russian
Federation, the Dominican Republic and Belarus for
their proposals. We see merits in all the proposals,
which demonstrates that all of us attach great interest
to this process. We see those proposals as efforts to
provide certainty and predictability towards starting
our work as soon as possible, while ensuring that all
Member States can participate equally and safely and
be well-prepared.
My delegation also wishes to reiterate the
importance of inclusive consultations to decide the way
forward for the work of the Ad Hoc Committee. As we
embark on a long journey, it is important that we get off
on the right foot and aim for a consensus decision, and
we regret that the General Assembly was not able to
adopt a decision by consensus today.
It is for that reason that my delegation believes
that the consultation process was cut short and that a
consensual decision was still possible, guided by the
reality of the pandemic situations and informed by
the advice of the local authorities and the Secretariat.
My delegation therefore abstained in the voting on
documents A/76/L.33/Rev.1 and A/76/L.34/Rev.1 due
to the limited time frame provided to Member States
to consider those proposals thoroughly and inclusively,
which prevented us from reaching a consensual decision.
However, in the spirit of flexibility, and in order
to lend predictability to our working plan moving
forward, my delegation will go along with the adoption
of document A/76/L.31, as amended and decided by the
whole membership.
We stand ready to engage with all Member States
in moving forward with our work together in the Ad
Hoc Committee in a more constructive manner.
22-23510

20/01/2022

A/76/PV.55

Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We take note of the decision of the General
Assembly. Nonetheless, we had to vote against our own
draft, as amended, for several reasons.

clearly defined by resolution 74/247 — to elaborate a
comprehensive international convention on countering
the use of information and communications technologies
for criminal purposes.

The consensus decision of the General Assembly
on holding an official meeting in line with the adopted
decisions was, de facto, made dependent on a number
of criteria, including health conditions and availability
of space. In other words, it depended on particular
conditions, including the availability of space. That is
new to us and our practice.

Second, Algeria is committed to the early
commencement of the Ad Hoc Committee on
Cybercrime, in accordance with resolution 75/282,
taking into account the importance of the topic at hand.

Yesterday in this Hall, as we were considered the
priorities of the President of the General Assembly for
the seventy-sixth session, the Russian representative
asked him to call a briefing expeditiously on questions
regarding the business continuity of the General
Assembly. Indeed, we see a serious contradiction
between the real epidemiological situation in the city
and the policies adopted by the Secretariat.
In his agenda, the President of the General Assembly
mentioned the agenda for hope, but we would like to act
instead. We have had enough hoping. We would like
the Assembly to be the master of its own house, which,
sadly, we have not seen.
Ms. Ighil (Algeria): I take the floor to explain my
delegation’s vote on draft decision A/76/L.31 and draft
amendment A/76/L.33/Rev.1.
The position expressed by the Algerian delegation
flows from several elements.
First, Algeria is committed to implement the
mandate of the Ad Hoc Committee on Cybercrime,

Thirdly, there is a need to achieve consensual
decisions among the Member States as the appropriate
way to ensure the success of the work of the Ad
Hoc Committee. In that respect and taking into
consideration the current pandemic situation and its
impact on the calendar of meetings in the United Nations
Headquarters in New York, my delegation is convinced
that the promotion of consensual decisions, beyond any
other consideration, would have been the appropriate
way forward — not only to preserve the safety of
delegations, but also to keep the positive momentum
generated by the recent informal consultations held
in Vienna.
We see this as an opportunity to call on all Member
States to promote both procedural and substantive
future consensual decisions. Such an approach would
undoubtedly enhance our collective efforts to come up
with positive outcomes that satisfy the expectations of
the international community in that regard.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting. The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 109.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

22-2351029/29
