A /76/PV.63

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

63rd plenary meeting

Tuesday, 29 March 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Commemorative meeting on the occasion of the
International Day of Remembrance of the Victims
of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade
Agenda item 120
Commemoration of the abolition of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade
The President: In accordance with paragraph 4 of
resolution 73/345 of 16 September 2019, the General
Assembly will hold a commemorative meeting on the
occasion of the International Day of Remembrance of
the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade.
Statement by the President
The President: Over the course of four centuries,
more than 15 million men, women and children
from across Africa were subjugated, shackled and
involuntarily transported to the Americas. Many
perished on that journey, succumbing to its appalling
conditions. For those who survived, a life without
compassion, joy and freedom awaited. Their remaining
days were filled with torture and forced labour.
That was the brutal reality of the transatlantic slave
trade, which to this day remains the largest forced
movement of a people in history. Slavery was meant
to take away the names, individuality and legacy of its
victims. By documenting, sharing and reflecting on
their stories, we prevent them from fading into obscurity
and we reaffirm their individual human worth.

That is why today we observe the International
Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and
the Transatlantic Slave Trade, on the theme “Stories of
courage: resistance to slavery and unity against racism”.
It is our obligation to continue to raise awareness of
the pernicious legacies of slavery, including racism,
discrimination and social injustice, while also
celebrating the bravery of those who stood up against
that brutal system. We must never forget, and we must
always contemplate, the lessons of that tragic chapter
in our history. And as we do so, we must acknowledge
certain facts without equivocation, including the fact
that many people of African descent were stolen from
their homes, put in chains, separated from their families,
bought, sold, abused, tortured and violated in body and
spirit. That collective trauma, endured for hundreds of
years by successive generations, cannot be expected to
heal quickly. To this very day, the consequences of the
transatlantic slave trade — and the racist attitudes that
facilitated it — still endure and affect the lives of many
people of African descent.
Years ago, I visited Goree Island in Senegal,
which was the largest slave-trading centre on the West
African coast from the 15th to the 19th centuries.
Packed into small cells, the enslaved were chained and
shackled. Their only escape was through the small door
of no return through which every man, woman and
child walked to the slave boat to be shipped across the
Atlantic Ocean to build the new world.
Slavery was not only a dreadful individual ordeal
but also a cultural trauma whereby a group of people
were subjected to such inhuman pain and torture

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-30327 (E)

*2230327*

A/76/PV.63

that it dehumanized their existence, their group
identity, values, feelings and cultural worldview.
As acknowledged by the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action, people of African descent
continue to disproportionately suffer the consequences
of the slave trade and colonialism. They experience
multiple and aggravated forms of discrimination. That
discrimination often intersects with, and is amplified
by, other forms of prejudice, targeting language,
religion, gender, sexual orientation and gender identity,
disabilities or birth status, among many other aspects.
And in recent years, the coronavirus disease pandemic
has been a compounding factor, as it has put an
immense strain on social systems and laid bare the stark
inequities faced by individuals in already marginalized
communities. Standing in solidarity with victims is
the bare minimum we can do. We must act to address
these inequalities.
Last week, I visited the Ark of Return, the United
Nation’s permanent memorial to the victims of the
transatlantic slave trade. It stands as a reminder that
only by acknowledging history can we understand how
it continues to inform and affect the present, only then
can we properly address the injustices that still linger.
And only by addressing those injustices can we truly
honour those victims who fell prey to one of the most
vicious institutions ever devised by humankind.
In that spirit, let us honour the memory of the victims
by standing up against racism and discrimination, by
calling for greater commitments to social justice and
by celebrating the equal worth and dignity of all our
communities, irrespective of caste, creed or skin colour.
With hope and conviction, let us resolve to write a new
chapter in our history, filled with justice and equality.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: It is my privilege to join
the General Assembly as we pay tribute to the victims
and survivors of the transatlantic slave trade.
There is much that we know about the trade in
enslaved Africans, and today is a day we remember the
crime against humanity, the unprecedented mass human
trafficking, the degrading economic transactions and
the unspeakable human rights violations. But there is
also much that we do not know, and today must be a
day of learning.
2/27

29/03/2022

Behind the facts and figures are millions of human
stories — stories of untold suffering and pain, stories
of families and communities ripped apart, but also
stories of awe-inspiring courage and defiance against
the cruelty of oppressors. We need to tell those stories
of righteous resistance, from Zumbi dos Palmares in
Brazil and Queen Nanny of the Maroons in Jamaica
to Queen Ana Nzinga of the Kingdom of Ndgongo in
present-day Angola, Toussaint Louverture of SaintDomingue in present-day Haiti and many more.
We also need to hear the stories of prohibitions
of slave trade in the imamate of Futa Toro in presentday Senegal during the reign of Abdul Kader — well
before abolition movements gained momentum in
Europe and the Americas. We will never know every
act of resistance, great or small, that slowly but surely
triumphed over injustice, repression and enslavement.
But those accounts are crucial to our understanding of
a past whose most pernicious cause and most persistent
legacy stains our present: racism.
The transatlantic trade in enslaved Africans was
instrumental in shaping modern conceptions of race.
To rationalize the inhumanity of the slave trade,
Africans were portrayed as less than human. Racist
tropes circulated widely, legitimized by pseudoscience
and enshrined in law. Over 200 years after the end of
the transatlantic slave trade, the vicious lie of racial
supremacy remains alive today. Indeed, it finds new
resonance and amplification in online echo chambers
of hate. Ending slavery’s legacy of racism is a global
imperative for justice, which implicates us all — we
are all responsible for standing up and speaking out in
solidarity against racism wherever and whenever we
encounter it.
The transatlantic slave trade marked a brutal
rupture in African history and thwarted the continent’s
development for centuries. At the same time, the
prosperity achieved across so much of the Western world
was possible only through the exploitation of African
slave labour and know-how. It devastated the economies
of those it enslaved and enriched the colonizers.
We must reverse the consequences of generations of
exploitation, exclusion and discrimination — including
their obvious social and economic dimensions — through
reparatory justice frameworks. Acknowledging past
wrongs, tearing down statues of slavers and seeking
forgiveness cannot undo the crimes. However, they can
22-30327

29/03/2022

sometimes help free the present and the future from the
shackles of the past.
(spoke in French)
But past wrongs must not distract us from presentday evils. Outside Africa, people of African descent
are often among the last to benefit from health care,
education, justice and opportunities of all kinds. The
African diaspora has enriched societies around the
world, and yet its members still face marginalization,
exclusion and unconscious bias; their lives are still
darkened by the long shadow of slavery.
On this International Day of Remembrance, let us
honour the victims of slavery, memorialized by the Ark
of Return, which stands in the plaza just outside this
Hall as a constant reminder of the courage of slaves.
It calls on us to stand united against racism, to fight
inequality and injustice, to learn and teach about the
past and to build societies based on dignity, respect,
justice and opportunities for all.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
Before proceeding further, and as indicated in my
letter dated 4 March, I would like to consult members
with a view to inviting Ms. Nikole Hannah-Jones of
The New York Times Magazine and creator of the 1619
Project, to make a keynote statement on this occasion.
If there is no objection, may I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly, and without setting a
precedent, to invite Ms. Nikole Hannah-Jones to make
a keynote statement at this commemorative meeting?
It was so decided (decision 76/557).
The President: In accordance with the decision
just taken, I now give the floor to Ms. Hannah-Jones.
Ms. Hannah-Jones: It is my deepest honour to
speak before the General Assembly today on this
International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of
Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade.
I have dedicated my life’s work to excavating the
modern legacy of transatlantic slavery. My thoughts are
therefore never far from what has become the defining
subject of my journalism and what I believe continues
to be the defining undercurrent of life in the Americas:
the legacy of slavery.
I stand before the Assembly the great-greatgrandchild of enslaved men and women born in the

A/76/PV.63

United States of America, part of the millions who
lived and died under the brutal, immoral and inhumane
system of chattel slavery that existed for the first 250
years of the land that would come to think of itself as
the freest nation in the history of the world.
We gather in this Hall to mark the global trade that
took some 15 million beloved human beings across the
Atlantic in the holds of barbaric ships — the largest
forced migration in the history of the world and one
that would reshape the entire Atlantic world and
transform the global economy. We must never forget
the scale and depth of the horrors that people of African
descent suffered in the name of profit — profit that
enriched the European colonial Powers and built the
nascent economy of the United States. We must never
forget how the systems of slavery collapsed, only to
be reborn in other such models of violent and racist
economic exploitation as what we benignly call Jim
Crow in the United States, but what is more aptly called
apartheid. But on this solemn day of remembrance,
the looking back cannot be and should not be solely
defined by African-descended people’s enslavement.
Just as defining — just as important to remembering
the legacy of transatlantic slavery — are the stories of
Black resistance that would, more than any other force,
lead to slavery’s collapse in our hemisphere.
No people voluntarily submit to their enslavement,
and, by obscuring the role of Black resistance in our
collective rememberings of the transatlantic slave trade,
we continue to do the work of those who sought to justify
slavery by stripping us of our collective humanity.
People of African descent resisted their enslavement
from the moment of their capture. They resisted on the
long walk from the interior of Africa to the coast. They
resisted in the castles before being dragged out to the
waiting ships. They resisted so frequently on the water
that the slave ships had to be specially designed to try
to prevent mutiny. The ocean became the final resting
place of thousands of Africans who resisted by choosing
a final swim with the ancestors over enslavement in a
strange land.
As we remember our brutal enslavement by people
who believe themselves to be civilized, even as they
tortured, abused and murdered other human beings for
profit, for sugar for their tea, for molasses for their rum,
for cotton to wear, and for tobacco to smoke, we must
remember most the fierce Black radical tradition of
resistance that did not begin with anti-colonialism efforts
on the continent or with civil rights movements in the

22-303273/27

A/76/PV.63

United States and other places, but with, as the scholar
Cedric Robinson argued, the cimarrones of Mexico,
who ran away to indigenous communities or form their
own fugitive communities known as palenques. We
must remember Yanga, who led a community of fugitive
Africans and fought the Spaniards so fiercely that they
won their status as a free Black settlement. We must
remember Brazil’s quilombolas, including Palmares,
a fugitive Black community that would endure for 90
years in the Portuguese colony that would import more
Africans into slavery than anywhere else in the Atlantic
world. We must remember the Maroons of British and
French Guiana, Cuba and the United States and the
Bush Negroes of Suriname, who, for five decades.
fought against their oppressors who were attempting
to re-enslave them. We must remember the revolts of
enslaved people in Jamaica in 1690, in New York City
in 1712, Queen Nanny in 1720, the Stono Rebellion in
1739, and Tacky’s Rebellion in 1760.
We must remember the most successful uprising
of enslaved people in the history of the world — the
Haitian Revolution, where enslaved people rose up
and defeated three mighty colonial empires, becoming
the first nation in the Americas to abolish slavery and
establishing the world first free Black Republic in
audacity for which the Western world has punished
Haiti ever since.
We must remember revolts in Barbados in 1816,
the Baptist War in Jamaica in 1831, and Nat Turner’s
Rebellion that same year in the United States, as
Black people attempted to make manifest the words of
Patrick Henry, the famed American revolutionary, who
proclaimed “give me liberty or give me death”, even as
he enslaved African human beings for profit.
We must remember such freedom fighters as
Harriet Tubman, Frederick Douglass and Gabriel
Prosser. We must remember that it was not merely the
Enlightenment ideas or some reckoning among white
abolitionists that brought the end to the system that
had enriched colonial Powers, but that abolition was
propelled by constant revolt that forced colonial Powers
to realize that, as scholar Mary Reckford wrote, it would
remain more expensive and dangerous to maintain the
old system than to abolish it.
Black people were actors in their own freedom.
Obscuring and marginalizing stories of Black resistance
serves to justify the hypocrisy of colonial Europe and
the United States, by insinuating that had slavery been
4/27

29/03/2022

so bad, surely African peoples would have fought
harder against it. These are lies of omission that, in the
absence of truth, warp our collective memory.
Resistance must therefore be central to any
remembrances of the transatlantic slave trade and must
be connected to the ongoing resistance movements in
the fight for Black liberation across the globe.
I stand before the General Assembly today, a
recipient of that tradition of resistance. My father was
born in a little shack in 1945 on a cotton plantation in
Greenwood, Mississippi. He was born into a family of
sharecroppers who toiled within the violently enforced
system of labour exploitation that emerged at the end
of slavery. He was born into a strictly apartheid state
where Black people could not vote, use the public
library or attend schools with white children, and were
lynched for such things as starting a union, walking into
a room where a white woman was alone, failing to get
off of the sidewalk fast enough in deference to a white
person, or the greatest crime of all in the American
South — having the audacity to be a financially
prosperous Black person.
In Greenwood in the 1940s, life was so devastating
that Black children could be put to the fields as early
as the age of three to start carrying water to workers,
so when my father was two years old, my grandmother
Arlena Paul, a Black woman sharecropper, packed
a suitcase and loaded her two young children on a
northbound train and escaped the apartheid of the
American South.
My grandmother had a fourth-grade education, and
she would spend the rest of her life as a domestic and a
janitor. But that single act of resistance — leaving the
racial caste system of the American South with nothing
but the determination that her own children would not
pick cotton like she had, like her parents had, like her
enslaved grandparents before her had — set into motion
the events that would lead me to stand before this body
today, addressing the Assembly that represents all the
nations of the world. Hers was an act of resistance that
mirrored those of millions of enslaved Black people
who resisted every day in ways big and small. She,
like our ancestors, resisted, in order to plant the seed
for freedoms and opportunities that she would never
see for herself. It is that history, that understanding
that leads me to argue that the defining story of the
African diaspora in the Americas is not slavery but
our resistance to it, of people determined to be free
22-30327

29/03/2022

and societies that did not believe that they had a right
to freedom. We must acknowledge that history, as the
legacy of slavery can be seen all around us.
Today the descendants of slavery fight to resist their
conditions in the societies that once enslaved them. They
suffer the highest rates of poverty, the highest rates of
incarceration, the highest rates of death and the highest
rates of violence. The tradition of resistance continues,
in protest against police violence and inequality, from
Brazil to Cuba to the United States.
But we the people of the African diaspora should
not have to find ourselves still resisting. It is long
past time for the European colonial Powers and for
the United States of America to live up to their own
professed ideas, to become the great and moral nations
that they believe themselves to be. It is not enough
to simply regret what was done in the past; they are
obligated to repair it.
As I stand before representatives of the countries
that once enslaved African peoples and the peoples who
were once enslaved as we collectively remember this
day, the way for me to honour those who toiled and died
and fought is to say this clearly and without flinching:
it is time for the nations that engaged in and profited
from the transatlantic slave trade to do what is right
and what is just. It is time for them to make reparations
to the descendants of chattel slavery in the Americas.
That is our global truth, the truth that we as human
beings understand with stark clarity. There can be no
atonement if there is no repair.
It is time, it is long past time for reparations for
the transatlantic slave trade, all the devastation that it
has wrought and all the devastation that it continues
to wreak. I thank the members of the Assembly very
much for their attention as we all remember that crime
against humanity together.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lesotho, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of African States.
Mr. Monyane (Lesotho): Each year we gather
to commemorate and mark the International Day
of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the
Transatlantic Slave Trade. The theme for 2022, “Stories
of courage: resistance to slavery and unity against
racism”, is even more pertinent as it relates to the reality
faced by people of African descent, who continue to

A/76/PV.63

face racism and have to rise o challenges in their very
existence and daily lives.
Allow me, Mr. President, on behalf of the Group of
African States, to thank you for having organized this
event to mark this day. Today more than ever, we are
called on as one family to strengthen our ties and close
ranks in our vision for humankind as we move forward
from those troubled moments of our history.
We affirm the need for us all to resolve to adopt all the
measures necessary to eliminate racial discrimination
in all its forms and manifestations, and to prevent
and combat racist doctrines and practices in order to
promote understanding among human beings and to
build an international community that is free from all
forms of racial segregation and racial discrimination.
Indeed, we are convinced that any doctrine of
superiority based on racial differentation is false,
morally condemnable and socially unjust. Racial
discrimination is deplorable, and there is no justification
in theory or in practice anywhere across the globe.
We are disappointed and alarmed that manifestations
of racial discrimination based on racial superiority,
hatred and policies of apartheid, segregation or
separation are manifest in today’s purportedly civilized
world. A case in point is that currently students of
African descent are facing discrimination and racism
as they strive to flee from conflict in areas in Ukraine
to safe havens across the borders of nations. Injustice
against any person is injustice to all.
In that connection, we believe that reparations
for slavery and colonialism include not only justice
and accountability for historic wrongs but also the
eradication of the scars of the racial inequality,
subordination and discrimination that were built under
slavery, apartheid and colonialism. We recognize that
racism is a global concern and that tackling it should be
a universal effort by all of us.
The transatlantic slave trade is often studied and
discussed at the macro level. It was a phenomenon
characterized by unprecedented mass human
trafficking, degrading economic transactions and
unspeakable human rights violations. But examining
the transatlantic slave trade at the micro level reveals its
true brutality. Behind the facts and figures are millions
of human stories, the stories of those who were ripped
from their homelands and families, the stories of those
who fought against the oppressors, the stories of those

22-303275/27

A/76/PV.63

who triumphed against all odds to win their freedom,
many of whom won that freedom only in death.
Those stories continue today as people across the
globe keep struggling together against the transatlantic
slave trade’s most enduring legacy: racism. Among
the human stories are triumphs of cultural transfer
from Africa during the transatlantic slave trade. Those
people, despite the atrocious consequences of great
suffering, held on to the most precious part of their
humanity that none could ever take from them.
Through the legacy of their culture, music,
storytelling, customs, dance, art and food, they
transformed the places they found themselves in, and
the rich contribution of the African culture shaped
societies throughout the Americas and still serves as a
powerful unifying force.
Just a few examples illustrate that cultural history.
African jollof rice is a popular dish in the Dominican
Republic, alongside cassava and sweet potatoes in
Brazil and in the Caribbean countries and beyond.
The African drumbeat is the foundation of music
in the Americas, and the intricate cloth and weaving
is a tradition carried on from generation to generation.
The culture and artistic, scientific, economic and
political contribution of people of African descent have
triumphed over adversity. Through art and cultural
experiences, people of African descent have shared
the obstacles, resilience and defiant joy of their lives.
They shout with joy and life in a universal language of
dance, art and music that enables us to connect the past,
present and future, a recognition of the transformative
capabilities of African culture in Africa and beyond. In
that vein, therefore, the African Union celebrated the
theme of culture and heritage in 2021.
Lastly, Mr. President, last Thursday you led us on
a visit to the Ark of Return, a stark reminder of the
journeys that started at the Ark of No Return, those
journeys of slavery, but which is hugely symbolic of the
hope of redemption.
I would refer to a song by a renowned African
musician, Letta Mbulu, the lyrics of which talk about
the willow tree, which wept, the African river, which
cried, and the motherland, which lost its people. The
Ark of Return, that hope of redemption, also tells of
that. The African willow tree will not continue to weep
in vain. The African river will not continue to cry in
vain. The motherland will not continue to lose her
6/27

29/03/2022

children to the sea in vain. Let us therefore all together
join hands to celebrate one another and enjoy our human
diversity — Umoja.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nauru, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Asia-Pacific States.
Mrs. Dongobir (Nauru): I have the distinct honour
to speak on behalf of the Asia-Pacific Group as Chair
for the month of March. Allow me to convey our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having convened
this special meeting to commemorate the International
Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the
Transatlantic Slave Trade, with its theme, “Stories of
courage: resistance to slavery and unity against racism”.
On 25 March each year, the International
Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery is
commemorated to honour the memories of those who
suffered and died during the transatlantic slave trade,
one of the darkest chapters in human history, which
lasted four centuries.
The slave trade is among the worst violations of
human rights in the history of humankind and grounded
in social and economic inequality, hatred, racism and
prejudice, which continue to affect people of African
descent today. We reaffirm the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, which proclaimed that no one shall
be held in slavery or servitude and that slavery and the
slave trade shall be prohibited in all their forms.
In accordance with resolution 73/345, we recognize
that too little is known about the transatlantic slave trade
and its lasting consequences. We stress the importance
of educating current and future generations about the
causes, consequences, lessons and legacy of slavery
and the transatlantic slave trade and the right to seek
just and adequate reparation, remedy and satisfaction.
We also acknowledge the efforts made to date to raise
public awareness on the subject.
This year’s theme, “Stories of courage: resistance
to slavery and unity against racism”, is one way
of educating the public on the transatlantic slave
trade. Behind the facts and figures are millions of
human stories, families being ripped away from their
homeland, unspeakable human rights violations and
stories of those who fought against their oppressors and
triumphed against all odds to win their freedom. It is a
reminder to us all that the Ark of Return, a permanent
memorial at the United Nations to honour the victims
22-30327

29/03/2022

of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade, serves as a
reminder that slavery has no place in our world.
As the Secretary-General said in his message on
this day, today people of African descent continue to
confront racial discrimination, marginalization and
exclusion. In that regard, the Asia-Pacific Group stands
in unity to strive for the elimination of racism and racial
discrimination in all its forms.
The Asia-Pacific Group also expresses its profound
concern over the rise in violence and hate crimes
against Asians and people of Asian descent, including
Asian diplomats in New York City. We call upon the
concerned Government to fulfil its commitments and
take real measures to address systematic racism, racial
discrimination and hate crimes.
We note with appreciation the report of the
Secretary-General on the programme of educational
outreach on the transatlantic slave trade and slavery
(A/76/134), which aims to address that gap in knowledge
and appreciation by raising awareness. The report
appropriately describes the positive support of Member
States aimed at enhancing public awareness.
Moreover, we again welcome the theme for the
International Decade 2015-2024 as proclaimed by the
General Assembly being “People of African Descent:
recognition, justice and development”, with one of the
objectives being to promote a greater knowledge of and
respect for the diverse heritage, culture and contribution
of people of African descent to the development
of societies.
To conclude, the Asia-Pacific Group stands together
with the international community in commemorating
this important event. We commend the efforts made by
Member States and other stakeholders in the promotion
of the awareness of transatlantic slavery. We look
forward to working with all other regional groups to
address the pernicious and persistent consequences of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade for our common
future and present and coming generations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. De La Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): It is an honour to deliver this statement
on behalf of the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States.

A/76/PV.63

We would like to extend our appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for having convened this plenary
meeting in commemoration of the International Day
of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the
Transatlantic Slave Trade. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral, António Guterres, and Ms. Nikole HannahJones for their contributions today.
Today we honour and remember the 15 million
women, men and children from Africa who suffered
and died because of the transatlantic slave trade, a
system of global exploitation that for more than 400
years unjustly linked the economies of three continents.
The transatlantic slave trade was the largest legally
established forced migration in history. That dark
chapter was one of the greatest atrocities and injustices
in human history. The terrible system of the slave
trade affected not only people from Africa and their
descendants but also indigenous peoples, whom we also
commemorate today.
We are here today to not only remember those who
suffered the inhuman injustices of slavery but also to
honour and recognize the bravery of those who fought
against their oppressors and resisted the slave trade
system, as well as those who continue to fight against
racism today.
We echo the call of the Secretary-General for
reparative justice as an essential element of achieving
racial equality and undoing the extensive repercussions
of centuries of colonialism and slavery. The Ark of
Return, adjacent to this building, is a reminder not
only of what happened in the past and its consequences
but also of our common commitment to protecting
the intrinsic, equal and inalienable rights of all
human beings.
To a large extent, Afro-descendants of the
Americas and the Caribbean are also a legacy of the
transatlantic slave trade. Throughout the generations,
Afro-descendants have enriched our societies and
identities. Today we honour the innumerable and
immense contributions that people of African ancestry
have made to our region.
While it is true that slavery has been abolished,
its effects remain present in contemporary versions of
the racism and racial discrimination felt by millions
of people throughout the world. We must redouble our
efforts to eliminate systemic discrimination from our
societies, institutions and norms within the framework
of this Decade for People of African Descent and beyond.

22-303277/27

A/76/PV.63

The elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related forms of intolerance are
priority areas for our region and must also be in the
work of the Organization. We would highlight the need
to work with the Permanent Forum of People of African
Descent to promote their full political, economic and
social inclusion in the societies in which they live.
Although the slave trade has been abolished,
there are still various kinds of modern-day slavery.
Today more people are subject to modern slavery
than throughout the four centuries of the African
transatlantic slave trade. According to the International
Labour Organization, more than 40 million people are
currently the victims of modern-day slavery. Boys and
girls represent one quarter of those victims, while 71 per
cent of enslaved individuals are women, and 99 per cent
of victims of sexual slavery are women and girls.
It is clear that slavery today reflects the gender
inequality of our time. Slavery is illegal, but it exists
and persists within an economy of global exploitation,
forced labour and forced servitude, including domestic
servitude, human trafficking, sexual slavery, early
and forced child marriage, the recruitment of child
soldiers, and human trafficking for organ harvesting
are just some of the worst manifestations of modernday slavery.
We must take collective action to dismantle the
transnational criminal structures that support these and
other kinds of exploitation. The fight against modernday slavery is a necessary condition for not leaving
anyone behind and to move forward with sustainable
development. In order to do so, the protection and
promotion of human rights, efforts to operationalize
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action are vital. In order to respond
to the painful lessons of yesteryear, we must address
the issues of today. We have to honour the victims of
slavery from the past by protecting the most vulnerable
from contemporary forms of slavery.

29/03/2022

The transatlantic slave trade is an unparalleled
tragedy that persisted for more than four centuries
and involved unspeakable atrocities and the cruel
enslavement of millions of Africans, many of whom
perished during the horrific journey across the
Atlantic. We must never forget the unbearable hardship
or the tragic deaths of the millions of men, women and
children who died as a result of the brutality of slavery
and the transatlantic slave trade. We pay our solemn
respects to the countless victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade and to their descendants.
We need to share the stories of those who were
forcibly taken from their homelands and sold as slaves,
the stories of those who courageously fought against
their oppressors and against the inhuman practices of
slavery. We need to teach young people about the history
of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade and about
the devastating consequences and long-lasting impact.
It is critical that we also shed light on the heritage
and important contributions of people of African descent
and that we pay tribute to their many achievements. We
need to redouble our efforts to ensure the full realization
and enjoyment of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Moreover, we must acknowledge that racism
against people of African descent is in part an enduring
legacy of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
We are committed to addressing the root causes
of racism and taking concrete action to prevent
and eradicate racial discrimination and to combat
racism, xenophobia and related intolerance. Racial
discrimination is unacceptable affront to the
human dignity of all persons, and we must therefore
unequivocally condemn and confront racism whenever
and wherever it occurs.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Western European and other States.

We urgently need to dismantle racist structures, as
we can move forward from the past only by addressing
ongoing racial inequalities and injustices. To that end,
it is critical that we renew our commitment to the
full and effective implementation of the International
Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of
Racial Discrimination.

Mr. Kridelka (Belgium): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of Western European
and other States on the occasion of the International
Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the
Transatlantic Slave Trade.

Today’s observance should also encourage us to
act in line with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which proclaims that no one shall be held in
slavery or servitude and that slavery and the slave trade
shall be prohibited in all their forms.

8/27

22-30327

29/03/2022

A/76/PV.63

Today traffickers exploit and profit at the expense
of adults and children by compelling them to perform
labour or engage in commercial sex. While women
and girls make up the majority of identified victims
of these widespread, abhorrent practices, many more
individuals, including men and boys, are also impacted
by those often hidden crimes.

We acknowledge the myriad atrocities of slavery
and continue to grapple with the racial, ethnic, gender,
economic, social and political hierarchies it created.
And yes, we must honour the victims of slavery by
dismantling its institutional remnants, such as racism,
discrimination, economic inequity, marginalization
and systematic underdevelopment.

(spoke in French)

The
United
States
must
address
the
multidimensional legacies of slavery through an
unprecedented commitment to racial equity, justice
and inclusion within our borders and throughout our
global affairs. We have demonstrated our commitment
nationally through a Government-wide approach to
addressing systemic inequity.

It is vital that we abide by our obligations under
international law, particularly the Convention to
Suppress the Slave Trade and Slavery. We call on those
States that have not yet done so to ratify the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children,
and to effectively implement them. We must step up our
efforts to eradicate all forms of human trafficking and
contemporary slavery, as set out in the 2030 Agenda,
and to guarantee justice, accountability, dignity and
freedom for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America, who
will speak on behalf of the host country.
Ms. Lee (United States of America): I have the
unique honour of addressing members on this important
occasion as both a member of Congress and one of this
year’s United States Congressional Delegates to the
General Assembly.
As we commemorate the abolition of slavery
and the transatlantic slave trade, let us reflect on the
profound words of self-emancipated enslaved person,
abolitionist, orator, global luminary and diplomat
Frederick Douglass. “Abolition of slavery”, he said,
“had been the deepest desire and the great labour of
my life”. Those words prompt our remembrance of the
victims and descendants of slavery and the transatlantic
slave trade.
The transatlantic slave trade forced millions
of people from their homes, families, societies and
countries and subjected them to exploitation and
dehumanization, creating a global enterprise of
unparalleled wealth for Western nations and fuelling
the global economy. Chattel slavery remains an
immoral and indelible stain on the history of the United
States and the Western hemisphere, and the collective
chronicle of our inhumanity.

Today the President of the United States, Joseph
R. Biden, will sign the Emmett Till Antilynching Act
of 2022, recently passed by the United States Congress.
It has been over 120 years since Congress’ first attempt
to criminalize the horrendous act of lynching. And yes,
today it will be finally made a federal hate crime.
Members of both the House and the Senate have
supported legislation that acknowledges and addresses
the remnants of our racialized past resulting from the
institution of chattel slavery. Legislation like H.R. 19,
urging the establishment of a United States commission
on truth, racial healing and transformation; H.R. 40,
urging the establishment of a commission to study and
develop reparation proposals for African Americans;
and H.R. 1280, the George Floyd Justice in Policing
Act, are all examples of how Congress is grappling with
the need for systemic change and redress.
And last year, President Biden signed into law
legislation making Juneteenth — that is, 19 June — a
national holiday. It was on that day in 1865 that Union
soldiers arrived in Texas to announce that Black people
were free — two and a half years after the Emancipation
Proclamation. That announcement was made in
Galveston, Texas, which is the home of my grandfather
and my great-grandmother.
On the global stage, we championed the
establishment of the Permanent Forum on People
of African Descent and supported the International
Independent Expert Mechanism to Advance Racial
Justice and Equality in Law Enforcement. And I
personally fought for our participation in the movement
to establish the beautiful permanent memorial to
and remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade in a prominent spot at the

22-303279/27

A/76/PV.63

29/03/2022

United Nations. And I was honoured to witness the
establishment of the International Decade for People of
African Descent.

regional and, crucially, international levels if we are
truly to understand the past and meaningfully address
the current, multidimensional modern-day legacies.

Despite those promising efforts, there is still so
much work to do to achieve full equity, in the United
States and globally. We must therefore embrace this
momentous occasion as a clarion and dynamic call to
engage and to move forward.

Your own words, Mr. President, those of the
Secretary-General and of others who have spoken at
this meeting today provide clear guidance.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Barbados, who will speak on behalf
of the Caribbean Community.
Mr. Jackman (Barbados): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the 14 member States
of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
First, I would like to express our appreciation to
you, Mr President, for giving the Caribbean Community
the opportunity to speak at this important moment.
It will have escaped no one in this Hall that the
Caribbean societies, in whose name if have the honour
of speaking today, were subjected to the scourge
of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade we are
remembering today.
The iniquity of slavery and the transatlantic
slave trade and their contemporary consequences are
increasingly well understood and documented, due in
no small part to the efforts of the United Nations and its
Member States.
Today’s commemoration is part of a larger fabric
of research, recognition and, we hope, reparations,
which is being woven into this multilateral system: the
International Decade for People of African Descent,
which concludes in 2024; the UNESCO Slave Route
project; the establishment by the General Assembly
in 2021 of the Permanent Forum of People of African
Descent; the 2021 report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights on Promotion and
protection of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of Africans and of people of African descent
against excessive use of force and other human rights
violations by law enforcement officers (A/HRC/47/53),
which sets out the ambitious Four-point Agenda
Towards Transformative Change for Racial Justice and
Equality (A/HRC/47/53, annex); and the Ark of Return,
which stands on these very grounds.
Those are all valuable contributions to the debate
and must inform necessary action at the national,
10/27

The theme for this commemoration, “Stories
of courage: resistance to slavery and unity against
racism”, draws the connection between that bloodsoaked chapter in our history and the contemporary
challenges faced by Caribbean and other societies
shaped by slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
It has long been the view of the Caribbean
Community that we must together take further steps to
address both the historical roots and the contemporary
branches of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
The only tool to achieve that goal is reparatory justice.
At the high-level event held in September of 2021
to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, speaker
after speaker from both sides of the Atlantic made that
call for reparatory justice. At their historic inaugural
meeting last year, the Heads of State and Government
of the Caribbean Community and the African Union
agreed that reparatory justice must be pursued.
The Caribbean Community has been actively
pursuing that goal through many channels, including
through the CARICOM Reparations Commission,
which has put forward a 10-point plan, a plan that
has striking similarities to the Four-point Agenda
Towards Transformative Change for Racial Justice and
Equality of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. A full and good-faith implementation of
the Durban Declaration and Plan of Action also shows
us the way forward.
All of us here today, in this global community Hall,
can and must go further together in addressing past and
present injustices.
Mr. Rodrigue (Haiti) (spoke in French): Before
I begin my remarks, I would like to state that the
delegation of the Republic of Haiti fully associates
itself with the statements made by the Permanent
Representatives of Mexico, on behalf of the Group of
Latin American and Caribbean States, and of Barbados,
on behalf of the Caribbean Community.
22-30327

29/03/2022

However, the holding of this commemoration of the
victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade is of
such significance for Haiti that it is important for us to
share the voice of the first black republic to the General
Assembly’s tribute to the millions of men, women
and children victims of the greatest human tragedy in
universal history.
Slavery and the transatlantic African slave trade is,
without a doubt, the greatest genocide the world has
ever known. That is why we must go beyond a simple
commemorative ceremony to substantively address this
painful chapter of our common history. For the legacy
of the slave system is still very much with us, and
people of African descent remain the primary victims
of the systemic racism resulting from colonialism and
the African slave trade.
We must not forget the fact that the transatlantic
slave trade constitutes the largest forced displacement
of people in human history. According to UNESCO
estimates, that criminal practice, which lasted for more
than 400 years, led to the uprooting of 15 to 20 million
Africans, who were kidnapped and forcibly dragged to
the Americas to be sold like cattle.
The transatlantic slave trade was far from
accidental. It had its roots in the racist ideologies that
underpinned the slave system and colonialism. Many
thinkers of the so-called Enlightenment vehemently
advocated the thesis of the superiority of the white
race over other races, especially the black race, which
served as the basis or instrument for legitimizing the
colonialist and slave system.
Fortunately, the Haitian Revolution of 1791
enlightened humankind by leading to the collapse of
the system of domination and extreme exploitation
of enslaved human beings based on ideological,
political and economic motivations. That is why Haiti
is recognized as playing a special and significant
role in the history of the abolition of this inhuman
and immoral practice. It has shown the whole world
the way to freedom and human emancipation. The
Haitian Revolution gave meaning to the notion of
the dignity of the human person, the very foundation
of the fundamental rights of human beings, the clear
cardinal principle underpinning Haiti’s quest for the
independence it won in 1804.
It was precisely the Haitian Revolution that refuted
and put an end to the premise of white superiority over
Blacks. The Haitian Revolution is the only anti-slavery,

A/76/PV.63

anti-colonial and anti-segregationist revolution. Those
three fundamental characteristics make it unique in
human history.
By advocating the equality of all human beings
and the end of slavery and colonialism as sine qua
non conditions for liberation, the Haitian Revolution
universalized the principles of freedom and equality.
In that regard, in a famous lecture delivered in
1893 on the occasion of the inauguration of the Haitian
Pavilion at the World’s Fair in Chicago, Frederick
Douglass, the famous American abolitionist, said:
“you and I and all of us have reason to respect Haiti
for her services to the cause of liberty and human
equality throughout the world ... She has grandly
served the cause of universal human liberty ... We
should not forget that the freedom ... that has come
to the coloured race the world over, is largely due
to the brave stand taken by the black sons of Haiti
90 years ago. When they struck for freedom ...
they struck for the freedom of every black man in
the world.”
It is clear that this very welcome commemoration
represents a break with the silence on this topic and
fulfils a duty to remember this tragedy. However, I
would like to take this opportunity to invite the Member
States of the United Nations to better understand the
root causes and long-term harmful consequences of the
four centuries of the transatlantic slave trade and the
participation of slaves in the construction of the societies
that enslaved them. We must also combat contemporary
forms of slavery, such as human trafficking and the
exploitation of migrant workers.
At the same time, I invite the United Nations to
continue to systematically implement large-scale
awareness-raising programmes on the dangers of racism
and prejudice of all kinds so that this human tragedy is
never repeated. It is time to discuss in depth the issue of
restorative justice for the victims of transatlantic slave
trade, as its legacy continues. It is high time to move
from words to action.
Mr. Romero Puentes (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The commemoration of the International Day
of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and
the Transatlantic Slave Trade takes on particular
significance in the face of alarming manifestations of
racism, discrimination and xenophobia in some of the
most developed societies.

22-3032711/27

A/76/PV.63

29/03/2022

This issue is of particular importance for Cuba, a
country deeply proud of its African roots and heritage.
We will never forget that some 1.3 million African
slaves were forcibly brought to Cuba in order to replace
the indigenous population workforce exterminated by
Spanish colonialism.

economic relations are concerned. As a general rule,
those of us whose nations are yesterday’s colonies
are subject today to an unfair international order that
has changed in name but not in essence, because it
continues to promote the wealth of a few at the expense
of the impoverished majority.

In paying tribute to the victims of slavery and
the transatlantic slave trade, we Cubans also pay
tribute to the roots of our people. Our nation, culture,
idiosyncrasies and popular religiosity are profoundly
mestizo and cannot be understood without this African
contribution. And neither can our struggles for
independence and self-determination be understood
without understanding the decisive contribution of the
freed slaves and their descendants.

A telling example of the unfairness of the current
international order is the unacceptably low level of
access of developing countries to vaccines against
the coronavirus disease. While developed countries
are already administering booster doses, most of
the developing world has not been able to acquire
all the vaccines needed for the initial vaccination of
their populations.

This crime against humanity, whose victims we
remember today, is inextricably linked to the situation
of structural inequality, racial discrimination, prejudice
and exclusion that continues to affect people of African
descent even now in the twenty-first century.
As expressed by the historic leader of the Cuban
Revolution, Fidel Castro, at the historic 2001 World
Conference against Racism:
“The inhuman exploitation imposed on the
peoples of three continents, including Asia, marked
forever the destiny and lives of more than 4.5 billion
people living in the Third World today whose
poverty, unemployment, illiteracy and health rates,
as well as their infant mortality, life expectancy and
other calamities — too many, in fact, to enumerate
here — are certainly awesome and harrowing.
They are the current victims of that atrocity,
which lasted centuries, and the ones who clearly
deserve compensation for the horrendous crimes
perpetrated against their ancestors and peoples.”
It is a moral duty to ensure that reparations and full
compensation reach the peoples and groups affected
by that heinous and unspeakable crime. Developed
countries have profited from conquest, colonization,
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade. They are
therefore responsible for the extermination associated
with them.
For that reason, we support the just claim raised
by the member States of the Caribbean Community.
It is also only fair that there should be special and
differential treatment towards developing countries,
particularly those in Africa, where their international
12/27

The best tribute we can pay to the victims of slavery
and the transatlantic slave trade in today’s world, in
addition to the necessary remembrance, is to show
international solidarity with the countries from which
those millions of people were snatched.
For that reason, and based on its humanist stance,
Cuba has continued to strengthen its international
cooperation programmes in the area of health,
particularly with countries and territories in the
Caribbean, Latin America and Africa, despite the
unprecedented tightening of the economic, commercial
and financial blockade imposed by the United States
against my country.
However, as long as the international community
fails to address and solve the root causes of the inequality,
exclusion, racism and discrimination that have survived
slavery and which continue to be suffered by millions
of people, particularly those of African descent, the
tribute we pay today will be a mere formality.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): The commemoration of the International
Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the
Transatlantic Slave Trade, which was first celebrated
in 2008 following the adoption of resolution 62/122,
should be a day of deep reflection and retrospective
examination of the sad and shameful treatment that for
centuries was inflicted on Africans, namely, the slave
trade — a gross violation of human rights, which became
a lucrative multinational operation. Some practices of
the slave trade were even legalized in some countries.
The transatlantic slave trade caused untold
suffering. The millions upon millions of individual
victims each had a story, a family, dreams and hopes.
22-30327

29/03/2022

Some 15 million Africans were violently and cruelly
torn from their homes, separated from their families,
treated as inferior beings and forced to march in chains
for hours and days at a time from their communities in
the interior of our continent to the coast, where they
were to begin a journey of no return and a permanent
separation from their families towards a destiny of
terrible torment.
The slave trade was at the heart of deep structural
inequalities, both economic and social. Those injustices
and inequalities still affect black people and people of
African descent around the world today, as we continue
to see in the major crises taking place in the world. Black
people are always treated in a discriminatory manner in
a world where there is constant talk about the obligation
to respect human rights and humanitarian rights.
The human beings who succumbed under the yoke
of slavery had little refuge. They were left with their
beliefs, their drums and their invincible will not to die.
They were in danger of losing their identity and their
reason for living.
On this International Day of Remembrance of the
Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea pays the most heartfelt
tribute to the courage of the nearly 5 million Black men
and women who succumbed under the yoke of slavery,
and we celebrate their boldness. We celebrate Toussaint
Louverture, Aimé Césaire, the Maroons and the brave
fighters of Jamaica, Haiti, Peru, Brazil, Cuba, Barbados
and others, as well as the entire African diaspora who
rose up against humiliation — as the great Aimé Césaire
depicted in his epic poem, Notebook of a Return to the
Native Land — and who fought as embodied in the
figure of the Haitian woman, the symbol of our pride.
On this International Day of Remembrance, we also
celebrate the memory of those who fought against such
a terrible crime, grave intolerance, base injustice and
flagrant violation of human rights. We celebrate those
who, through their creativity, contribute to the struggle.
Thus, we celebrate the architect Rodney Leon, who
designed and built The Ark of Return, a permanent
memorial in honour of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade, which stands in the Visitors’
Plaza of United Nations Headquarters and for whose
construction the President of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, His Excellency Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo,
made a significant contribution.

A/76/PV.63

Mr. Afonso (Mozambique), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Allow me to conclude my statement by pointing out
that we are all part of the same great family, that is, the
family of humankind. In this great family, there should
be no room for, or should there be, any degrading and
discriminatory treatment of some of its members. All
of us, from the Caribbean to Africa and everywhere
else, let us say together, let us shout together and let us
sing together: never again, never again and that racial
discrimination and the treatment of black people as
inferior beings cease. We are all part of the great family
of humankind.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): My delegation welcomes
the convening of this meeting, as it highlights stories
of courage and the resistance to slavery and unity
against racism. We align ourselves with the statement
made by the delegation of Lesotho on behalf of the
Group of African States.
The International Day of Remembrance of the
Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade,
celebrated on 25 March, also serves to highlight the
demographic, cultural and ideological heritage of the
African continent, which for more than 400 years saw
its children traded as slaves across the Atlantic to North
America, South America, Europe and beyond.
In approaching this subject, it is never too much
to remember the historical causes, the consequences
and the particularities of the trade — besides certainly
analysing how various forms of integration were
generated among Africa, Europe, the Americas and the
Caribbean. The transatlantic slave trade was certainly
the largest forced migration in history, with some
20 million men, women and children as victims. The
number of victims of slave traders is estimated to have
been even greater.
The current economic and social situation of
the African continent is intrinsically linked to the
consequences of the slave trade. History shows that the
period between the sixteenth and nineteenth centuries
was one of economic stagnation in Africa, which fell
farther and farther behind in economic progress as the
years passed. It is no wonder then that some historians
interpret that as a sign that the transatlantic trade was
seriously holding back Africans’ economy development.
On the other hand, although the economic
consequences were the most obvious, the transatlantic

22-3032713/27

A/76/PV.63

slave trade severely affected Africans’ political
landscape and set a disturbing precedent for the future.
Politically, the brutal and arbitrary intervention and
wars resulting from the competition between rival
African rulers for control of the slave capture and
trade left the continent in a fragile political situation.
The slave trade had a negative impact on African
societies and led to the long-term impoverishment of
the continent. There are numerous examples of the
slave trade causing the deterioration of national legal
institutions, the weakening of States and political and
social fragmentation.
Angola condemns the crimes against humanity
committed during slavery and the transatlantic slave
trade — the cause of profound economic and social
inequality, hatred, bigotry and racism, which continue
to affect people of African descent around the world.
In that context, I would like to emphasize that, in
the specific case of Angola, 5 million persons were
subjected to the slave trade beginning in the early
fifteenth century. Data indicate that approximately
10,000 slaves left Angola annually in the 20 years
between 1810 and 1830, at a time when many countries
were already fighting against the slave trade.
To conclude, we reiterate the importance of
implementing paragraph 4 of resolution 62/122 to
enable people of African descent around the world to
find their roots, retrace their identity and rewrite their
proposed history.
Mr. Kuzmenkov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We would like to thank the President
for convening today’s meeting on such an important
topic. We believe that it is particularly important to
disseminate knowledge about the causes, consequences,
lessons and legacy of the slave trade. We are convinced
that present and future generations must not forget that
tragic chapter of world history.
As we know, the United Nations was born in
response to the horrors facing the world during the
Second World War. Although the events of that war and
the transatlantic slave trade are separated by a century
and a half, the two historical events had much the same
underlying causes. It is the perverse notion that one
racial or ethnic group has some sort of superiority over
another. That is why it is incumbent upon Members
of the United Nations to take every step to preserve
the memory of the victims of the slave trade and
its consequences.
14/27

29/03/2022

It cannot be denied that the transatlantic slave trade
was one of the most heinous crimes against humanity,
which remains wrongly silenced. No apology, let alone
compensation, has ever been offered to the African
peoples for the immense moral and material damage
caused by the former colonial European countries.
Millions of inhabitants of the African continent
were forcibly removed from their homeland, tortured
and badly treated. Many of them died or lost their
health working in inhumane conditions, while the
European colonial Powers and the United States of
America profited from the misfortune. The slave labour
of Africans, appropriated by American businessmen,
was largely responsible for the economic well-being
and prosperity of American society.
The transatlantic slave trade is an example where a
historical event has a truly global dimension and a clear
impact on the present and the future, for that inhumane
policy of the colonial Powers laid the foundation for
systemic racism, racial discrimination, hate speech
and xenophobia in the European Union and the United
States. Ethnic and religious intolerance and migrant
phobia are gaining momentum in European States. The
United States ignores its own long-standing problems
but tries to lecture other nations and countries.
Many States that do not want to go along with the
self-proclaimed hegemon and defend their sovereignty
and independent foreign-policy path are subjected
to economic blockades, illegal unilateral sanctions
and blatant interference. Such actions are contrary to
the norms and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and we demand an end to them.
In addition, the United States authorities have been
unwilling to try to address social problems, such as
racism, rampant xenophobic ideas and the complete
impunity of security and law enforcement agencies that
mistreat black people.
We remember all too well how Western countries
were very reluctant to establish the Permanent Forum
of People of African Descent and did their utmost
to prevent that body from effectively fulfilling its
mandate. However, all those efforts were unsuccessful,
and the Forum became a reality. We are counting on
the members of the Permanent Forum to give their
assessment of the crimes of Western colonizers.
The Russian Federation wholeheartedly condemns
the policy of colonialism and expresses its support for
22-30327

29/03/2022

all peoples who suffered as a result of the slave trade.
The time has come to raise the question of restoring
historical justice and establishing responsibility for
the crimes of colonialism. It is important that States
Members of the United Nations remember that and
discuss such issues.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in this commemorative meeting.
The
Assembly
has
thus
concluded
its
commemorative meeting to mark the International Day
of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the
Transatlantic Slave Trade. May I take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 120?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/76/L.42)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Zambia to introduce draft resolution
A/76/L.42.
Mr. Simbyakula (Zambia): My delegation has the
honour to introduce draft resolution A/76/L.42, entitled
“International Day of Plant Health”. We are most
grateful to all delegations that actively engaged during
the informal consultations, and their contributions
through constructive engagement and flexibility are
much appreciated.
Plants produce the oxygen essential for life on Earth
and make up 80 per cent of the food that we eat. Yet they
are under constant attack from pests and diseases, which
destroy from 20 to 40 per cent of food crops every year,
resulting in low yields and trade losses. That leaves
millions of people without enough food to eat and has a
negative impact, especially on poor rural communities,
which derive most of their income from agriculture.
Therefore, by protecting plants from invasive pests and
diseases we can greatly contribute to food security,
better nutrition, environmental protection, combating
climate change and boosting economic development, as
well as to achieving the goal of zero hunger.

A/76/PV.63

In December 2018, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 73/252, entitled “International Year of Plant
Health, 2020”, which was aimed at raising global
awareness about how protecting plant health was
essential to our livelihoods by combating hunger and
reducing poverty, as well as maintaining a healthy
environment. Despite the setbacks brought about by the
coronavirus disease pandemic, major activities were
carried out at the global, regional and national levels with
the participation of Government and non-Government
actors, including the private sector, non-governmental
organizations and other stakeholders working together
in observance of the importance of plant health to all
forms of life on Earth and to the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals.
In October 2020, the 27th session of the Committee
on Agriculture of the Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) endorsed a proposal championed by Zambia for
the International Day of Plant Health to be observed
on 12 May every year. The 42nd session of the FAO
Conference, held in June 2021, unanimously adopted
conference resolution 6/2021, which unanimously
endorsed the proposal as one of the key legacies of the
International Year of Plant Health 2020.
I wish to underscore that the observance of the
International Day of Plant Health will provide continuity
to the efforts made throughout the International Year of
Plant Health in 2020 and will continue to pursue the
main objective of raising awareness of the importance
and impacts of plant health in addressing issues of
global significance, including hunger, poverty, threats
to the environment and economic development. It will
also remind Governments to take appropriate actions,
such as policy formulation, capacity-building and
investment in infrastructure aimed at promoting plant
health and the control of plant pests and diseases, as well
as implementing measures to combat climate change
and human activities, which have also emerged as new
and urgent challenges to plant health over the years.
The declaration of 12 May as the International Day
of Plant Health has the support of the International
Plant Protection Convention contracting parties, the
FAO governing bodies, FAO members from all FAO
regions and various partner organizations from various
stakeholder groups.
In conclusion, let me also emphasize that the draft
resolution text is based on the relevant documents of the

22-3032715/27

A/76/PV.63

Food and Agriculture Organization, the International
Plant Protection Convention and other organizations.
On behalf of all co-sponsors, I sincerely hope that
this draft resolution will receive unanimous support in
this plenary.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/76/L.42, entitled
“International Day of Plant Health”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of draft
resolution A/76/L.42 and in addition to the delegations
listed in that document, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft resolution: Angola,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Burkina Faso, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Japan,
Mongolia, Namibia, Papua New Guinea, South Africa,
Thailand, Turkey and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.42?
Draft resolution A/76/L.42 was adopted (resolution
76/256).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 15.
Agenda item 20 (continued)
Sustainable development
Draft decision (A/76/L.45)
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now take action on draft decision A/76/L.45, entitled
“Accreditation and participation of an intergovernmental
organization in the international meeting entitled
‘Stockholm+50: a healthy planet for the prosperity of
all — our responsibility, our opportunity’”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft decision A/76/L.45?

29/03/2022

Agenda items 20 and 78 (continued)
Sustainable development
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft decision (A/76/L.44)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now take action on draft decision A/76/L.44,
entitled “Accreditation and participation of an
intergovernmental organization in the 2022 United
Nations Conference to Support the Implementation
of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and
sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources
for sustainable development”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft decision A/76/L.44?
Draft decision A/76/L.44 was adopted (decision
76/559).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
20 and sub-item (a) of agenda item 78.
Agenda item 129 (continued)
Global health and foreign policy
Report of the Secretary-General (A/76/492)
Draft resolution (A/76/L.43)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway to introduce draft resolution
A/76/L.43.
Ms. Juul (Norway): The coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic is undoubtedly one of the
greatest global challenges in recent history. It has
revealed serious weaknesses in our preparedness,
prevention and response to health emergencies. It has
tested our ability to act as a global community and has
revealed overwhelming inequities in today’s world. It
will also test our ability to learn from our actions and
move forward.

Draft decision A/76/L.45 was adopted (decision
76/558).

Our response to COVID-19 and the resulting
economic crisis has been ad hoc. We must transform
that into sustainable solutions for the long term.

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 20.

Therefore, it is my honour today, on behalf of the
core group of the Foreign Policy and Global Health
Initiative — Brazil, France, Indonesia, Norway,

16/27

22-30327

29/03/2022

Senegal, South Africa and Thailand — to introduce draft
resolution A/76/L.43, entitled “Elevating pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response to the highest
level of political leadership”. Allow me to highlight
some of the main elements of the draft resolution.
First, it sends a clear message that we need to
increase international collaboration and coordination
on pandemic preparedness and response at the highest
political level. We should do that by strengthening
our implementation of the International Health
Regulations — the sole legally binding instrument
that defines countries’ rights and obligations to report
public health events and emergencies that have the
potential to cross borders.

A/76/PV.63

including a joint work plan on One Health, to better
address disease outbreaks.
In conclusion, no country can control a pandemic
alone. We all depend on multilateral and multisectoral
global collaboration. I would therefore also like to
express my sincere gratitude to all delegations for
the support, engagement and flexibility they show
throughout this process. And I would like to extend a
special thanks to our dear colleagues from Senegal for
allowing us to finalize draft resolution A/76/L.43 in the
resumed session of the General Assembly while they
are formally chairing the Foreign Policy and Global
Health Initiative.

In addition, we should support ongoing
discussions in the World Health Organization (WHO)
towards developing a convention, agreement or other
international instrument so that the world will be better
prepared and better able to respond to a new pandemic.

Mr. Manalo (Philippines): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends
in Support of Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in Health
Care Facilities, made up of Colombia, Egypt, Hungary,
Mauritania, Nepal, Poland, Slovenia and my own
country, the Philippines.

Secondly, the draft resolution calls on Member
States to prioritize pandemic prevention, preparedness
and response in their own national agendas, build
resilient health systems and prioritize primary health
care — ensuring a whole-of-Government and whole-ofsociety approach.

The multidimensional impact of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic remains one of the most
pressing concerns that we face, as it has upended our
lives, reversed years of sustainable development gains
and deepened inequalities, particularly among the
most vulnerable.

Thirdly, the draft resolution calls for more
sustainable financing for pandemic preparedness and
response. It underlines the importance of adequate and
predictable financing of WHO to enable it to fulfil its
core functions. Health security is a global public good,
and it is our shared responsibility to ensure that we
make the necessary investment.

Our group supports the theme of this year’s global
health and foreign policy draft resolution A/76/L.43 to
elevate pandemic prevention, preparedness and response
to the highest level of political leadership in order to
ensure that we build back better from the current crisis
and are better prepared for future health emergencies.

Fourthly, the draft resolution places emphasis on
access, including by underscoring the need to support
the efforts of the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator
in order to speed up the development and production of
and equitable access to COVID-19 tests, treatments and
vaccines, as well as recognizing the importance of a
skilled health workforce, which is crucial to ensure that
no one is left behind.

The COVID-19 pandemic has also revealed the
urgent global need for improvement in access to water,
sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services in health-care
facilities. WASH is the first line of defence against
COVID-19, a virus that thrives amid the inequities in
our societies and our health systems. WASH services are
therefore crucial to preventing the spread of COVID-19
as well as other diseases, safely treating those infected
and preventing future pandemics.

Fifthly, let us not forget that diseases of zoonotic
origin are among the most likely sources of future
pandemics. Yet there is currently no global agreement
for how to monitor, manage or respond to those threats.
The draft resolution therefore also calls on relevant
institutions to develop options, for consideration by
their governing bodies, to establish a common strategy,

Water, sanitation and hygiene services and healthcare facilities are also fundamental for the provision
of quality people- centred care, health security,
preparedness and response efforts. Such services
reduce exposure to diseases, as well as the transmission
of diseases, and serve to uphold the dignity and human
rights of all people, especially people in vulnerable

22-3032717/27

A/76/PV.63

situations, including mothers, newborns, children and
indigenous people.
WASH in health-care facilities is critical to prevent
the deaths of millions who die because of unsafe,
poor-quality health-care services. The lack of those
essential services impacts nearly 2 billion people, and
communities in low- and middle-income countries
suffer greatest from that devastating health-care and
economic problem.
Recognizing that crisis even before the COVID-19
pandemic, the Secretary-General announced a global
call to action in March 2018, emphasizing that access
to WASH in health-care facilities is fundamental to the
achievement of universal health coverage and critical
Sustainable Development Goals, encompassing the end
to poverty, improved education, reduced inequities,
clean water and sanitation, better health and well-being
for all.
Investments in, and improvements to, WASH
services will serve as an indispensable first line of
defence when the next pandemic emerges. WASH in
health-care facilities is a necessary element for primary
health care and a foundation of strong health systems.
We cannot overemphasize the essential role WASH
plays in combating antimicrobial resistance, ensuring
infection prevention and control, providing safe
environments for maternal and child care and the most
fundamental criteria in achieving the goal of universal
health coverage by the year 2030.
The Philippines and Hungary, as co-Chairs of the
Group of Friends in Support of WASH in health-care
facilities, and the members of our group are committed
to raising the profile of safe water, sanitation, hygiene
and infection prevention and control in health-care
facilities within the United Nations. We invite other
Member States to join us in elevating this agenda,
towards our shared commitment to achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals, particularly in this
decade of action, and in support of elevating the
discussions on pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response to the highest level of political leadership.
We stand ready to work with other groups of friends
to ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all
at all ages and to ensure the availability and sustainable
management of water and sanitation for all.
18/27

29/03/2022

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Ms. Ludwig (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina;
and the European Free Trade Association country
Liechtenstein, as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
We would like to start by thanking Norway and the
entire core group for their efforts and engagement on
draft resolution A/76/L.43.
With the world still in the grip of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which is now entering
its third year, the topic is of high relevance and
importance: pandemics constitute a major threat to all
our health and lives, economies and livelihoods.
This is a time for humankind to come together
in solidarity and cooperation. Instead, Russia, in its
brutal military aggression against Ukraine, with the
involvement of Belarus, is indiscriminately targeting
civilians and civilian infrastructure, including
hospitals. Resolution ES-11/2, which we adopted on
24 March, demands full respect for, and protection
of, all medical and humanitarian personnel, as well as
medical equipment and facilities. We urge Russia to
uphold the resolution fully and respect its obligations
under international law. We are also concerned about
the dire humanitarian situation in relation to several
other ongoing armed conflicts.
Unfortunately, the current pandemic will not be
the last one. Given its negative impacts on almost
all aspects of human life, we need to do everything
possible to prevent the emergence of new epidemics,
prevent epidemics from becoming pandemics and
prepare to better respond to future pandemics and other
health threats.
In that regard, we especially welcome a number
of important elements and commitments in the draft
resolution, including with respect to increasing
international coordination and supporting the process
in Geneva on a World Health Organization (WHO)
convention, agreement or other international instrument
22-30327

29/03/2022

on pandemic prevention, preparedness and response;
prioritizing pandemic prevention and response in our
national agendas, with full respect for human rights;
achieving universal health coverage and building
resilient and equitable health systems that are able to
provide essential public health functions and health
services during health emergencies; and acknowledging
the importance of improved global, regional and local
manufacturing — an approach the EU actively supports
in several African countries already.
We also acknowledge the need to fully fund the
Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator, which is the
most powerful and truly multilateral tool for delivering
vaccines equally through the COVID-19 Vaccine
Global Access pillar. It also addresses the needs for
therapeutics, diagnostics and the crucial aspect of
health system strengthening and country readiness.
We clearly recognize the detrimental effects of
COVID-19 on gender equality and the empowerment of
women and girls. That needs to be urgently translated
into effective countermeasures now, urgently. Gender
equality is a prerequisite not only for building back
better but also for effectively preventing and preparing
against pandemics.
We are also happy to see an agreement on setting up
another high-level meeting on antimicrobial resistance
(AMR) in 2024, which seems quite far away, but more
needs to be done to address the silent pandemic of AMR.
Addressing the challenges of human, animal and
ecosystem health using a One Health approach is
essential for tackling the root causes of pandemics. We
are delighted to see that the call for closer cooperation
among the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, WHO and the World Organization for
Animal Health has resulted in the establishment of a
quadripartite memorandum of understanding with the
United Nations Environment Programme, which was
signed in March.
Nevertheless, given that draft resolution A/76/L.43
is a fundamental draft resolution on health in the
General Assembly, we are convinced the text would
have benefited from also integrating some holistic
aspects, such as an explicit acknowledgment of sexual
and reproductive health-care services as part of
essential public health.
With a view to the next global health and foreign
policy draft resolution, we encourage the process to be

A/76/PV.63

a little bit more transparent so that delegations can plan
accordingly on the basis of an early shared timetable.
Mr. Prongthura (Thailand): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the member States of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Health has been continuously gaining political
attention in New York over the years but, in particular
over the past two years, the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has put health high on the
agenda of the United Nations. That is why ASEAN
believes that the annual draft resolution presented by
the Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative, entitled
“Elevating pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response to the highest level of political leadership”
(A/76/L.43), is very timely and relevant.
ASEAN remains deeply concerned about the
continued human cost and suffering as well as the
severe disruption to societies and economies and the
devastating impact on lives and livelihoods brought
about by COVID-19, which have severely affected
the region.
For our region to emerge more resilient and
stronger, ASEAN will seek to fully and effectively
implement ASEAN COVID-19 initiatives, such as the
COVID-19 ASEAN Response Fund and in particular
the ASEAN Comprehensive Recovery Framework
(ACRF) and its implementation plan, which serves
as the region’s consolidated exit strategy from the
COVID-19 pandemic. ASEAN is determined to work
together through the five ACRF broad strategies around
health, human security, economic integration, digital
transformation and sustainability.
Under the broad strategy on health, ASEAN sees
the need to enhance vaccine production and distribution
in the region to put an immediate end to the COVID-19
pandemic, including through enhanced collaboration
and the sharing of experiences with partners in
research, development, production and the distribution
of vaccines; providing equitable access to medicines for
COVID-19; making COVID-19 vaccines available and
affordable to all as global public goods; and preparing
for other future public health emergencies.
That would also help strengthen vaccine security
and self-reliance at the regional level in the longer
term, which is a priority strategy for health in ASEAN,
as affirmed by the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on
ASEAN Vaccine Security and Self-Reliance.

22-3032719/27

A/76/PV.63

We also believe that building resilient and strong
health systems and achieving universal health coverage
is the foundation of pandemic prevention, preparedness
and response. We also place importance on enhancing
the region’s capacity to prepare for, prevent, detect and
respond to public health emergencies and emerging
diseases. In that regard, we look forward to the
operationalization of the ASEAN Centre for Public
Health Emergencies and Emerging Diseases, which
would serve as a centre of excellence and a regional
resource hub.
We must also build resilience to emerging
infectious diseases and future health threats, including
antimicrobial resistance, which ASEAN recognizes as
a risk to the environment and human health. ASEAN
therefore welcomes the decision proposed in draft
resolution A/76/L.43 to hold a high-level meeting on
antimicrobial resistance in 2024.
In conclusion, ASEAN would like to reaffirm its
commitment to continue working with the international
community, especially with the World Health
Organization and the United Nations, towards achieving
healthy lives and well-being for all, in particular by
ending the COVID-19 pandemic, emerging stronger
and more resilient from the recovery process and
being more prepared for future health emergencies and
other shocks.
Mr. Abd Aziz (Malaysia): Malaysia associates
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Thailand on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations. We are also pleased to co-sponsor draft
resolution A/76/L.43 today.
As the Secretary-General said in 2020, “[t]he
pandemic is a clear test of international cooperation — a
test that we have failed.” (S/2020/953, annex I). His words
are still relevant today. To date, more than 6 million
people have perished owing to this pandemic.
Despite the scale and character of the pandemic,
which knows no borders, the world today still
witnesses a lack of global preparedness, solidarity
and cooperation. The divide between the global North
and South, including on matters concerning access to
vaccines, still prevails. What is more disappointing
is that suspicion and acrimony among some countries
continue to foil much-needed trust and cooperation
even in the face of shared challenges.
20/27

29/03/2022

It is Malaysia’s firm belief that global recovery
can be materialized only when the pandemic is
controlled. In that connection, greater engagement
among countries and non-State actors on health
issues should be prominently applied in foreign policy
decision-making, including in the multilateral forums,
such as the United Nations.
That must be our goal, for the simple reason that
global health issues, such as the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, have a widespread and severe
impact on our work in advancing all three pillars of
the United Nations, which I will briefly elaborate in
three points.
First, on the pillar of peace and security, countries
that lack robust and reliable health systems, particularly
fragile and conflict-affected countries, often struggle
to build or sustain peace. The lack or absence of trust
in the institutions providing basic health services to the
people may potentially lead to and prolong conflicts,
respectively. Subsequently, a humanitarian crisis could
occur, which may threaten national, regional and global
peace and security.
Secondly, on the pillar of development, the pandemic
has unleashed an unprecedented crisis, reversing
progress on meeting all 17 Sustainable Development
Goals, with the world’s poorest and most vulnerable
affected the most. It also continues to highlight
inequalities among and within countries. In a larger
context, the global health crisis continues to impact
trade, foreign direct investment and economic growth.
The only path to an inclusive recovery is by
vaccinating the world. As long as the virus is not dealt
with equally, trade flows and global supply chains will
continue to be severely disrupted, costing the global
economy trillion of dollars and hindering countries’
progress towards achieving the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the SDGs.
Thirdly, concerning the human rights pillar, human
rights are unquestionably critical in responding to and
recovering from the pandemic. Health is a fundamental
human right that is indispensable to the exercise of
other human rights.
There is no alternative but to work together to ensure
the availability, accessibility and quality of health
care as a human right for all without discrimination,
including access to the COVID-19 vaccine. Vaccine
nationalism must end, as it only leaves the door open
22-30327

29/03/2022

for the emergence of new variants. The emergence of
Omicron has further exposed that harsh reality.
A healthy population and planet are fundamental
to prosperity, security and stability. In December 2021,
Malaysia launched its framework for Malaysia’s foreign
policy in a post-pandemic world, which specifies three
objectives in health diplomacy as follows: first, we
aspire to become a responsible actor for global public
health equity; secondly, we seek to build international
partnerships on public health, research and vaccine
development, and pharmaceutical capabilities; and,
thirdly, we commit to multilateral approaches to public
health and global challenges.
We are doing our best to translate those commitments
into action. For instance, Malaysia is currently hosting
a regional hub for the United Nations Humanitarian
Response Depot of the World Food Programme, which
provides supply-chain solutions to the international
humanitarian community, including humanitarian
relief cargo shipments to support COVID-19 global
operations. In addition, Malaysia is hosting a World
Health Organization representative office, with six
collaborative and research centres operating in four
Government agencies and two public universities.
We are also proud to host the WHO Global Service
Centre and joined the global COVID-19 vaccine
development platform, the COVID-19 Vaccine Global
(COVAX) Facility. In support of solidarity, humanity and
multilateralism, we have contributed almost a million
vaccines to Bangladesh, Laos, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and Palestine. We remain committed to continuing to
assist countries with low vaccination rates through the
provision of COVID-19 vaccine contributions.
Malaysia also supports the call to solidify global
solidarity in addressing the pandemic and for the
vaccine to be considered a global public good. Beyond
that, we need to also push for intellectual property
waivers for life-saving vaccines and treatments during
pandemics and to increase the capacity of many more
countries to manufacture vaccines and treatments.
One of the greatest threats facing today’s world is
tiny and microscopic, but our collective action must
be big and bold. Advancing foreign policy and global
health interests must go hand in hand, as countries
need to engage and act together to respond to the global
health crisis and its devastating impact. Malaysia will
continue to profess and promote those linkages, and we
call all Member States to do the same.

A/76/PV.63

Ms. Pullela (Australia): I am pleased to deliver this
statement on behalf of Canada, New Zealand and my
own country, Australia (CANZ).
Before I begin, I should like to note for the record
that CANZ condemns in the strongest possible terms
Russia’s unprovoked, unjust and illegal invasion of
Ukraine. The invasion is a gross violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and of international law, including
horrifying reports from the World Health Organization
of dozens of Russian attacks on Ukrainian health-care
personnel and facilities.
As the whole world is now witnessing, Russia’s war
on Ukraine will have many flow-on effects, including
on global health, as food and energy security around
the world is decreased and supply chains are disrupted.
CANZ strongly supports Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity and calls on Russia to immediately
withdraw its forces from Ukrainian territory, consistent
with the legally binding decision of the International
Court of Justice.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
on global health and foreign policy, and commend
his calls for ambitious action by Member States and
international cooperation to reverse negative trends
in health and development resulting from the impacts
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We
also thank the Core Group of the Global Health and
Foreign Policy Initiative, particularly Norway, for its
stewardship of draft resolution A/76/L.43, which we are
considering today.
The circumstances have not been straightforward
this year given the fast pace of discussions on pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response around the
world. Since the high-level meeting on universal health
coverage in 2019, we have witnessed the devastating
and unprecedented impact of COVID-19 on global
health and health systems. We have seen the critical
importance of ensuring equitable access to vaccines
and other medical supplies around the globe, and we
remain committed to the goal of vaccinating 70 per
cent of the world’s population against COVID-19 by
mid-2022, including by strengthening the systems that
deliver vaccines, therapeutics, diagnostics and other
health technologies.
We believe that the cost of ensuring universal
health coverage as well as preventing and preparing
for health emergencies is low compared with the
cost of responding to crises such as COVID-19. We

22-3032721/27

A/76/PV.63

must prioritize public spending on health and other
social sectors as Member States continue to address
COVID-related issues alongside maintaining essential
health services.
As we have seen globally, women have a vital role
to play in a strong, inclusive and sustainable recovery
from the health and economic crises of COVID-19.
They will be critical for future pandemics as well. But
pandemics have a significant impact on women and
girls, interrupting their access to education, economic
opportunity, social protection and health services,
including sexual and reproductive health and rights, and
increasing the risk and severity of violence for all too
many. That is also true for other marginalized groups,
including people living with disabilities, members of
the LGBTI community, indigenous peoples and ethnic
minorities, all of whom have been disproportionately
impacted by the health, economic, security and social
impacts of the pandemic.
The world must remain committed to gender
equality, the economic security and empowerment
of women and their full, equal and meaningful
participation in health and care work. That is critical
to ensuring the health of our communities and our
economies and for us to be best placed to meet future
pandemics head-on.
We are committed to taking the lessons learned
from the COVID-19 pandemic to build a more agile and
responsive global health system, with the World Health
Organization at its core. We see a new international
instrument on pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response as an important avenue to achieving ambitious
reform alongside implementing a broader agenda to
strengthen the global health architecture.
We support an open, inclusive and transparent
negotiation process that reflects the diverse experience
and challenges faced by Member States, including
in low- and middle-income countries and small
island States.
Finally, we faced unusual circumstances in
negotiating this draft resolution given the many
discussions under way on pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response. We would like to encourage
reflection by Core Group members, particularly next
year’s Chair, on working methods and timelines that
would allow for truly meaningful and transparent
consultations with the wider United Nations
membership, both in New York and in Geneva. When the
22/27

29/03/2022

draft resolution next comes forward for consideration, it
will be important to ensure that it reflects developments
in the global health and foreign policy space as well as
the voices of all States Members of the United Nations.
I would like to assure the Assembly of the continued
constructive engagement of the CANZ delegations.
Ms. Sulaiman (Brunei Darussalam): At the outset,
Brunei Darussalam aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Thailand on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Brunei Darussalam would like to express
its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report under this agenda item (A/76/492).
The priority actions listed in the report deserve careful
consideration in our continued efforts to recover from
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
As rightly pointed out by the Secretary-General
in his report, global health and foreign policy are
inextricably linked. The political and socioeconomic
dimensions of global health require solutions not only
at the domestic level but also at the international level.
Many examples in the past have shown that the
alignment of global health and foreign policy can
generate significant benefits for the health of the planet
and peaceful development and growth. Had global
health been fully integrated into foreign policy leading
up to the COVID-19 pandemic, the world might have
been better prepared to face the crisis with stronger and
more resilient health systems.
The disconnect between global health and foreign
policy was put on display during the COVID-19
pandemic, when countries started turning inward
and became less willing to work with one another.
During the early part of the pandemic, nationalism
and protectionism became politically attractive in
many parts of the world. Many countries unilaterally
closed their borders, banned exports of critical medical
supplies such as face masks, personal protective
equipment, testing kits and ventilators, played the
blame game and spread misinformation. However, the
short-term gains from those actions did not last and
have proved counterproductive.
As a small country dependent on free trade and
open borders, Brunei Darussalam cannot afford to turn
inward and shut its borders completely. Like many other
countries, Brunei Darussalam has had to maintain a
delicate balance between the need to save lives through
22-30327

29/03/2022

containing the spread of the virus and protecting
livelihoods by keeping the economy open and running.
Early in the pandemic, we worked with our key
trading partners to ensure that our trade lines remained
open to facilitate the flow of goods and services. We
also worked with our regional neighbours to establish
reciprocal green lanes to facilitate essential business and
official travel during the pandemic, including reciprocal
mutual recognition of vaccination certificates.
In a spirit of solidarity, Brunei Darussalam also
donated medical goods and equipment to support
our friends in the region in their battle against the
pandemic, which our friends also reciprocated. That
is what it means to have multilateralism: to help one
another when one is in need and to provide when we
have the means to do so.
Brunei Darussalam’s swift mitigation measures
have been successful and prevented community
infections for more than a year. Unfortunately, like
many others, we were hit by a second wave of the
pandemic, and cases of local transmission returned in
August 2021. Immediately our Government ramped up
our testing capacity, vaccination efforts and awareness
programmes. We were able to do so successfully
with the support of our private-sector partners and
volunteers, especially with the active participation of
our youth.
Today we are able to process up to 5,000 COVID-19
swab tests each day, helping to ensure that clusters
are contained. We have also introduced mobile and
drive-through testing and vaccination centres around
the country to care for and protect our population.
A widespread contact-tracing mechanism through
the use of an application called BruHealth continues
to be used, which has effectively identified clusters
of imported as well as locally transmitted cases. We
continue to underline the significance of transparent
communication and interaction between the Government
and the public through daily press conferences hosted
by the Ministry of Health, raising public awareness of
the importance of physical distancing and self-isolation,
as well as carrying out basic hygiene and sanitization.
Foreign policy also played an integral role in our
national COVID-19 vaccination programme. Brunei
Darussalam started vaccinating its population in
April 2021, and to date more than 94 per cent of our
population has received two doses of vaccine, of which

A/76/PV.63

60.9 per cent have been boosted with a third dose. That
achievement would not have been possible without the
support and cooperation of our external friends and
partners, the COVID-19 Vaccine Global (COVAX)
Facility and the vaccine manufacturers.
Brunei Darussalam is committed to doing its
part and to working with the United Nations to build
a more resilient, equitable and inclusive global health
system, based on the principle of delivering universally
accessible, high-quality and affordable essential health
care for our people. That includes calling for global
support on mutual recognition of all vaccines and sources
that are endorsed by the World Health Organization and
doing away with policies dictating a restricted list of
vaccines permitted for cross-border entry.
For all of the uncertainties over the past two years,
the COVID-19 pandemic has made it clear that we all
belong to one human race. We have more in common
with one another than we ever thought. Only through
global solidarity, working together and supporting each
other, can we truly overcome this pandemic and pass
what the Secretary-General termed the formidable test
of leaving no one behind.
Mr. Guo Jiakun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has been
ongoing or almost two years. The most serious pandemic
in a century is still raging, with frequent viral mutations
posing grave challenges to human life, health and
sustainable development. Overcoming the pandemic at
an early date and restoring economic growth are the top
priorities of the international community.
I would like to make the following three observations.
First, in the face of the pandemic, we must
uphold solidarity and cooperation to eliminate the
immunization gap. The pandemic has once again
proved that there is no insulated island with absolute
safety in the world. Human society is a community
with a shared future. The lives and health of people in
developing countries are as precious and important as
those of people in other countries.
Vaccines are the most powerful weapon against
the virus. The key to current global anti-pandemic
cooperation is to ensure the fair distribution of
vaccines. All countries must honour their commitments
instead of making empty promises. China was the
first to propose making COVID-19 vaccines global
public goods and is the biggest contributor to the fair

22-3032723/27

A/76/PV.63

distribution of vaccines. So far, China has provided
more than 2.1 billion doses of vaccines to more than
120 countries and international organizations.
One out of two vaccines used globally is made in
China. China is a staunch supporter of joint vaccine
production. It was the first to support a vaccine
intellectual property waiver and took the lead in
technology transfer to developing countries. To date,
China has conducted joint production with more than
20 countries, with an annual production capacity of
1 billion doses.
As an active participant in multilateral cooperation
on vaccines, China supports the World Health
Organization in playing a central coordinating role in
prioritizing the procurement needs of the COVID-19
Vaccine Global (COVAX) Facility. China has donated
$100 million to COVAX, with a supply of more than
200 million doses of vaccines.
Secondly, in the face of the pandemic we must
uphold openness and inclusiveness and restore
economic development. The global industrial chain
and supply chain have been severely affected by the
pandemic. The imbalance in the supply and demand
structure has widened, and inflationary pressure
has risen.
Achieving sustainable development and a
sustainable economic recovery during the pandemic
and coordinating the tasks of fighting the pandemic,
stabilizing the economy and protecting people’s
livelihoods are common issues faced by us all. Last
September, President Xi Jinping, during the seventysixth session of the General Assembly (see A/76/PV.3),
proposed a global development initiative upholding
the core concept of putting people first, following the
guideline of pragmatic cooperation, advocating the
spirit of open and inclusive partnership and calling
on the international community to accelerate the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. The goal thereof is to promote stronger,
greener and healthier global development, build a
shared future for global development, devise a blueprint
for international development cooperation and provide
direction for advancing global development and
international development cooperation.
The global development initiative is another
important public good provided by China to the
international community. The initiative is open to the
world, and all countries are welcome to participate and
24/27

29/03/2022

make joint efforts to accelerate the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda.
Thirdly, in the face of the pandemic, we must tackle
both the symptoms and the root causes and improve
the governance system. The COVID-19 pandemic is
a litmus test of the global health governance system.
We must strengthen the role of the United Nations and
the World Health Organization, improve the global
disease-prevention and control system, and better
prevent and respond to possible future outbreaks. We
must uphold the spirit of extensive consultations, joint
contributions and shared benefits, and fully heed the
views of developing countries and better reflect their
legitimate concerns and demands.
It is essential to improve our capacity for monitoring,
early warning and emergency response; for patient
treatment during major pandemics; for contingency
reserves and logistics; for fighting disinformation and
for providing support to developing countries.
China has always been committed to pandemic
prevention and response. It is open to any efforts and
measures that will help strengthen global solidarity
and coordinate responses to future pandemics and is
willing to work with the international community to
build a community with a shared future for humankind.
Mr. Romero Puentes (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has consistently
made clear the inequitable international order in which
we live. The most vulnerable countries and peoples
have been the most affected, not only because of the
direct impact of the virus on health but also owing to its
socioeconomic consequences.
Contrary to the collective sentiment that should
reign in such a reality, developed countries have
engaged in a frenetic and irresponsible race with a view
to securing for themselves alone vaccines and measures
for protection against COVID-19. Similarly, throughout
the pandemic, unilateral coercive measures have been
strengthened against developing countries, violating
the Charter of the United Nations and international law,
and ignoring the calls by the Secretary-General and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
to ease measures that impose additional difficulties on
countries that have been affected as they try to respond
to the pandemic.
We cannot forget that the challenges created by
COVID-19 were added to the others that we were already
22-30327

29/03/2022

facing in terms of global health, which disproportionately
affect the poorest countries, such as HIV/AIDS,
malaria, tuberculosis and non-communicable diseases.
It is an unsustainable paradox that in a world with so
much scientific development and so many economic
resources, millions of people still die from curable
or preventable diseases. So long as there is an order
that privileges the few at the cost of the many, we will
hardly move forward at all in the area of global health.
Over the nearly two years of the COVID-19
pandemic, Cuba has had to deal with, in addition to the
issues related to that particular illness, the aggression
of the United States Government, which has intensified,
in an opportunistic and criminal manner, the longest
economic, commercial and financial blockade ever
imposed on any country and engaged in unconventional
warfare aimed at destabilizing the country. The
blockade impedes Cuba’s access to equipment,
technology, equipment, treatments and drugs from
United States companies, which it is possible to obtain
only at higher prices through intermediaries, or which
must be substituted for by generic drugs that are less
effective. That makes it harder for people to obtain,
in a timely manner, medications that are required on
a daily basis and creates scarcity among those used
in hospitals.
In the face of that massive scarcity, the Cuban
scientific community created three vaccines and two
vaccine candidates of our own against COVID-19,
which has allowed the country to fully vaccinate
89.4 per cent of our population, having administrated
as of 26 March more than 35 million doses.
In that effort, Cuba was the first country to start
vaccinating children between the ages of 2 and 18
years old against COVID-19. That makes clear our
strengthened scientific system and our technological
innovation in the service of our people. We have also
reiterated our willingness to work with other interested
countries on agreements on the supply and production
of vaccinations, as a modest contribution to the goal of
attaining universal immunization soon.
While the United States tried to match the health
services that we delivered to various nations, Cuba sent
more than 4,900 personnel, organized into 57 medical
teams, to 40 countries and territories affected by
COVID-19 as a response to the requests that we
received, guided by its deep sense of solidarity and
humanism. We could do much more for the benefit

A/76/PV.63

of our country in terms of health or in support of the
efforts of other countries, including in the context of
COVID-19, if we could just get access to the resources
of which we are deprived by the blockage illegally
imposed by the United States.
Cuba will continue to advocate for the promotion of
a world that is more just for all nations and peoples, one
in which solidarity, cooperation and multilateralism
reign and priority is given to the full exercise of the
right to health.
Mr. Konstantinopolskiy (Russian Federation)
(spoke in Russian): We would like to thank the core group
of the Global Health and Foreign Policy Initiative, led by
Norway, for introducing the draft traditional thematic
resolution (A/76/L.43) and for the consultations held.
The Russian delegation welcomes that document and
supports its adoption by the General Assembly.
Despite the tight time frame and the intensive
negotiation process, we have before us the text of a
draft resolution that is concise and clearly focused on
the topic. We are satisfied with this approach and are
pleased that our main comments and priorities were
taken into account. We welcome the reaffirmation in the
draft resolution of the central role played by the World
Health Organization (WHO) in multilateral efforts
to protect against infectious diseases. We advocate
for further strengthening WHO as a coordinator of
international cooperation in this field.
In that context, we believe that it is vitally
important that the document reaffirms the importance
of the international health regulations as a key legal
document on emergency preparedness in the health
sector. We also agree with the provisions on a possible
new legal instrument, under the auspices of WHO, that
would tie in with agreements reached in the World
Health Assembly.
The draft resolution rightly underscores the need for
equitable access to coronavirus diagnostics, therapeutics
and vaccines, as well as the positive role played by
various initiatives to address this crucial challenge. We
are also satisfied with the draft resolution’s focus on
achieving universal health coverage, with particular
emphasis on primary health care as key to this process.
We also commend the decision to convene a high-level
General Assembly meeting on antimicrobial resistance
in 2024 and look forward to the close involvement of
Member States in its preparation.

22-3032725/27

A/76/PV.63

At the same time, we believe it would be
counterproductive to attempt to pre-empt or hurry the
outcome of the professional process agreed by Member
States within to addres the pandemic. That could include
launching parallel initiatives in other United Nations
platforms or outside the global Organization. Such an
approach risks fragmenting this critical agenda and
blurring its single understanding, which, in our view,
does not serve the purpose of uniting the international
community to prevent similar problems in future.
We must also respond to those delegations that,
unfortunately, have once again used a sector-specific
event in the General Assembly in order to continue
the information war. Our delegation refutes the
false accusations against us. We have informed the
international community about the reasons and goals
of our special operation in Ukraine multiple times, and
they are well known. We will not repeat them again.
However, we would like to draw attention to
the fact that States that claim that they support the
real fundamental postulates of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law have — for
many years — trampled upon them and continue to
do so. Or they prefer to manipulate and not notice an
undesirable reality.
In that context, it is not clear why they did not
respond or react to the heavy shelling of the hospital in
Donbas by Ukraine’s military. Why did they not bring
up at the United Nations the issue of the consequences
of the trade and economic blockade of Donbas,
imposed by the Kyiv authorities, or the lack of access
to medicines in hospitals in Donetsk and Luhansk?
Why are they ignoring the nationalist battalions’ use
of civilian infrastructure for military purpose and
civilians as human shields? What about the infamous
statements made by the head of one Ukrainian hospital
who called for violence to be carried out against
Russian prisoners?
We call for the abandonment of double standards
and for the work of the General Assembly to not be
politicized. That is counterproductive and will not allow
us to address any problems. There are other formats
within the United Nations for that type of discussion.
We do not plan on coming back to this topic again.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the delegations of the
Member States of the core group of the Foreign Policy
and Global Health Initiative, launched by the World
26/27

29/03/2022

Health Organization, for presenting the draft resolution
entitled “Elevating pandemic prevention, preparedness
and response to the highest level of political leadership”
(A/76/L.43). I also thank the delegation of Norway for
facilitating consultations on the draft resolution, which
coincides with the start of the third year of the General
Assembly’s international efforts to respond to the
coronavirus pandemic and address its repercussions on
our societies.
Three years into the pandemic, we are still witnessing
the emergence of new mutations of the virus, despite
scientific advances in the production and distribution
of vaccines, as well as successful initiatives aimed
at reducing the gap between production and demand.
The ongoing situation therefore serves to emphasize
the importance of providing vaccines to all countries,
which requires a comprehensive approach based on
the availability of political will at the highest levels,
as well as facilitating more access to financing and
related technologies. In that context, Egypt has called
for an international strategy that takes into account the
manufacturing capabilities of Member States, builds
their capacities and organizes the transfer of technology,
vaccines, medicines and raw materials. As indicated in
the Secretary-General’s 2021 Sustainable Development
Goals Report, the achievement of the Goals was delayed
even before the start of the pandemic, which confirms
the need for concerted efforts to accelerate the pace
of combating the virus and to enhance our ability to
mitigate its economic and social repercussions.
Egypt has made many efforts to accelerate the
pace of vaccinating its citizens, especially those
most affected by the virus, in addition to working to
locally manufacture vaccines and transfer the required
technologies in the context of making Egypt a regional
centre to export vaccines to all the neighbouring
countries. The number of doses administered in Egypt
has reached more than 76 million of different kinds,
with an estimated 32 million people fully vaccinated.
Egypt has also started clinical trials for the Egyptian
vaccine, EgyVax, which reflects Egypt’s manufacturing
capabilities, especially alongside Egypt’s success in
producing more than 30 million doses of the Sinovac
vaccine in order to respond to local needs and
contribute to the global supply chain. Egypt is also
trying to provide locally made vaccines to neighbouring
countries with low rates of vaccination. We are also
collaborating with China in that regard. Perhaps the
announcement of Egypt’s inclusion among the African
22-30327

29/03/2022

countries receiving mRNA vaccine technology is the
best evidence of Egypt’s manufacturing capabilities in
this field.
Those successes are the result of our efforts to raise
the level of health services across the country. Egypt has
implemented several comprehensive health initiatives
under the slogan 100 Million Health, including the
national campaign to eliminate the hepatitis-C virus
and detect non-communicable diseases, the initiative
to support the health of Egyptian women and other
important initiatives, as well as launching the
comprehensive health insurance project that covers all
Egyptians and aims to alleviate the burden of health
expenses on citizens and to achieve comprehensive
health coverage by 2030.
At the continental level, Egypt recently ratified
the convention to establish the African Medicines
Agency, which seeks to enhance local capacities for
manufacturing medicines in African countries and
improve medical capabilities by addressing the gap in

A/76/PV.63

the production of medicines and facing the challenges
of medical industrialization in our African continent.
In that regard, Egypt intends to host the first African
medical exhibition, namely, the Africa Health ExCon
forum in June, in order to respond to medical needs
with products and services and to ensure that African
countries have access to modern medical products.
In conclusion, the continued current situation
requires concerted international efforts to overcome the
ongoing challenges and ensure that the recovery process
from the pandemic is comprehensive and successful.
As noted in the draft resolution before us today, there
is a need to strengthen international cooperation and
coordination in order to enhance pandemic prevention
and preparedness as well as ways to respond to them. In
that context, I emphasize Egypt’s full commitment to
supporting efforts to promote regional and international
health security.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

22-3032727/27
