S/2016/587

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 July 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2228
(2015), by which the Council extended the mandate of the African Union -United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until 30 June 2016 and requested
me to report every 90 days on the implementation of the mission’s mandate. In
addition to the special report of the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (S/2016/510), which provides a conflict analysis, an update on the
political situation and a recommendation for mandate renewal, the present report
covers events in Darfur since the date of publication of my previous report
(S/2015/1027), from 22 March until 15 June 2016. It presents the achievements of
UNAMID in implementing its strategic priorities, endorsed by the Council in
resolutions 2148 (2014), 2173 (2014) and 2228 (2015), and in achieving its revised
benchmarks (see S/2014/279 and resolution 2228 (2015)). It also highlights the
main challenges to effective mandate implementation, the transfer of tasks to the
United Nations country team and the exit strategy.

II. Security situation
Fighting between government forces and rebel groups
2.
Fighting between government forces and Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid
(SLA/AW) elements continued in parts of the Jebel Marra throughout the reporting
period. Clashes were reported in areas north-east of Nertiti, Central Darfur, on
22 and 23 March and 1 and 4 April, with government forces allegedly attacking the
villages of Kwila, Kadingo, Koron, Solow, Hilat Tusug, Boringakari a nd Mari.
Aerial bombardments were also reported in the area, including in Jokosti, Miela,
and Daginja around Golo between 4 and 18 March and Sarrong between 17 March
and 9 April. The Government also launched air strikes south -east of Nertiti in the
villages of Galol, Jaro, Dirma and Dirsa on 23 March, as a result of which two
children were reportedly injured.
3.
In the vicinity of Golo, east of Nertiti, SLA/AW elements ambushed a convoy
of the Sudanese Armed Forces on 4 April. The Government responded with aerial
bombardments in Golo and Guldo on 8 and 9 April, while its forces attacked Togay
16-10680 (E)

080716

*1610680*

S/2016/587

and other villages south-west of Guldo and west of Golo. To the north-east of Golo,
the attack by government forces against the local population in Rockero on 8 and
9 April reportedly resulted in 90 casualties. According to local sources, the
Sudanese Armed Forces and Military Intelligence prevented civilians from fleeing
the fighting in Guldo and Nertiti. On 8 April, government forces reportedly captured
Sarrong, south of Golo, but on 9 April, SLA/AW allegedly attacked a convoy of
border guards near Golo.
4.
In Golol, south-east of Nertiti, fighting between government forces and
SLA/AW was reported on 28 April. On 7 May, the Government reportedly dropped
18 bombs there, followed by clashes with SLA/AW forces on 8 May. On 10 May,
UNAMID personnel in Nertiti witnessed government aircraft flying over the Jebel
Marra and subsequently heard explosions in the mountain area.
5.
On 29 and 30 May, a government aircraft reportedly dropped several bombs in
Kutrum, east of Nertiti, after which SLA/AW forces allegedly attacked a Sudanese
Armed Forces position in the area on 30 May. A total of 9 SLA/AW members and
12 Sudanese soldiers were reportedly killed in the clash. On 5 June, UNAMID
received further reports from local sources of aerial bombardments and fighting in
Kutrum, as a result of which 10 civilians were killed.
6.
In South Darfur, on 21 April, UNAMID was informed by local sources that
government forces had attacked Feina and surrounding areas near Kass on 15 March
and killed 42 civilians.
7.
With respect to other rebel movements, much as in previous reporting periods,
there was no report of military engagement involving government forces and the
Justice and Equality Movement. On 21 April, the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni
Minnawi (SLA/MM) faction claimed that it had repulsed an attack by government
forces in Wadi Maghreb, North Darfur.
Local conflicts and intercommunal violence
8.
The security situation in East Darfur deteriorated in April with a series of
incidents, including two attacks against its governor, by Southern Rezeigat militias.
Following the theft of camels by Southern Rezeigat from Ma ’alia in the village of
Tortahan on 15 April, Rezeigat attacked Ma’alia community leaders on 17 April
who had gathered at a police station to discuss the issue. In the exchange of fire,
seven Ma’alia, four government security personnel and nine Rezeigat were killed.
The following day, Rezeigat attacked the residence of the gover nor in Ed Daein,
who was absent at the time, and four of his guards and two assailants were killed in
the ensuing firefight. Sudanese Armed Forces reinforcements were deployed to
contain the situation. On 25 April, the governor ’s residence was attacked again, and
a civilian was killed. The Government established a panel to investigate the
incidents, but, on 11 May, an attempt by government security forces to arrest an
individual allegedly involved in the attack against the governor reportedly led to a
heavy exchange of gunfire and the withdrawal of the government forces.
9.
The flight of internally displaced persons from the Jebel Marra also changed
the local dynamics. In Sortony, North Darfur, Northern Rezeigat carried out a series
of attacks from 2 to 15 May against the internally displaced persons who had
arrived recently from the Jebel Marra, accusing them of stealing their cattle and of
being affiliated with SLA/AW. On 9 May, Rezeigat raided the camp for internally

2/16

16-10680

S/2016/587

displaced persons in Sortony, killing six internally displaced persons and injuring
six others, including a UNAMID peacekeeper. UNAMID apprehended two of the
assailants, who were handed over to the government authorities.
10. In West Darfur, tensions between Northern Rezeigat and Massalit orig inating
in disputes over diya (blood money) culminated into an exchange of fire in Azerni
on 22 May, which claimed 10 lives, including that of a Sudanese soldier. The
government offices in El Geneina, including those of the State Governor ( Wali),
were closed until military and police forces were deployed to contain the situation.
11. UNAMID recorded six other clashes, which resulted in 36 fatalities. In West
Darfur, a dispute over land between Massalit and Dago on 21 April resulted in the
death of a Dago. In North Darfur, a clash between an unidentified armed group and
cattle herders between 24 and 25 April claimed 28 lives in total, and Massalit
attacked Northern Rezeigat near Sereif and killed two of them in an armed robbery.
In East Darfur, a fight over cattle between Habaniya and Rezeigat on 23 April
resulted in the death of two Habaniya, disputes over access to farmland between
Ma’alia and Zaghawa led to the death of a Zaghawa on 7 April, and a clash over
farmland between Birgid and Rezeigat resulted in the death of three Rezeigat and
two Birgid between 28 and 29 April.
Crime and banditry
12. A total of 786 criminal incidents and 179 casualities were recorded during the
reporting period, in an increase from 505 incidents and 126 casualties in the
previous period. The most common crimes were armed robbery (123 cases),
attempted robbery (26 cases), assault/harassment (251 cases), burglary/break -ins
(48 cases), looting (18 cases), abduction (40 cases), arson (9 cases), shooting
(131 cases), attack/ambush (34 cases), threat (44 cases), livestock theft (40 cases)
and others (22 cases).
13. Attacks on internally displaced persons and civilians by armed nomads, militia
groups and other criminal elements increased during the reporting period, resulting
in 281 civilian fatalities compared with 97 in the previous period. The upsurge in
violence has been a continuous trend since the previous period and is attributable to
the role of armed militias in the ongoing military campaign in the Jebel Marra.
14. In Central Darfur, armed militias entered and began shooting in the Thur East
and Hassahisa internally displaced persons camps on 30 April and 9 May,
respectively, injuring an internally displaced person in each case. Shots were fired
in the vicinity of the Khamsadagaig, Habad East and Straina internally displaced
persons camps on 9 April, 29 March and 19 May, respectively. In South Darfur,
unidentified assailants opened fire in the Kalma internally displaced persons camp
on 30 April and 7 and 11 May, which resulted in an injury.
15. In North Darfur, an armed group reportedly attacked a village near Sortony on
25 March, burning houses and killing an undetermined number of civilians. In
addition, on 20 May, some 50 armed Arab nomads raided the village of Sigilli,
firing randomly. Internally displaced persons were also killed in other criminal
incidents, including in Mujajeria, Al Neem, East Darfur; Kalma, Al Salam camp,
Dereige and Kass, South Darfur; and Tawilla, North Darfur.
16. Incidents of assault and harassment of internally displaced persons and
civilians also increased from 110 during the previous reporting period to 127 in the

16-10680

3/16

S/2016/587

period under review. In addition, internally displaced persons were arrested by the
government authorities without specific charges. On 15 May, Military Intelligence
arrested two internally displaced persons in Kass, South Darfur, including a
secretary-general of the internally displaced persons leadership committee, for
unknown reasons. On 23 May, the National Intelligence and Security Services
detained a sheikh from the Thur camp, Central Darfur, whose whereabouts remain
unknown. Seven other sheikhs remain missing. On the same day, another internally
displaced person from the Kalma camp, South Darfur, was arrested by Military
Intelligence in Nyala. On 29 May, a resident of the Thur camp, South Darfur, was
also arrested by the National Intelligence and Security Services and Military
Intelligence.
17. During the reporting period, there were also several attacks against
government installations by armed militias. In Central Darfur, a police station in
Bindisi was attacked on 8 April by some 150 armed Arabs from the Nawaiba clan in
retaliation for one of its members having been killed the day before while
attempting to free another member from detention. In South Darfur, on 27 April,
militias associated with the Rapid Support Forces exchanged fire with the police in
Nyala, and a civilian was injured by a stray bullet. In North Darfur, on 3 June,
unidentified armed men attacked a police station in Saraf Umra and freed five
detainees. In West Darfur, on 16 May, during a meeting to discuss the killing of
Arab men near a Sudanese Armed Forces base, Arab nomads held hostage for
several hours the locality commissioner, commanders of the Sudanese Armed Forces
and Sudanese police, and members of the security committee in Habila.

III. Political developments
18. The national dialogue was launched on 10 October 2015, notwithstanding a
boycott by many opposition parties and armed movements. The dialogue
deliberations were concluded through six committees dealing with peace and unity,
the economy, the governance and implementation of the outcome of the dialogue,
external relations, identity and culture and freedom and basic rights. Some of the
recommendations reportedly included the establishment of a four -year national
reconciliation government and a constitutional review. On 9 May, the committees
announced that their reports were ready for submission to the President, but a date is
yet to be announced for the consideration of their recommendations.
19. Consultations between the Government and non-signatory armed movements
continued, without yielding an agreed-upon outcome. From 18 to 21 March, the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel convened a meeting between the
Government and members of the Sudan Call coalition in Addis Ababa with a view
to reaching a cessation of hostilities agreement and a consensus on the way forward
on the national dialogue. During the meeting, the Government signed a road map
agreement presented by the Panel which, among others, called for a meeting
between the coordination body known as the Higher Coordinative Committee for
National Dialogue and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North, together
with other opposition parties, to consider steps that should be taken to achieve
inclusivity in the dialogue. The opposition refused to sign it, however. On 21 April,
the Sudan Call coalition held a meeting in Paris and reaffirmed its opposition to the
road map, while declaring an extension for an additional six months of its unilateral
cessation of hostilities, initially declared in September 2015, and calling upon the

4/16

16-10680

S/2016/587

Panel to facilitate a meeting with the Government to implement the cessation of
hostilities.
20. A referendum to determine the administrative status of Darfur, in accordance
with the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur between the Government and the
Liberation and Justice Movement, was held from 11 to 13 April, as scheduled.
Non-signatory movements and the majority of internally displaced persons
continued to reject the referendum. Peaceful demonstrations against the referendum
was held in internally displaced person camps in Sortony, North Darfur, on
25 March; Kalma, South Darfur, from 2 to 5 April; and Hamidiya, Hassahisa and
Khamsadagaig, Central Darfur, on 10 and 11 April. Students staged a peaceful
demonstration in front of El Fasher University on 11 April and were dispersed by
the Sudanese police.
21. Voting proceeded without major incidents, except for the assault and injury by
the police of a representative of the Darfur Regional Administration who reported
witnessing irregularities in East Darfur. The League of Arab States, the African
Union and some Member States deployed observers. On 24 April, the Darfur
Referendum Commission announced that 90.7 per cent of registered voters had
turned out to cast a ballot, and 97.72 per cent of them had voted for administering
Darfur through the current five-state system rather than reverting to the status of
Darfur as a single region.
22. On 13 June, the Government announced the dissolution of the Darfur Regional
Authority, the term of which had been extended by presidential decree until July
2016, following its expiration in 2015, as provided for in the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur. This follows, according to the Government, the implementation of
most of the provisions of the Doha Document, including the Darfur administrative
referendum in April. In its announcement, the Government reiterated its previous
position that the commissions and funds established under the Doha Document
would continue to function under the authority of the presidency to ensure the full
implementation of outstanding issues, such as the work of the Darfur Land
Commission. The Special Criminal Court on the Events in Darfur and the
Implementation Follow-up Commission of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur,
headed by Qatar, would also be retained.

IV. Humanitarian situation
23. Displacements caused by the ongoing military action in the Jebel Marra area
continued to generate significant humanitarian needs in North, Central and South
Darfur. The influx of South Sudanese into East and South Darfur also required a
humanitarian response. In Darfur, humanitarian partners had verified, as at the
beginning of June, that some 80,000 people had fled from the Jebel Marra. In
addition, there have been unconfirmed reports of up to 127,000 additional people
being displaced. That number has not yet been verified by humanitarian partners,
owing to lack of access.
Jebel Marra
24. In North Darfur, the humanitarian response continued to focus on some 58,000
internally displaced persons gathered at Sortony, Tawilla, Kabkabiya and Shangil
Tobaya. In Central Darfur, limited access allowed international humanitarian

16-10680

5/16

S/2016/587

partners to register only 4,295 new internally displaced persons at the Hassahisa and
Hameedia camps. The Sudanese authorities meanwhile reported that an additional
58,000 people had been displaced in Nertiti, Thur, Guldo and Golo. Unconfirmed
reports continued to indicate that up to 53,000 people had been displaced in other
locations, including Boori and the Wadi Boori area, the villages of Daya and Fanga
Suk, the town of Rockero and the Thur East camp. Verification of these figures has
not been possible, owing to movement restrictions.
25. In April, the Government reportedly conducted assessments in North a nd
Central Darfur. International humanitarian partners were not involved in the
exercise, and its findings have not yet been made available. On 30 May, the
Government presented a plan to facilitate the return of internally displaced persons
to the Jebel Marra and reported that 11,500 people had returned from Guldo to
Golo, to their villages, and been provided with some food and non -food items.
Humanitarian actors have approached the Government to discuss the plan and
opportunities to support it in a coordinated manner and in line with humanitarian
principles, including dignity, safety and voluntary return.
26. In April, for the first time since the beginning of the ongoing military
operation in the Jebel Marra, the World Food Programme (WFP) obtained access to
conduct, through partners, general food distribution to 14,000 newly internally
displaced persons at Thur, Guldo and Nertiti. However, independent needs
assessments have not been carried out owing to the lack of clearance.
27. In South Darfur, 18,000 internally displaced persons have been verified at the
town of Kass, the Otash camp, the villages of Mershing and Menawashi, the town of
El Malam and the village of Deribat, with a further estimated 10,000 yet to be
verified. Humanitarian partners currently have access to all locations of
displacement except Deribat and the surroundings of Kass, to which they still do not
have access, despite having repeatedly requested it since the beginning of the crisis.
Influx of South Sudanese
28. Since the previous reporting period, there has been an additional influx of
more than 10,000 South Sudanese refugees into East and South Darfur, who are
mainly driven by hunger caused by the conflict in South Sudan, bringing the total
number of refugee arrivals in 2016 to 52,000. Since the beginning of the year, more
than 5,000 people have been registered at the Bielel camp in South Darfur. In East
Darfur, some 29,000 people have arrived at the Khor Omer camp in Ed Daein, while
an additional 17,500 have reportedly arrived at another seven localities.

V. Operating environment
Attacks against, restrictions of movement of, and denial of access for the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
29. UNAMID personnel and property continued to be targeted by individual
perpetrators and armed criminal elements. A total of 60 criminal incidents,
comprising 21 incidents of break-ins, burglary and theft, 3 incidents of threats,
3 assaults, 3 robberies and 2 incidents of attempted theft, 2 shootin g incidents,
4 carjacking incidents, 1 abduction of a UNAMID truck driver, 16 incidents of
stone-throwing at UNAMID vehicles, 1 incident of an attack against the team site of

6/16

16-10680

S/2016/587

UNAMID and 4 incidents of damage to the assets and properties of the United
Nations, were recorded, in comparison with 21 incidents in the previous reporting
period.
30. The Sudanese security agencies, most notably the National Intelligence and
Security Services and Military Intelligence, restricted patrols and flights by
UNAMID especially those relating to the Jebel Marra, on multiple occasions, citing
insecurity or lack of prior authorization. From 4 to 14 April, the National
Intelligence and Security Services in Nertiti, Central Darfur, stopped all movements
of UNAMID, except for water collection, citing security reasons. They allowed
logistical convoys and water collection patrols to resume on 14 April, while all
others remained suspended. On 27 April, the Services in Zalengei, Central Darfur,
refused clearance for a UNAMID mission to Guldo, Golo and Sarrong, scheduled to
be conducted from 27 April to 1 May. In West Darfur, a UNAMID patrol outside
El Geneina was prevented from interacting with community members by the
Services on 29 March; a UNAMID training activity at the Rongates camp was
stopped by the Sudanese police on 4 May; and a UNAMID patrol out of El Geneina
was denied access by Military Intelligence on 17 May, and again by the Sudanese
Armed Forces on 1 June. In South Darfur, a UNAMID assessment mission with two
local partners was stopped by the Services claiming that non-UNAMID personnel
did not have security clearance on 10 May. In North Darfur, a patrol of UNAMID
from Sortony to Rockero was stopped at the military checkpoint on 15 June — no
particular reason was provided.
31. UNAMID also continued to experience flight restrictions. During the reporting
period, 68 sorties, or 29 regularly scheduled flights to 18 destinations, were
cancelled owing to the lack of clearance by the authorities. These included repeated
cancellations of flights to Sortony, North Darfur, on 9, 12, 13, 17, 18, 19, 23, 26, 27
and 30 April and 1, 3, 4, 7 and 12 May.
Attacks against United Nations agencies, international non-governmental
organizations and humanitarian personnel
32. The number of attacks against United Nations agencies and humanitarian
organizations continued to decline, from three in the previous reporting period to
two during the period under review. On 27 March, a national staff member of WFP
was robbed in Nyala, South Darfur, and on 5 April, three local staff members of an
international non-governmental organization were robbed near El Geneina, West
Darfur.
Denial of access for and restrictions imposed on humanitarian actors
33. Humanitarian organizations regularly reported having encountered challenges
in their humanitarian action and protection activities owing to access restrictions,
interference with programme administration and implementation by the authorities
and the impact of ongoing hostilities and incidents of vi olence and intimidation.
34. Inter-agency and/or other independent needs assessments relating to
displacement in the Jebel Marra have not been permitted by the Government in a
number of areas of reported displacement, in particular Central Darfur. In East
Darfur, an inter-agency mission to assess the situation of the South Sudanese
refugees in several locations was denied clearance three times, before it was finally
conducted from 10 to 11 May.

16-10680

7/16

S/2016/587

35. In May, the Government issued new directives, including a reduction in the
duration of travel permits from one year to six months, the suspension of expedited
customs procedures for humanitarian goods and additional restrictions on the
dissemination of humanitarian information. These actions run contrary to
international norms and humanitarian standards and, if implemented, would inhibit
the international community’s ability to implement its response.
Visas and customs clearance
36. During the reporting period, the Government rejected 6 visa requests,
compared with 5 in the previous reporting period, while 992 were approved, the
majority of which were for police personnel. On 24 February, UNAMID submitted a
list of 29 priority visa requests from the 97 requests rejected in 2015, and, thus far,
20 of the 29 have been approved. As at 15 June, 57 visa requests remained pending
from those submitted in 2016. The number of visas issued to substantive personnel
in the protection of civilians and humanitarian liaison sections in 2016 increased. In
May, the Sudanese Ministry for Foreign Affairs indicated it would not renew the
residence permit of the Head of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs in the Sudan, resulting in his de facto expulsion.
37. Following the third technical-level meeting with the Government of the Sudan,
on 15 June, 106 ration shipments consisting of 142 containers were cleared for
release from Port Sudan. Meanwhile, 314 shipments of United Nations -owned
equipment and contingent-owned equipment, some of which have been there since
April 2015, remain in Port Sudan and Khartoum, pending customs approval. Those
shipments contain military and police assets, such as armoured personnel carriers,
vehicles, spare parts and self-sustainment supplies, and the resulting shortages have
not only severely hampered the ability of UNAMID troops to communicate, conduct
robust patrols and protect civilians, but also resulted in demurrage charges and
additional costs for the troop- and police-contributing countries to inspect and repair
their equipment.

VI. Mandate implementation
A.

Support for an inclusive peace process
High-level mediation
38. On 15 and 16 April, the Joint Special Representative/Joint Chief Mediator met
with the leadership of the Justice and Equality Movement/Gib ril faction
(JEM/Gibril) and SLA/MM in Addis Ababa, who expressed their readiness for
further discussions with the Government, facilitated by UNAMID and Qatar. The
two groups held further consultations with the Deputy Prime Minister of Qatar and
UNAMID in Doha on 30 and 31 May to discuss issues relating to the peace process,
including their concerns with the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. The SLA/AW
representative remained outside of the process, despite indicating to the Joint
Special Representative/Joint Chief Mediator his intention to participate in
consultations scheduled for 12 to 14 June in Geneva, to discuss the Doha Document.

8/16

16-10680

S/2016/587

Implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
39. The eleventh meeting of the Implementation Follow-up Commission of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur was held in Khartoum on 9 May. As the tenure
of the Darfur Regional Authority was to expire in July, the Government indicated
that several commissions and funding structures created under the Doha Document
would continue under a new mechanism, placed under the presidency, to ensure the
full implementation of pending issues. It was also agreed that the Commission
would continue to monitor the implementation of the remaining provisions of the
Doha Document.
40. Further to the release of 6.4 million Sudanese pounds, equivalent to
$1 million, or 50 per cent of the pledge made by the Government for the second
phase of the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultation in February, the Government
and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) signed an agreement on
16 March for the latter to manage the funds. The Darfur Internal Dialogue and
Consultation Implementation Committee, in collaboration with UNAMID, began
preparing for the holding of consultations in 26 lo calities in Darfur.
41. From 18 April to 9 May, in El Fasher, UNAMID supported the demobilization
of 779 ex-combatants from the Liberation and Justice Movement and Justice and
Equality Movement-Sudan and from the outstanding caseload from the Darfur Peace
Agreement. Community-based reintegration began for 700 ex-combatants, with the
support of UNDP and funding from Qatar.
42. In addition, UNAMID, in collaboration with the Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration Commission, the Federal Ministry of the Interior and the Darfur
Regional Authority, held conferences on the control of small arms and light
weapons in El Fasher on 18 and 19 April and in El Geneina on 6 and 7 March.
Discussions focused on the way forward for the reduction of the number of weap ons
held by civilians and gun safety measures through the proposed establishment of an
arms registration and marking process in communities across Darfur. UNAMID
donated gun-marking machines, compressors and gun lockers to the Commission in
West Darfur and provided technical and logistical support.

B.

Protection of civilians
Provision of physical protection
43. In accordance with its strategy for the protection of civilians, UNAMID
focused on providing targeted responses to civilians under threat by increasing
synergy within the mission and with humanitarian partners and fostering interaction
with local community members to inform patrol planning and execution at the team
site level. Despite those efforts, civilians, in particular women and childr en,
remained vulnerable to attacks, especially while undertaking livelihood activities
such as farming and collecting firewood. UNAMID continued to explore ways to
address those specific protection issues.
44. UNAMID conducted 23,360 patrols, as compared with 19,417 in the previous
reporting period, comprising 8,090 routine patrols, 9,620 short -range patrols, 480
long-range patrols, 2,654 night patrols, 576 humanitarian escorts and 1,941 logistics
and administrative escorts covering 7,364 villages and 3,02 4 camps for internally
displaced persons.

16-10680

9/16

S/2016/587

45. UNAMID police personnel conducted 8,706 patrols as compared with
8,741 patrols in the same period in 2015, comprising 4,672 confidence -building
patrols to camps for internally displaced persons and 4,034 patro ls to protect women
and children engaged in livelihood activities outside such camps, including market,
village, town, areas of return and commercial routes patrols. Those efforts resulted
in 777 criminal cases being reported to UNAMID (compared with 574 c ases
reported in the same period in 2015), which resulted in 178 arrests by the Sudanese
police.
46. In response to the influx of internally displaced persons from the Jebel Marra
at its team site in Sortony, North Darfur, UNAMID continued to conduct day a nd
night patrols inside and outside the camp and to establish static positions inside the
camp to monitor the situation. A protection network committee and an integrated
field protection team have been established to strengthen coordination, dialogue,
early warning and timely response to protection threats.
47. UNAMID continued to support the clearance of explosive remnants of war and
conducted general hazard assessments in 22 villages, primarily in North and South
Darfur. UNAMID located and destroyed 1,297 items of unexploded ordnance,
including a 500-lb aircraft-delivered bomb in Shangil Tobaya, North Darfur, and
146 rounds of small arms ammunition. UNAMID reached 92,285 beneficiaries with
1,184 risk education sessions on explosive remnants of war in areas identified as
high priority, owing to their level of contamination and accident reporting, as well
as areas where internally displaced persons were arriving from the Jebel Marra. In
addition, UNAMID, with a view to promoting safe practices in weapons and
ammunition safety in selected police stations, initiated 13 projects for the
refurbishment of basic weapons and ammunition storage facilities in Ed Daein,
Nyala and El Geneina.
Logistic and security support to humanitarian operations
48. During the reporting period, UNAMID military personnel provided 411 round trip escorts for humanitarian partners undertaking the del ivery of humanitarian
assistance and the monitoring of the humanitarian and protection situation, the
majority of which were carried out in North Darfur. In addition, UNAMID formed
police units provided 73 humanitarian escorts, mainly in North and South Da rfur,
including for the delivery of food and non-food items to Kutum, Kabkabiya,
Sortony, El Sireaf, Tawilla and Korma in North Darfur.
49. UNAMID provided escorts two to three times per week for humanitarian
convoys between Kabkabiya and Sortony, in addition to providing daily escorts for
water trucks from Kobe to Sortony. In support of humanitarian partners, UNAMID
also dug a borehole and provided four tankers and generators for water trucking and
pumping at a water point near Sotorny and is digging three more boreholes. With
the logistical support of UNAMID for the rehabilitation of the helipad, the United
Nations Humanitarian Air Service launched twice -weekly flights between El Fasher
and Sortony on 29 May.
Promoting a protective environment
50. The human rights situation remained volatile and unpredictable, with
continued clashes in the Jebel Marra making communities in the area vulnerable.
Attacks against civilians worsened on account of the alleged complicity of the

10/16

16-10680

S/2016/587

Sudanese security forces and the perceived lack of police interest in apprehending
perpetrators. Women and girls continued to be exposed to sexual and gender -based
violence, including conflict-related sexual violence.
51. During the reporting period, UNAMID documented 120 new incident s of
human rights violations and abuses, involving 387 victims (including 27 children),
compared with 132 such incidents involving 338 victims during the previous period.
The violation of the right to life accounted for 27 cases, involving 130 victims; the
right to physical integrity accounted for 41 cases, involving 108 victims; sexual and
gender-based violence, including conflict-related sexual violence in the form of
rape, accounted for 24 cases, involving 61 victims (including 16 children); and the
right to freedom from arbitrary arrest and illegal detention accounted for 14 cases,
involving 60 victims. There were 14 cases of abduction, involving 28 victims. In
44 cases, involving 161 victims, assailants were identified as government security
forces and allied groups. The remaining 76 cases, involving 226 victims, were
perpetrated by unidentified armed men.
52. Of these reports, UNAMID confirmed the occurrence of 74 cases of human
rights violations and abuses through field missions, visits to camps for i nternally
displaced persons and trial monitoring. The remaining 46 cases could not be
verified, owing in part to movement restrictions imposed by the Government.
Access issues, relating in particular to the Jebel Marra, were also attributable to the
fall in the number of reported cases and prevented UNAMID from interacting with
displaced persons and host communities. Such interaction is critical for interviewing
victims and witnesses and documenting human rights incidents. For example,
internally displaced persons at the North camp, Central Darfur, reported on 18 April
that they had been instructed by the authorities not to release any information to
UNAMID. Moreover, civil society groups operating health -care centres were not
allowed to deal with cases involving conflict-related, sexual and gender-based
violence, especially in Central Darfur.
53. Widespread impunity remained a major challenge, aggravated by a capacity
deficit on the part of State institutions, the absence of a security environment
conducive to civilian safety across Darfur and excesses in the exercise of power by
security forces. For example, on 24 March, a female student was intercepted on her
way to the University of El Geneina by the National Intelligence and Security
Services and assaulted. Similarly, seven students from Nyala University who were
arrested on 26 April for demonstrating against the increase in public transport fees
reported having been beaten in detention. In an encouraging development, on
10 May, a court in El Geneina, convicted and sentenced a 25-year-old man and
Sudanese soldier to 20 years’ imprisonment for the rape of a 7-year-old girl.
54. UNAMID carried out capacity-building initiatives for Sudanese police
officers, including a training course on criminal investigati on, English-language
classes and a workshop on gender mainstreaming and sexual exploitation and abuse,
in addition to training for community policing volunteers. As part of crime
prevention initiatives in camps for internally displaced persons, 214 joint p atrols
were conducted with the involvement of 267 community policing volunteers. In
addition, UNAMID held 150 awareness-raising sessions for internally displaced
persons on sexual violence, safety and security issues, highlighting the importance
of reporting criminal cases to the police and seeking medical treatment for the
victims. A total of 254 visits were conducted to police stations and detention centres

16-10680

11/16

S/2016/587

to monitor the conditions of children in juvenile detention centres and those living
with their mothers in such facilities. Five workshops on gender mainstreaming,
sexual and gender-based violence and livelihood skills were conducted for
163 internally displaced persons (82 men and 81 women) in the north, south and
east sectors.
55. In a positive development, the Supreme Court Division for Darfur States was
inaugurated in Nyala on 13 April, following advocacy by UNAMID. The Division
has already undertaken case reviews and released 512 prisoners from prisons in
Darfur, many of whom were minor offenders or mothers accompanied by young
children. Similarly, following advocacy and capacity-building support from
UNAMID, the General Directorate for Prisons and Reform recruited 350 prison
officers, 79 of them women, during the reporting period. In South Darfur, i n
collaboration with the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), UNAMID
engaged the Ministry of Social Affairs, the peace and security department of the
University of Nyala and other government ministries in a process that resulted in the
release of 30 female inmates from Nyala prison, who then received livelihood
support.
56. On 27 March, my Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children in Armed Conflict witnessed the signing of the action plan by the United
Nations and Government on protecting children from violations during armed
conflict, including through the cessation and prevention of child recruitment in
Darfur and the Sudan at large. The visit also provided an opportunity to gain access
to 21 children allegedly recruited by JEM/Gibril and captured during military
operations in Darfur in April 2015. The United Nations Children ’s Fund and
UNAMID continue to work with the Government to expedite the release of the
children and their reunification with their families. In addition to those a dvocacy
efforts, UNAMID provided capacity-building and training on child rights and child
protection for 1,149 people (510 women and 639 men), including Sudanese police
officers, prison workers, personnel from the Ministry of Social Affairs, community
policing volunteers, internally displaced persons and community members.
57. In an effort to bolster dialogue and enhance the peace process, more than
130 women leaders benefited from a programme entitled “Darfur women talking
peace”, designed by UNAMID to discuss peace messages in communities, including
in the women’s prison in El Fasher on 20 and 21 April. In West Darfur, UNAMID,
in collaboration with UNFPA, hosted 100 women in a discussion on the key concern
of disparity between traditional laws and Sudanese law. UNAMID also trained
members of civil society organizations on gender mainstreaming.

C.

Local conflict mediation
58. UNAMID took measures to mitigate tensions between communities affected
by incidents of intercommunal violence. In the aftermath of the attacks against
internally displaced persons in Sortony, North Darfur, UNAMID initiated the
reconciliation process between nomads and those displaced, including a meeting on
17 and 18 May between leaders of the Northern Rezeigat and Fur tribes in So rtony.
UNAMID sought to facilitate the reopening of the road between Kabkabiya and
Sortony, but Northern Rezeigat continued to refuse the proposal, demanding the
release of two Rezeigat arrested for the attack against the camp in Sortony. In East

12/16

16-10680

S/2016/587

Darfur, following the incident at the village of Tortahan that led to attacks against
its governor in April, UNAMID undertook intensive consultation efforts with
Southern Rezeigat and Ma’alia communities to ease tensions and begin the
reconciliation process.
59. In South Darfur, UNAMID continued to facilitate reconciliation between
Salamat and Fallata, following their clashes in February, by supporting a peace
conference held from 14 to 18 May by the Darfur Regional Authority and the state
mediation committee. The two communities signed a revised peace agreement. In
addition, UNAMID and native administrations conducted a peace conference in
Graida on 17 and 18 May to ensure the implementation of the cessation of hostilities
agreement signed in 2015 between the Fallata and Massalit. Participants
recommended the formation of a joint peace committee to review land disputes.
60. In West Darfur, UNAMID held eight dialogue and consultation forums, from
11 to 25 May, with a view to preventing conflicts between farmers and nomadic
herders in the forthcoming planting season. A total of 453 participants, representing
farmers, nomadic communities, native and religious leaders, returnees, internally
displaced persons and local authorities, took part in the process.
61. In North Darfur, UNAMID continued to engage with traditional leaders and
local and state authorities from Berti and Zeyadiyah, urging them to hold their
reconciliation conference.

VII. Transfer of mandated tasks and cooperation with the
United Nations country team
62. The lack of sufficient funding and human resources for the United Nations
country team continued to pose a challenge to the transfer of tasks. In the meantime,
UNAMID has concluded its operations in several tasks relating to the rule of law,
including support for legal aid, and is narrowing the geographical scope of its
support for the criminal justice chain in areas to which internally displaced persons
have returned or are likely to return. The joint programme developed by UNAM ID
and the country team for the rule of law in Darfur for the period from 2016 to 2019
is designed to enable the latter, pending donor support, to progressively assume
many of the transferred tasks. UNAMID and the country team convened donor
meetings jointly to mobilize funding for the programme in Khartoum on 24 April
and 2 June.

VIII. Financial aspects
63. The General Assembly, by its resolution 69/261 B, appropriated the amount of
$1,102.2 million for the maintenance of the Operation for the period from 1 July
2015 to 30 June 2016. As at 13 June 2016, unpaid assessed contributions to the
Special Account for UNAMID amounted to $253.3 million. Total outstanding
assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations at that date amounted to
$2,232.9 million. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made
for the period up to 30 April 2016, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent owned equipment has been made for the period up to 31 December 2015, in
accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

16-10680

13/16

S/2016/587

IX. Observations
64. While an estimated 2.6 million people remain displaced in Darfur, and fighting
between government forces and SLA/AW in the Jebel Marra continues, the political
process to agree on a framework for peace in Darfur is yet to be concluded. I
commend and continue to support the efforts of the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel, the Joint Special Representative/Joint Chief Mediator and
other partners to seek a negotiated solution to the conflict. I am concerned b y the
continued absence of SLA/AW from the negotiating table, and I urge them to
participate constructively in the process. In our special report of 8 June
(S/2016/510), the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and I called upon
the broader Sudanese opposition to adhere to the road map agreement proposed by
the Panel, which was signed by the Government in April. This would represent a
considerable step towards ending the conflicts in the Sudan, enabling th e provision
of assistance to communities in need and enhancing the environment for a credible
and inclusive national dialogue.
65. Continued access restrictions imposed by the Government in Central Darfur
have prevented UNAMID and humanitarian partners from undertaking verification
missions and assessment exercises. Consequently, the full scale of humanitarian and
protection needs remains unknown, and thousands of affected civilians remain
without assistance. I reiterate my call upon both the Government an d SLA/AW to
cease fighting to allow full and unhindered humanitarian access to the civilian
population in all locations, including the Jebel Marra, and urge the Government to
give priority to political negotiations, as agreed during the deliberations of th e Joint
Working Group. I remind all parties to the conflict that they have an obligation
under international law to protect civilians and to allow unhindered access for
humanitarian assistance.
66. I remain concerned that intercommunal violence continues t o be a major
source of insecurity for civilians. Recurrences of clashes, despite government
interventions, as well as repeated attacks against internally displaced persons,
illustrate the fluidity and fragility of local dynamics, which are exacerbated by t he
conflict. This highlights the need for concerted efforts to address the root causes of
local tensions, especially regarding the management of land, water and other scarce
resources, together with efforts to strengthen the rule of law and other dispute resolution mechanisms without the use of force.
67. Given that the nature of the Darfur conflict remains largely unchanged, I
reiterate the recommendations in the special report in which the Chairperson and I
requested UNAMID to focus its mandate activities on the following: first,
protecting internally displaced persons by prioritizing resources based on a mapping
of displacement camps and potential areas of return; and, second, addressing
intercommunal violence through the implementation of a mission -wide strategy
based on prevention, mitigation and support for the resolution of the root causes of
such violence. Concurrently, the uniformed components will take measures to
enhance their overall flexibility through the reinforcement of troops at team sites o f
greater operational significance and the possible reduction or closure of others, the
creation of a highly mobile reserve military capability and an increased field
presence of police officers from within existing capabilities.

14/16

16-10680

S/2016/587

68. I welcome the progress made by the United Nations, the African Union and the
Government to improve cooperation with respect to the operations of UNAMID,
including in relation to its exit strategy. I count on the Government to fulfil its
commitment regarding the removal of all bureaucratic impediments imposed on the
personnel and assets of UNAMID. While the Government has taken steps to release
some of the containers from Port Sudan, the delay in processing customs clearance
for food supplies has not only put UNAMID uniformed per sonnel at risk, but has
also led to troop- and police-contributing countries accruing demurrage charges.
Furthermore, shipments containing equipment from the troop - and policecontributing countries remain held in Port Sudan, to the detriment of their
operations and welfare. I once again urge the Government to uphold the UNAMID
status-of-forces agreement.
69. In conclusion, I should like to thank the Joint Special Representative/Joint
Chief Mediator, Martin Uhomoibhi, and all the women and men of UNAMID, t he
United Nations and non-governmental organizations who seek to improve the lives
of the people of Darfur. I also commend my Special Envoy for the Sudan and South
Sudan, Haile Menkerios, and former Presidents Thabo Mbeki and Abdulsalami
Abubakar, of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, for their efforts
to resolve the conflicts in the Sudan.

16-10680

15/16

S/2016/587

16/16

16-10680
