S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9174th meeting

Friday, 28 October 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ngyema Ndong. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Prizreni
Mr. Jardim Oliveira
Mr. Tian Bingxu
Mrs. Morghad
Mr. Nsowah
Mr. Setia
Mr. O’Connell
Ms. Nyakoe
Mrs. Robledo López
Ms. Halle
Mr. Khloponin
Ms. AlMatrooshi
Ms. Camara
Mr. Kris

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-66242 (E)
*2266242*

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no more
than four minutes in order to enable the Security Council
to carry out its work as expeditiously as possible.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphone will
prompt all speakers to bring their remarks to a close
after four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Jalil Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I thank you, Madam President, for organizing this
important open debate.
The situation in the occupied Palestinian territories
has deteriorated. United Nations reports indicate that
2022 has been the deadliest year for the Palestinian
people since 2006. The Israeli regime has persisted with
its oppressive, expansionist and apartheid practices,
as well as systematic violations of the human rights
of Palestinians by killing innocent people, including
women and children, stealing and demolishing the
property of the Palestinian people and forcibly evicting
them from their homes. Today, Gaza has become the
world’s largest prison and the voice of the oppressed
people of Gaza is silenced. Civilians, including women
and children, face severe deprivation and violations of
their basic rights. That is a crime against humanity,
a violation of all international laws and norms, and a
serious threat to international peace and security.
For 74 years, such brutal crimes and atrocities
have been committed against the Palestinian people
without ceasing, and neither the occupation has ended
nor has the occupier and apartheid regime faced any
consequences. Today, the Palestinian people need
the Security Council’s effective support and decisive
action to stop the aggressor and end the occupation, not
its sympathy. The Israeli regime ignores and violates
brazenly all United Nations resolutions, including the
Security Council’s resolutions.
Due to the Security Council’s silence, all United
Nations resolutions of the past several decades have
remained on paper only, while we continue to witness
more atrocities committed against Palestinians by that
despicable regime. That regime is fully aware that, due
to consistent support and carte blanche of one permanent
member of the Security Council, it will not be held
accountable by the international community. Members
2/28

28/10/2022

of the Security Council must consider whether any
United Nations resolutions, particularly those urging
an end to the occupation, settlement expansions or the
blockade of Gaza, have been implemented.
We believe that the conflict in Palestine can be
resolved only if the occupation ends and the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination is
fully recognized, restored and protected, resulting in
the full restoration of Palestinian sovereignty over all
of Palestine. That, however, will not be achieved until
the Security Council’s inaction remains an option.
The Council’s current position has only encouraged
and emboldened the Israeli regime to perpetuate its
occupation and atrocities against the oppressed people
of Palestine.
The Islamic Republic of Iran regards it as its duty
to support Palestine’s legitimate right to resistance to
the oppression and aggression of the apartheid regime,
in line with the right of self-determination, and that
will be our principled policy until the occupation ends.
The representative of the Israeli regime attempted to
abuse the Chamber once again, resorting to fabrications
and lies and making repeated allegations by accusing
Iran of hostile actions and malicious activities that the
terrorist regime has conducted and is continuing against
regional countries and beyond. Iran categorically
rejects all those baseless allegations. It is obvious that
the purpose of such unfounded accusations is to deflect
attention from the meeting’s agenda item, which is
focused on the atrocities committed by that apartheid
regime against the Palestinian people, as well as its
systematic and deliberate violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law in the occupied
Palestine territories.
At today’s meeting, the representative of that
rogue regime went beyond that, blatantly threatening
a Member of the United Nations with the use of force
in the Chamber, in a flagrant violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law. The
Security Council must strongly condemn such reckless
and belligerent statements, which can pose a threat to
regional and international peace and security.
We also totally reject the unjustified and
unfounded claims levelled against my country by
the representative of Albania, who deviated from the
Council’s agenda issue. Iran has already rejected those
unfounded assertions and detailed its position in its
letters to the Security Council dated 10 September
22-66242

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

(S/2022/685), 19 October (S/2022/776),and 24 October
2022 (S/2022/794).
Given the Security Council’s unique role and
mandate in maintaining international peace and security,
we believe that membership of the Security Council
entails greater responsibility and more professionalism.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Türkiye): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this open debate, and Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
We remain concerned over the lack of progress
towards a solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
Equally frustrating is the lack of interest on the part of
the international community in finding a just, lasting
and comprehensive solution to the longest-standing
conflict on the United Nations agenda. Unilateral
actions in the occupied Palestinian territories continue
to undermine the prospects for a two-State solution;
they also weaken the Palestinian Authority. The
situation in the West Bank and East Jerusalem is
fragile. The ongoing tension, escalated by the recent
raids and military blockades, is a cause for serious
concern. Continuing violations against the sanctity
and status of East Jerusalem and the Al-Aqsa Mosque
are unacceptable. Those violations have led to further
escalation. The recent raids by radical Israeli groups
on the Al-Aqsa Mosque under the protection of Israeli
security forces are unacceptable.
Unilateral actions and provocations are triggering
more violence in the region. We call for restraint and
common sense in order to restore calm. Those events
remind us once again of the significance of addressing
the root causes of this problem. It is essential to return
to the path of negotiations to make progress towards
lasting peace and security.

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) plays a vital role
in that regard on behalf of all of us. We strongly support
the renewal of the Agency’s mandate by the General
Assembly in the coming weeks. Yet the extension of the
mandate alone is not sufficient. Ensuring the Agency’s
financial stability is also crucial to the continuation of
its lifeline services for millions of Palestine refugees.
We strongly encourage all to provide financial support
to UNRWA.
For its part, Türkiye has contributed $10 million
to the Agency this year and continues making in-kind
contributions. We also support the Secretary-General’s
call to increase assessed contributions to UNRWA
from the United Nations general budget. We are also
ready to support our Palestinian brothers and sisters
in their righteous request for full membership of
the Organization.
Türkiye will continue to support all efforts towards
finding a comprehensive and lasting solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): It is a
true pleasure to see you, Madam, and the Republic of
Gabon presiding over the work of the Security Council.
As we approach the end of your tenure, I should like
to warmly thank and congratulate you on an extremely
successful presidency. Your presidency is a source of
pride for our African continent.
(spoke in Arabic)

We encourage all Palestinian groups to continue
working towards unity and reconciliation. We welcome
the positive outcome of the national reconciliation
conference among Palestinian factions, held earlier
this month under Algeria’s auspices. The declaration
adopted at the conference is a good basis for the
unification of Palestinian factions. We hope that the
steps listed in the declaration, particularly the holding
of elections, will be implemented.

I would like to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for
his valuable briefing. The Kingdom of Morocco,
under the leadership of His Majesty King Mohammed
VI, Chairperson of the Al-Quds Committee of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, supports the
Palestinian question and a just and fair peace based
on international legitimacy and the two-State solution
agreed by the international community. There is
no alternative to a political solution leading to an
independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, within the 4 June 1967 borders, living
side-by-side with Israel in an environment of security,
stability, tranquillity and peace.

Providing assistance to Palestine refugees is a joint
responsibility of the international community. The

His Majesty King Mohammed VI, in his capacity
as Chairperson of the Al-Quds Committee, is making

22-662423/28

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

every political and diplomatic effort to preserve the
privileged status of the holy city. In that context, in
the Al-Quds Declaration issued on 30 March 2019,
His Majesty the King and Pope Francis reiterated the
importance of preserving the status of the holy city as the
common heritage of humankind and its legal, historic
and demographic status for the three monotheistic
religions. In the context of Morocco’s permanent
commitment to improving the living conditions of the
Palestinian people, His Majesty King Mohammed VI
mediated successfully to keep King Hussein/Allenby
Bridge open between Jordan and the West Bank. That
will have a positive impact on the daily lives of the
Palestinians by facilitating the movement of persons
and goods.
The Al-Quds Committee continues to emphasize
its message of protecting Al-Quds and supporting its
inhabitants under the direct auspices of His Majesty
King Mohammed VI. Morocco allocates nearly 86 per
cent of the Committee’s annual budget to cover political
efforts, along with work undertaken on the ground
by the Bayt Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif Agency. Since
its establishment in 1995, the Agency has worked to
safeguard Arab and Islamic rights in the holy city by
supporting and funding numerous vital projects in the
social, cultural, educational, health and construction
fields, with direct and tangible effect on the living
conditions of the inhabitants of Al-Quds.
The Bayt Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif Agency has
recently funded the tuitions of 100 students in the
Al-Quds Open University, pursuant to a partnership
and cooperation agreement signed in Rabat in June
between the Agency and relevant Palestinian parties.
The agreement also includes holding exhibitions and a
New Year’s Eve festival for the benefit of the MuslimChristian Associations and in support of Al-Quds and
the holy sites. In addition, the Kingdom of Morocco
reiterates its support for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
We are convinced of the centrality of the Palestinian
question, which is a core issue in the Middle East and one
of the main priorities of the international community.
We reiterate that position at every opportunity. We
believe that the stability and prosperity of the region
are closely linked to finding a just and lasting solution
to the Palestinian question in line with international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. In a
solidarity statement, His Majesty King Mohammed VI
reiterated on 21 November 2021 his solidarity with the
4/28

28/10/2022

Palestinian people on the occasion of the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, and
appealed for intense and effective diplomatic efforts to
return the stakeholders to the negotiating table in order
to find a solution to the Palestinian question within the
context of the two-State solution and to build a promising
future for the Palestinian and Israeli generations.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco reiterates
its full solidarity with brotherly Yemen and its
legitimate Government. We strongly condemn the
attack perpetrated by the terrorist Houthi militia on
Friday 21 October against a ship approaching the port
of Dhaba, in Hadramout province. We will maintain
our permanent and unconditional support for the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates
and all sisterly countries of the Arab Gulf against any
aggression or terror attack perpetrated by the Houthis
and their supporters.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States.
The candidate countries Montenegro and Albania,
as well as Bosnia and Herzegovina, align themselves
with this statement.
The EU stresses first the important role of the
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and strongly supports him and his
mandate. We are grateful to Mr. Wennesland for his
tireless efforts over the last year.
The EU welcomes the commitments to the twoState solution expressed recently by both Israel and
Palestine. It calls on the parties to now take concrete
steps towards restoring a political horizon and
relaunching the peace process as soon as possible. We
remain ready to give our support to that end.
The EU reaffirms its commitment to a just and
comprehensive resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, based on the two-State solution, with the State
of Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous,
sovereign and viable State of Palestine living side-byside in peace, security and mutual recognition, and
with Jerusalem serving as the future capital of both
States. Furthermore, the EU will seek to encourage
and build upon the recent establishment of diplomatic
relations between Israel and a number of Arab
22-66242

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

countries, with a view to enhancing the prospects to
reach a comprehensive settlement in the Middle East
peace process.
The EU is worried by the deteriorating situation on
the ground and increased violence in the occupied West
Bank, which fuel tensions and animosity, and calls
for efforts to de-escalate. The EU is concerned about
the increasingly high number of civilian casualties,
including children, as a result of actions, inter alia, by
Israeli security forces. We recall that the use of force
must be proportionate and in line with international
law, and be applied only as a last resort, when it is
strictly unavoidable in order to protect life. We reiterate
our call for a thorough investigation into the death of
journalist Shireen Abu Akleh, killed while covering
an Israeli security operation in the occupied West
bank. The EU firmly condemns recent terror attacks
in Israel, as well as all forms of terrorism, and remains
committed to the prevention and fight against terrorism
and violent extremism.
Having listened to the Special Coordinator earlier
today, let me add a call on the parties to end this vicious
circle of violence, in which everyone will lose. This is
not just an issue of security, but needs to be addressed
through political leadership and engagement.
The EU reiterates its strong opposition to Israel’s
settlement policy and activities, including in and
around East Jerusalem, and especially in sensitive
areas such as E1. Evictions, forced transfers, including
in Masafer Yatta, demolitions, including of EU-funded
projects, and confiscations of homes only escalate an
already tense environment and threaten the viability
of a two-State solution. Settlements are illegal under
international law. The EU will not recognize changes to
the 1967 lines unless they are agreed by the parties. We
call on Israel to halt continued settlement expansion,
which has reached record highs in the past years,
evictions, demolition and forced transfers. We call on
Israel to allow for a tangible improvement of freedom
of movement and access for the Palestinians, to enable
accelerated Palestinian construction, as well as social
and economic development in Area C, and to reverse
the worsening of living conditions for Palestinians in
Area C. The EU firmly condemns settler violence and
calls for accountability.
We recall the special significance of the holy sites
and call for upholding the status quo put in place in
1967 for the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, in

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

line with previous understandings and with respect
to Jordan’s special role. Underlining the necessity to
respect the status quo also for the Christian holy sites,
which are under increasing pressure, the EU reiterates
the importance of maintaining peaceful coexistence
among all three monotheistic religions. The EU will
closely monitor developments and their implications
on the ground, and remains ready to contribute further
to the protection and the viability of the two-State
solution.
The EU strongly condemns the indiscriminate
launching of rockets by Hamas, Palestinian Islamic
Jihad and other terrorist groups into Israel. The EU
deplores the loss of civilian lives during the escalation
of violence in and around Gaza in August. We call
on all parties to take the necessary steps to produce
a fundamental change to the political, security and
economic situation in the Gaza Strip, including the end
of the closure and a full opening of the crossing points,
while addressing Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
The EU will continue to call upon the Palestinian
Authority to hold free, transparent and inclusive
national elections without further delay. It urges all
Palestinian factions to engage in good faith in the
reconciliation process, adhere to previous agreements,
renounce violence and terrorism, and recognize Israel’s
right to exist, and commit to democratic principles,
including the rule of law. Democratic Palestinian
institutions based on respect for the rule of law and
human rights are vital for the Palestinian people and,
ultimately, for the two-State solution. In that regard,
the EU encourages the intra-Palestinian reconciliation
process and the recent steps towards that end taken at
Algiers on 13 October.
Palestinian civil society must be allowed by all
parties to carry out its important task freely, while
freedom of expression must be upheld. The EU recalls
the need to hold those responsible for the death of Nizar
Banat accountable. We are proud of our continued
support to civil society, which contributes to peace
efforts and confidence-building between Israelis and
Palestinians. We call on Israel to refrain from any
action that would prevent those organizations from
continuing their critical human rights, humanitarian
and development work in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Antiterrorism legislation should not be used
to undermine civil society and its valuable work and
contributions to the pursuit of accountability.

22-662425/28

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We welcome measures to improve Palestinian
livelihoods and call for the implementation of the
commitments made at the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians in New York in September.
Until there is a just, fair, agreed and realistic
solution to the refugee issue in accordance with
international law, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) remains crucial to providing the necessary
protection and essential services for Palestine refugees,
supporting peace and stability in the region. The EU
will continue to support UNRWA in all its fields of
operations, including in East Jerusalem.
Allow me to turn briefly to the situation in
Syria. It is essential that the international community
continue to pursue a sustainable and comprehensive
political solution in Syria. A durable solution to the
conflict continues to require a genuine and inclusive
political transition, with the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in line with resolution 2254
(2015)
and with the 2012 Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). The European Union remains
firm in its commitment to that goal and fully supports
the continuous efforts of UN Special Envoy Pedersen
to advance on all aspects of resolution 2254 (2015),
including his steps-for-steps approach, in furthering
the political process and resuming the work of the
Constitutional Committee.
We emphasize that no normalization, lifting of
sanctions or reconstruction will be possible until the
Syrian regime engages in a credible, sustainable and
inclusive a political transition, in the framework of
resolution 2254 (2015). The Syrian regime must also
fully cooperate with the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and its investigations on the use of
chemical weapons in the conflict, including the attack
in Douma. The EU, as a member of the International
Partnership against Impunity for the Use of Chemical
Weapons, will continue to work towards ensuring full
accountability in that regard.
All parties responsible for breaches of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights law must be held accountable. Accountability
and justice for victims is essential for a stable, peaceful
Syria. We reiterate our call to have the situation in
Syria referred to the International Criminal Court. In
the absence of international justice, the prosecution
6/28

28/10/2022

of war crimes and other serious crimes under national
jurisdiction, where possible, now under way in several
EU member States, represents a crucial contribution
towards securing justice, as does the Dutch-Canadian
initiative to hold Syria to account for breaching the
Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
We will continue to support efforts to gather
evidence with a view to future legal action, including
by the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the
work of the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.
The Secretary-General recently issued a report,
“Missing people in the Syrian Arab Republic”
(A/76/890), on how to bolster efforts to clarify the fate
of missing people in Syria, identify human remains
and provide a mechanism to support to the families
of missing people. We welcome the report and its
findings, are fully committed to the fate of the missing,
and will look positively into proposals for support of a
new mechanism.
Civilians must be protected at all times. The EU
echoes the calls made by the Security Council for the
implementation of a nationwide ceasefire. We recall that
the underlying causes of the refugee and displacement
crisis must be addressed under resolution 2254
(2015). The EU continues to warn against any further
displacements in any part of Syria, as well as against
the potential exploitation of such displacements for the
purpose of social and demographic engineering. Syrian
refugees in neighbouring countries are still unable to
go back home as the conditions for safe, dignified and
voluntary return, in line with the parameters defined by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and in accordance with international
law, are not fulfilled yet. It is the responsibility of the
Syrian regime to remove those obstacles. We will be in
a position to support returns only once those conditions
are satisfied.
We commend Syria’s neighbouring countries for
hosting large number of Syrian refugees for more than a
decade, and call on all leaders to avoid divisive rhetoric.
The EU and its member States are the largest donor and
have provided €25 billion to meet the needs arising from
22-66242

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Syrian crisis over the past decade, including over
€4.8 billion at the sixth Brussels Conference, with over
€3.1 billion coming from the European Commission
and €1.7 billion from the EU member States.
Yet, humanitarian needs in Syria continue to
increase. Ninety per cent of Syrians live under the
poverty line and 55 per cent of the population are
food insecure. There is an estimated 14.6 million
people in need inside Syria, 1.2 million more than in
2021. The EU will continue to demonstrate solidarity
with the Syrian people and calls on the international
community, in particular regional donors, to increase
their commitments.
Early recovery projects are important for the dignity
of the Syrian people and for their future. EU-funded
projects are intended and designed for those in genuine
need. The EU will not fund early recovery efforts that
could support social and demographic engineering.
Türkiye’s security concerns stemming from
northern Syria need to be addressed through political
and diplomatic means, not by military action, and in
full respect for international humanitarian law.
The confirmation of the extension of the
authorization for the UN to use the crossing point
of Bab Al-Hawa for humanitarian deliveries is a
humanitarian imperative. Its continuation in January
2023 is essential to preserve the functioning of a critical
humanitarian lifeline for people in north-western Syria
who depend on that assistance. The EU fully supports
the continuation of that essential mechanism and urges
Council members to uphold their commitment to
renewing the resolution for a longer period to ensure
that cross-border assistance is sustained in the midst of
winter and beyond.
The EU remains committed to the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Syrian State, and calls
once again on all parties to the conflict, particularly
the Syrian regime, to advance a credible sustainable
and inclusive political solution based on the full and
comprehensive implementation of resolution 2254
(2015) as the only route to sustainable peace in Syria.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I am
delighted to see you, Madam President, leading the
Security Council alongside your team of women. I
take this opportunity to congratulate you and Gabon

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

on successfully assuming the presidency of the
Security Council. I wish you further success during the
remainder of your tenure.
(spoke in Arabic)
At the outset, I would like to thank the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his briefing
this morning. He painted an alarming picture of the
dangerous escalation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, where Palestinian lives have been lost and
Palestinian civilians injured, including women and
children. This year has proved to be the bloodiest
since 2005. We are deeply concerned and fear that the
situation will spiral out of control and become a cycle
of violence and destruction in the region. We hope that
the Security Council will take measures to prevent that
from happening.
We commend Mr. Wennesland’s efforts to
de-escalate the situation and promote prospects for
peace in the Middle East. We stress that those efforts
need to be supported by the international community,
in particular the Security Council.
While Tunisia reiterates its condemnation of the
aggressive and systematic Israeli practices against
the Palestinian people in the occupied territories, it
condemns the daily violations against Palestinian
rights, the settlement projects, the forced displacement
policies and the demolition of houses, and stresses
the need for urgent international action to protect
Palestinian civilians and put an end to the violence
and unrestrained activities committed by extremist
settlers with impunity and the excessive use of force
by the occupying forces, including against women
and children. In that context, we call on the Security
Council to assume its responsibilities regarding those
serious violations, especially by following up on the
implementation of its relevant resolutions, the most
recent of which is resolution 2334 (2016), and ensuring
that the occupying Power is held accountable for its
violations. The continued insistence of the occupying
Power on violating those resolutions puts the credibility
of the Council at stake.
We also call on the international community
and the stakeholders to compel the occupying Power
to respect international law and to put an end to its
repressive practices and its discriminatory and racist
policies against the Palestinian people. In that context,
we reiterate the need to stop the expansionist settlement

22-662427/28

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

28/10/2022

plans of the occupation, the forced displacement of
Palestinians, the confiscation of their homes and lands,
and attempts to change the historical, demographic and
legal status of Jerusalem, and to lift the siege imposed
on the Gaza Strip.

for the brotherly Palestinian people in their defence
of their legitimate rights, foremost among which is
the establishment of their independent, sovereign
State within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

Tunisia once again calls on the international
community to assume its legal and moral responsibilities
towards the Palestinian people by addressing all
issues related to aggression and peoples’ rights with
the same standards and criteria. The Council must
defend the principles and purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations without selectivity. In that context,
my country stresses the importance of the international
community’s support for Palestine’s request for full
membership of the United Nations.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.

Unfortunately, the political stalemate, the ongoing
situation in the occupied territories, and international
attempts to address the Palestinian question by dealing
with episodes of violence without focusing on the main
cause of the situation, which is the occupation, portend
further violations, violence and escalation. From that
perspective, Tunisia stresses that security and stability
in the Middle East can be achieved only through a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict, in accordance with international law and the
resolutions of international legitimacy, and that any
attempt to impose a fait accompli will change nothing
in that regard, alter historical and legal facts or break
the will of the people to recover their legitimate rights,
which do not fall under a statute of limitations.
Tunisia looks forward to the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which will enable
it to continue to play its role in alleviating the suffering
of more than 5.5 million Palestinian refugees until a
just and lasting solution to the issue of the Palestinian
refugees is found. We also stress the importance of
identifying a comprehensive response to the Agency’s
chronic budget deficit and devising long-term solutions
to ensure the sustainability of finances so as not to
disrupt the vital services it provides.
With regard to internal affairs in Palestine, my
country welcomes the signing of the Algiers declaration
by our Palestinian brothers at the reunification
conference for achieving Palestinian national unity. We
value the efforts of sisterly Algiers in that regard.
In conclusion, Tunisia reiterates its firm support for
the just Palestinian question and its permanent support
8/28

Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke
in Spanish): In this open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, I shall refer exclusively to the
Palestinian question.
We thank the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process for his briefing. We
regret the deterioration of the situation and express our
concern about reported acts of violence.
Ecuador reaffirms its solidarity with Palestine and
reiterates its commitment to alleviating the difficult
situation faced by its people, which will be remedied
only through a political, peaceful, definitive and just
solution for the parties, based on the existence of two
States, Palestine and Israel, within the recognized
borders of 1967.
It is essential that all acts of violence against
the civilian population — including acts of terror,
provocation and destruction — come to an end and
that the life and safety of persons be respected,
in accordance with the obligations derived from
international humanitarian law.
Ecuador calls for a halt to the spiral of violence and
reiterates its conviction that both parties have the right
to live in peace and with dignity. The hostility between
the parties, which has led to destruction and death, is
unacceptable, even more so since the two nations are
obliged to comply with the norms of international law.
Reiterating the validity of all Security Council
resolutions on the issue, we call on all parties to make
collective efforts to initiate credible negotiations and
step up regional and international diplomatic efforts to
achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East. We express our deep concern about the
continuation of settlement activities, which affect the
possibility of a two-State solution and make a renewal
of the negotiations more difficult.
Finally, we reiterate the call that the Council made
in the resolution that summons us here today on both
parties to show calm and restraint, as well as political
22-66242

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

will, and to act in accordance with international law,
including international humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Razali (Malaysia): I thank you, Madam, for
convening this open debate. Malaysia would also like
to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process for his briefing.
Malaysia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Pakistan on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.
This has been one of the most horrific years for
the Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian territory,
especially in recent weeks. Today, we have heard
more reports of the merciless killing of innocent lives,
including children, forcible evictions, the demolition of
houses and the confiscation of lands. This is absolutely
appalling, and the message is clear. The situation on
the ground continues to worsen, without a durable
resolution in sight.
The Security Council cannot remain silent or
indisposed. It must assume its responsibility and ensure
protection to the Palestinian people, as well as hold the
perpetrators accountable. Israel’s continued impunity,
including that of its illegal settlers, is untenable and
undermines the great strides of past international
efforts to ensure accountability against war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
The occupying Power’s continued dereliction of
its obligation not only dishonours and disrespects the
Council, but further undermines the political horizon.
Its intractable attitude also reflects an unwillingness to
work towards a just solution for lasting peace in the
region. Malaysia calls on the Security Council to urge
Israel to end its illegal settler-colonial occupation and
apartheid regime, in accordance with international law
and relevant Council’s resolutions, including resolutions
904 (1994) and 2334 (2016).
Malaysia is fully committed to the plight of the
Palestinian people and will continue to work towards
the realization of their inalienable rights to selfdetermination, national independence and sovereignty.
We firmly believe that the way forward out of this
endless conflict is the realization of a two-State solution
based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
the capital of the State of Palestine.

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

Malaysia also supports the work of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East in providing assistance to Palestinian
refugees, including through predictable funding. We
remain committed to providing the necessary means to
securing the safety, protection, and well-being of the
Palestinian people.
It is high time for the international community
to recognize the statehood of Palestine, with full
membership of the United Nations. The unfair treatment
and injustice have persisted too long. The 74 years of
suffering have to end. The Palestinian people deserves
to live freely in peace and dignity as a rightful member
of this community of nations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Developments over the
past few months continue to dash our hope for a future
comprehensive solution. Like other Member States,
we remain seriously concerned about the continued
violence in the occupied Palestinian territory, with its
severe toll on civilians. The serious cycle of tensions
in August reminds us of the confrontation in Gaza last
year. We welcome the ceasefire that helped avoid a fullscale war.
However, the latest round of tensions in Gaza and
the endless clashes in the West Bank, the most recent
just a few days ago, only highlight the long-standing
volatility of the situation. Without a comprehensive,
just and long-standing solution, it is only a matter of
time until the next cycle of violence erupts.
To prevent such a worrying scenario, all relevant
parties should work towards negotiations and revive
the long-waited peace process. We continue to
believe that there is no alternative to a two-State
solution that includes the establishment of the State of
Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital, peacefully
coexisting alongside the State of Israel, with secure and
internationally recognized borders based on the pre1967 lines and a negotiated settlement, and in accordance
with international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
We welcome the statement by Israeli Prime Minister
Yair Lapid in the General Assembly last month,
confirming his support for the two-State solution (see
A/77/PV.8). We also welcome the recent agreement
signed in Algeria among Palestinians, which includes

22-662429/28

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

plans for elections in the future. We now need concrete
actions to turn that vision into reality. In this regard, I
would like to emphasize three points.
First, the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) is key to creating an environment conducive to
negotiations or any path to peace. Violence, settlement
activities, property demolitions and evictions must stop.
We have stressed on many occasions that all the Israeli
settlements in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, have no legal validity, constitute a flagrant
violation of international law and United Nations
resolutions, and erode the possibility of establishing
a viable and contiguous Palestinian State. The use of
excessive force can never bring about lasting peace,
but only ignite more violence. The security of Israel
must be respected, but it is in Israel’s security interests
to implement resolution 2334 (2016), along with other
relevant United Nations resolutions.
Secondly, the international community, particularly
the key players in the peace process, must be committed
to working towards a long-lasting solution. We believe
that all channels of diplomacy should be utilized, be
it the Arab Peace Initiative or the Quartet. We also
support all initiatives proposed by members of the
international community in this direction.
Thirdly, assistance for the Palestinians should
remain high on the agenda of the international
humanitarian community, even in the face of global
economic instability and funding scarcity. In that
regard, we highly commend the continued efforts of
various donors and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in
bringing much needed relief to the Palestinian people.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Alwasil (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I am pleased to make this statement on behalf of the
members of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC): the
United Arab Emirates, the Kingdom of Bahrain, the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Sultanate of Oman, the
State of Qatar and the State of Kuwait.
We thank you, Madam President, for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine, which is truly an
issue of great importance to regional and international
peace and security.
10/28

28/10/2022

The GCC countries have always been strong
supporters of achieving peace, security and stability in
the Middle East. Accordingly, they affirm their firm
position in support of the Palestinian question and the
importance of expeditiously finding a just solution
that guarantees the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people. The GCC countries reaffirm the centrality
of the Palestinian question, their support for the
sovereignty of the Palestinian people throughout the
Palestinian territories occupied since June 1967, and
the establishment of an independent Palestinian State
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and ensures the rights
of Palestinian refugees, in accordance with the Arab
Peace Initiative and the resolutions of international
legitimacy, with emphasis on the need to activate the
efforts of the international community to resolve the
conflict in a manner that guarantees all the legitimate
rights of the brotherly Palestinian people.
The GCC countries condemn and reject the
escalation of aggression against the city of Jerusalem
and the intensification of the policy of forced
displacement in Sheikh Jarrah, Silwan and other areas.
They call on the international community to intervene
to stop the targeting of the Palestinian presence in the
city of Jerusalem; efforts to change its legal nature,
demographics and the special arrangements for Islamic
holy places; and attempts to impose Israeli sovereignty
over Jerusalem, in clear violation of international law,
international resolutions and existing agreements
concluded in that regard. We affirm the need to refrain
from unilateral measures. The GCC countries also
condemn in the strongest terms the repeated incursions
by Israeli settlers into Al-Haram Al-Sharif with the
support, protection and participation of the Israeli
occupation forces. That is a violation of Muslim holy
sites and an ongoing provocation to the feelings of
millions of Muslims around the world.
The GCC countries reject and condemn Israeli
settlement policies and measures in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including the annexation of
lands, the construction and expansion of settlements,
the separation wall, the forced displacement of the
Palestinian population and the demolition of their
property, in clear violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, the principles of international law and United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
the 2004 advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
22-66242

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The GCC countries continue to support our
Palestinian brothers by supporting the political and
legal efforts of the State of Palestine to entrench its
independence on its occupied land. We will also continue
to support the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in the context of
the GCC’s firm and supportive position in favour of the
Palestinian people.
In conclusion, the GCC countries stress that the
Israeli occupation authorities must urgently respond
to calls for peace and work to engage in serious
negotiations in good faith in order to achieve peace
on the basis of the two-State solution and to ensure
stability in the Middle East region.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): Let me begin by stating
some facts. First, despite the worsening situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories, the Council
remains paralysed. Secondly, while the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and other United Nations mandate-holders have on
countless occasions provided disheartening factual
reports from the ground, the Council chooses to be
indifferent. Thirdly, regardless of how loudly Member
States call for an end to Israel’s blatant violations of
various international laws, the Council remains silent.
Against that inaction, Indonesia remains steadfast.
We are here today, and for certain we will be here
again, to knock on the Council’s door again and again
and again, call on the conscience of Council members
and urge the Council to act decisively. On that note, I
wish to emphasize the following.
First, we call on the Council to take action to end
the atrocities and human rights violations committed by
Israel in the illegally occupied territories. Human rights
violations and violence on the ground have resulted
in the highest civilian casualties in recent years. For
more than half a century, the people of Palestine
have lived under duress. They have been deprived of
their inalienable right to self-determination and lost
their sovereignty over their own natural resources.
The Council’s inaction has sent a powerful signal of
acceptance and a sense of normalization of Israel’s
occupation of and violence against the Palestinians.
The Council must change course and take action to
ease the burden of the Palestinians under occupation.
We call on the international community to continue

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

providing assistance where needed, including political
and financial support for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East .
Secondly, little has been done with respect to
Israel, which implements policies to create irreversible
geographical and demographic alterations on the
ground. Moreover, illegal settlements and provocations
against holy sites have created further instability and
widespread violence. We see no sign of or commitment
to stopping unilateral and unlawful measures against
the Palestinians or any serious effort to bring those
responsible to justice. A sense of impunity will remain if
the Council does nothing to ensure that the perpetrators
and the occupying Power uphold their responsibilities
under international law.
Thirdly, the Council should actively pursue a
breakthrough for the resumption of the peace process.
The Quartet has proven to have its limitations. We
have to open new avenues and be innovative to devise
a credible peace process that works for all parties. We
must remain resolute in maintaining the two-State
solution as the only option for resolving the Palestinian
issue. We should create opportunities, including
developments in the Palestinian national unity and
reconciliation process. Indonesia stands ready to
contribute and move the process forward in the United
Nations to safeguard the two-State solution.
Indonesia believes that the continuous inaction
of the Council poses a threat to international peace
and security. We need a comprehensive and lasting
solution for the long-standing question of Palestine
within the context of a two-State solution based on
internationally agreed parameters and the relevant
United Nations resolutions. Only in this way can the
Palestinian people have independence and sovereignty,
free from oppression.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela): We appreciate the convening of this
quarterly open debate on a topic to which our country
attaches special importance, due to its historic position
of principles and its firm support for the just cause of
the heroic Palestinian people. We also appreciate the
briefing by the United Nations Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process.

22-6624211/28

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We also endorse the intervention to be made by the
delegation of the Republic of Azerbaijan on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
Unfortunately, since we last met in this very
Chamber and in this very format (see S/PV.9099), the
situation on the ground has in no way improved. Since
then, we have received a copy of two communications
sent to the President of the Security Council by the
Ambassador of the State of Palestine, in which he
presents ongoing reports that constitute a historical
record of the brutal Israeli aggression during the last
20 years.
It is those communications, together with the
reports that we receive periodically from other
instances of the United Nations system, that make us
affirm once again today that the situation continues
to deteriorate day after day, while the suffering of the
noble Palestinian people, a victim of violent attacks by
the Israeli occupying forces, is continually perpetuated
down the years.
A clear example of that is the situation of collective
punishment in the Gaza Strip, the largest prison
in the world, which has been subject to a criminal
blockade for more than 15 years, resulting in a
disastrous humanitarian situation. and in deplorable
socioeconomic conditions for more than 2 million
Palestinians. We must remember in that context
that the month of August was marked by a series of
indiscriminate aerial bombardments by Israeli forces
of residential areas, including refugee camps located in
the Gaza Strip. The result was more death, more pain,
more destruction and more forced displacement for
dozens of Palestinian families who join a long list of
victims of that cruel Israeli aggression.
This situation is truly unsustainable. The
international community and, in a very special way, the
Security Council, cannot continue to remain inert in the
face of the policies of aggression, colonial occupation
and apartheid carried out by the occupying Power,
which, to date, have resulted in the death of more than
10,000 Palestinian men and women, including at least
2,000 girls and boys, over the past 20 years. This main
organ of the United Nations has a central responsibility,
not only to maintain international peace and security,
but also to enforce its resolutions, which are legally
binding on all of us who subscribe to the founding
Charter of the Organization.
12/28

28/10/2022

In that regard, we believe that it is essential
to guarantee a political horizon that leads to the
end of the Israeli occupation and to a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace, in accordance with
internationally recognized parameters, international
law and the provisions of the relevant resolutions of
both the General Assembly and the Security Council,
and based on the solution of two States living side by
side, in conditions of peace and security. It is time for
the Palestinian people to live, and not merely survive,
on their own ancestral lands, now illegally and forcibly
occupied. If that is to happen, however, it is essential to
move forward with a sense of urgency in at least three
critical areas:
First, the prevailing cycle of impunity must be ended.
Israel must be held accountable before international
justice for the crimes against humanity and war crimes
it has committed over the years. It is precisely that
lack of accountability, supported by the framework of
international impunity that has been provided over time
by the Government of one of its main partners, which is
also a permanent member of the Security Council, that
has encouraged all the criminal practices and policies
that Israel carries out on a daily basis, to date, with
total impunity.
Secondly, as long as that historical injustice
is not ended and there is no progress in terms of
accountability, and as long as the occupying Power
pursues its shoot-to-kill policies, indiscriminate aerial
bombardment, violence and terror committed by the
Israeli occupying forces and settlers, among other
cruel and inhuman practices that are committed daily
against the Palestinian civilian population, we must
move forward without further delay in adopting those
measures provided for in international humanitarian
law that provide and guarantee international protection
for the heroic Palestinian people.
Thirdly, there must be an end to the illegal policy
of settlements, evictions and demolition of homes,
expropriation of Palestinian land, discrimination
against Palestinians, arbitrary arrests and detentions
of innocent Palestinian civilians, the persecution of
Palestinian civil society organizations, incendiary
speeches that only encourage fanatical groups and that
encourage, among other things, the commission of hate
crimes or the assault on religious sites, and all unilateral
actions and measures. We are convinced that all of this
will help not only to reduce tensions and the continuing
cycle of violence, but ultimately to stop the conflict.
22-66242

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

For our part, Venezuela has no choice but to
continue insisting on calling on this organ to play a
constructive role in the peaceful resolution of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, including through the promotion
of an environment conducive to the resumption of a
necessary political dialogue and credible, serious and
direct negotiations between the parties; to comply
with the mandate entrusted to it by the Charter of the
United Nations; and to enforce the provisions of its
resolutions. This organ has the ethical, political and
moral duty to put an end to double standards and to
non-existent exceptionalisms.
To conclude, we reaffirm our unwavering solidarity
with the Palestinian people, as well as our irrevocable
position in support of the defence of their independence
and inalienable right to self-determination and the
realization of their legitimate national aspirations in
their own State of free, independent and sovereign
Palestine, within the pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and as a full Member of our
Organization. The Security Council cannot continue
to delay satisfying the yearning for peace, justice and
freedom of the heroic Palestinian people.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): We thank Gabon for
convening this germane meeting on one of the world’s
most protracted conflicts, the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. I also thank
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Tor Wennesland, for his insightful briefing
on the latest developments in the Middle East and the
Palestinian question.
In her report to the General Assembly on the
situation of human rights in the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, the United Nations Special
Rapporteur Francesca Albanese states that for more
than 55 years, the Israeli military occupation
“has prevented the realization of Palestinian
people’s right to self-determination, violating each
component of that right, wilfully pursuing the
‘de-Palestinianization’ of the occupied territory”
(A/77/356, para. 36).
Her report details the persistent violence, racism and
prejudice that Palestinians face. Women, young people
and children are not spared by the brutal policies that
have been mainstreamed by the occupying Power and

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

thus affect every segment of Palestinian society, with
the deliberate intention of intimidating Palestinians
and crushing any glimmer of hope for a better future.
We see that daily, including in the recent raids in
Nablus and the persistent violence of illegal settlers
against the indigenous people of Palestine. In a recent
statement claiming that ending apartheid policies
is key to teaching a two-State solution in Palestine,
five former European foreign ministers stated that
successive Israeli Governments, including the current
one, have had no plan to take steps towards ending
the prolonged occupation and that the “international
community has too often remained silent and failed
to act in the face of grave violations of international
law”. It is only when sitting foreign ministers of the
European Union and other world leaders cease to
give the Government of Israel the latitude to violate
international law that they may indeed start to respect
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
Security Council resolutions.
The situation in Gaza remains of grave concern to
South Africa, especially considering the recent August
2022 offensive on Gaza and the statement by Israeli
military indicating that the operation would “take a long
time”. It is in that context that we agree with the statement
of the Secretary General of Amnesty International
on 25 October that Israel must be investigated by the
International Criminal Court for possible war crimes.
Those unjust attacks kill innocent women and children
and place innocent civilians at severe risk. Moreover,
such actions are in contravention of international law,
and Israel must be held accountable for breaching
international human rights and humanitarian law.
As members of the international community,
Member States have an obligation to ensure that
international law is not violated indiscriminately and
to urgently stop the Israeli occupation forces’ repeated
attacks against innocent civilians as they continue their
blockade in Gaza.
There must be concerted international efforts to
bring about a just solution to the question of Palestine.
That will not only allow the Palestinian people to
exercise their right to self-determination, denied
through colonialism and occupation, but will ultimately
contribute to the establishment of peace in the region. It
is therefore imperative to revitalize international action
and seek avenues for justice. We must intensify the call
for international action, with the United Nations playing

22-6624213/28

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

a leading role, to find a solution that is premised on a
just settlement with just laws that are rights-based. We
must, as the international community, seek a solution
that facilitates equality and equity for all who have the
right to live in the territories of Israel and Palestine. In
the absence of those, security, dignity and prosperity
will not be achieved.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alenezi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend to you, Madam President,
and to the members of the delegation of Gabon our
congratulations on your successful conduct of the
work of the Security Council for the month of October.
I also sincerely thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
valuable briefing. We reiterate our support for him and
all his efforts to de-escalate the situation and restore
stability in the region.
My country’s delegation aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on behalf of the Gulf
Cooperation Council.
We have followed the recent worrying developments
and the dangerous escalation in the occupied Palestinian
territories as a result of the crimes and systematic
attacks committed by Israel, the occupying Power,
against the brotherly Palestinian people. The Al-Aqsa
Mosque is still subject to repeated violations, whether
by the Israeli occupation forces or by settlers. The
State of Kuwait reiterates its strong condemnation
and denunciation of those aggressive practices, which
represent a provocation to the feelings of Muslims all
over the world and an explicit threat to freedom of
worship in the Al-Aqsa Mosque, in addition to being
one more link in the chain of flagrant violations of
all international charters and resolutions, as well as a
destructive element for the pillars of stability in the
region and a stimulus of feelings of hate, extremism
and violence.
The State of Kuwait also condemns in the strongest
terms the continuous incursions and brutal attacks of
the Israeli occupation authorities on Palestinian cities,
including Nablus and Ramallah, several days ago,
which led to the deaths and injury of dozens of brotherly
Palestinians. We warn of the consequences of that
dangerous military escalation, responsibility for which
14/28

28/10/2022

will be borne by the Israeli occupation authorities, and
which threaten security and stability in the region.
We call on the international community to take
immediate and urgent action to provide protection to
the brotherly Palestinian people and ask the Security
Council to assume its responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations. The Israeli occupation forces
must be held fully responsible for the consequences
of their crimes and illegal and provocative practices
in Jerusalem and Al-Haram Al-Sharif, as well as
violations against the defenceless Palestinian people
on its own land and in its own holy places. How long
will the Israeli killing machine continue to claim the
lives of defenceless Palestinians without deterrence or
accountability from the international community? How
far will the multiple violations by the Israeli occupation
force go before the eyes of the entire world? How long
will the Security Council allow Israel, the occupying
Power, to continue its actions, practices and violations
as if it were above the law?
The attacks and crimes committed by the Israeli
occupation forces are among a series of violations of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016),
which underscore the inviolable special status of
Jerusalem and declare any action aimed at changing its
demographic nature to be null and void. The occupying
Power must respect the historical and legal status quo
at Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
In the absence of accountability for the daily and
systematic violations by the occupation Power inside
the occupied Palestinian territories, and in light of
the occupation Power’s exploitation of that reality to
deprive the Palestinian people of their legitimate rights
and to seize their land, wealth and sources of livelihood,
undermining the chances of reaching a just peace, it
has become urgent to stop acting as if the rights of the
Palestinian people were excluded from the rules and
provisions of international laws. We stress the need to
ensure accountability and justice for the defenceless
Palestinian people.
The State of Kuwait reiterates its full support for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East while believing in the vital
and important role it plays in alleviating the suffering
of Palestinian refugees in its five areas of operation.
We call on the international community to maintain its
22-66242

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

support for the Agency to ensure that it continues to
provide its health, educational and relief services.

establishment in 1945, in addition to the relevant United
Nations resolutions.

Furthermore, we welcome Australia’s announcement
that it will cancel its previous Administration’s
recognition of West Jerusalem as the alleged capital
of the Israeli occupation. That decision will constitute
support for international endeavours, adherence to
international law, a bulwark of the relevant United
Nations resolutions and a tributary to achieving a just
and comprehensive peace. We call on the countries that
have recognized Jerusalem as the alleged capital of
the Israeli occupation to do likewise by reversing their
decisions, which violate international legitimacy.

Following today’s briefing on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016), which indicated an escalation
in the severity of the situation in the occupied territories
in a way that portends imminent danger, the League of
Arab States believes that the Council must re-evaluate
the way to address the Palestinian question.

In conclusion, on 29 November we celebrate the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People. I take this opportunity to renew the support
of the leadership, Government and people of the State
of Kuwait’s for the brotherly Palestinian people and
our historical and principled solidarity with their just
cause. Kuwait salutes their steadfastness and legitimate
struggle against the occupation in order to obtain
their full legitimate political rights. We also reiterate
our adherence to the Arab, Islamic and international
position, which affirms that peace is the strategic option
and that a permanent, comprehensive and just solution
is based on the two-State solution, in accordance with
the agreed terms of reference represented in the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative, in a manner that leads to the Palestinian
people obtaining all their legitimate political rights and
the establishment of their independent State on their
land, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Abdelaziz.
Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): I am pleased to
begin my statement by congratulating you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October, and to thank
Mr. Tor Wennesland for his outstanding briefing to the
Council today. We endorse the statement of the Group
of Arab States to be made by the representative of the
Republic of Iraq.
The Palestinian question is central to the work of
the League of Arab States, as it is the primary Arab
issue based on the decisions, statements and initiatives
of the Arab summits, as well as the meetings and
ministerial committees of the Arab League since its

It is illogical, or contravenes the rules of international
multilateral legitimacy, to read United Nations report
after report that Israel is continuing to implement its
fierce settlement policies, in flagrant violation of
resolution 2334 (2016) since its adoption in 2016, and
to kill and repress the defenceless Palestinian people.
The Council has taken no punitive measure to compel
Israel to respect its resolutions. It is equally illogical
that Israel practices crude opportunism by condemning
the Russian Federation’s occupation of parts of the
territory of Ukraine while it arrogantly occupies the
entire territory of the State of Palestine, in violation of
General Assembly resolution 181 (II) of 1947, which
established and adopted the two-State solution. It is
also in blatant defiance of the numerous resolutions of
the Council seeking to launch direct negotiations for the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. Israel is also seeking
to impose its sovereignty over Al-Quds Al-Sharif and
the rest of the occupied Palestinian territories, where
it is continuing its massacres in clear violation of the
successive resolutions of the Council over the years,
without the slightest measure of accountability.
Nor is it logical to interpret Israel’s indication in
its statement today that normalizing its relations with
some Arab countries means abandoning the centrality
of the Palestinian question in the Arab world or giving
up the principle of the two-State solution, which has
been and will continue to govern the peace process in
the region, or even as a transformation of the principle
of land for peace to the principle of peace for peace. The
Palestinian territory is precious to all Arabs, regardless
of their political orientation. We must always remember
that the Palestinian State and territory were and will
remain the basis for the Arab Peace Initiative, launched
by the Arab summit, under the auspices of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, in Beirut in 2002. That initiative was
inaugurated 20 years ago today. The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and the LAS are seeking together, with the
support of the European Union and other parties, to
revive and restore it to the centre of events as the most

22-6624215/28

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

practical of initiatives in compliance with the rules
of international legitimacy. That initiative was and
remains the governing principle of the peace process,
no matter how leaders and Governments may change.
After I heard the statement by His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Hungary in the Council
today, and to demonstrate the credibility of the Arab
countries and their observance of the required balance
in dealing with the binding rules of international
legitimacy, the Arab countries have voted in favour
of the two General Assembly resolutions on Ukraine,
sending a clear message to the international community
that Arab countries reject the occupation of others’
lands by force. The Arab countries have also voted and
will vote in favour of all resolutions calling for an end
to the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories
and for the start of serious peace negotiations between
the Israeli and Palestinian parties on the basis of the
two-State solution, the principle of land for peace, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the relevant resolutions of the
Council. They will also vote in favour of other political,
economic and social decisions and resolutions adopted
on the Palestinian question by the main United Nations
organs, especially those extending the mandate of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East for three years. That is the
credibility that Israel and other countries that support it
unfortunately lack.
It is not enough for the Israeli leaders and their
supporters in the General Assembly to express their
support for the two-State solution; they must work to
translate words into practical deeds by engaging in
serious negotiations with the Palestinian partner based
on that important principle and in compliance with
the terms of reference of international legitimacy. The
Security Council, and specifically the international
Quartet, play a very pivotal role in lighting the first
spark of those negotiations, leading to the international
conference repeatedly called for by Palestinian
President Abu Mazen before the Council and before the
General Assembly.
Until that happens, and to ensure that the Palestinian
leadership and people do not lose hope or that matters
do not reach the brink of explosion or spin out of
control — and after we all heard the statement delivered
by President Mahmoud Abbas at the general debate of
the seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly
and the bitter appeals it contained in that regard (see
A/77/PV.10) — urgent international decisions and
16/28

28/10/2022

steps are required to ensure the expansion of the circle
of international recognition of the State of Palestine
and to ensure that the State of Palestine is granted
full membership of the United Nations. That would
lead to the protection of the defenceless Palestinian
people, while supporting the efforts of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan and the Kingdom of Morocco to
protect Islamic holy sites from the oppression of the
Israeli forces and settlers. That would also ensure that
Israel does not enact laws perpetuating the apartheid
regime against the Palestinian people or Jewish State
law, which has been rejected by the Arab world and
the international community, and that Israel does not
repeat the unaccountable assassination of Palestinian
journalists for exposing Israeli violations.
Israel must also be stopped from preventing
Jerusalem residents from participating in local
elections, especially following the international
and regional support for the declaration adopted in
Algeria this month and the signing of the agreement
for the reunification and national reconciliation of the
Palestinian people, which will pave the way for holding
the delayed Palestinian elections, with the support of
Egypt, Qatar, other Arab countries and other parties
working to achieve Palestinian reconciliation.
The international multilateral system has suffered
and continues to suffer from double standards and their
consequences in the work of the United Nations organs,
especially the Security Council. The time has come
for the Council to realize that its credibility is at stake;
that the international move towards the establishment
of a Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its capital will
not stop, but will continue and increase, with the full
support of the Arab countries and the Arab League;
and that the Council’s failure to deal effectively with
the Palestinian question will only lead to a greater
orientation towards the General Assembly, the Human
Rights Council, the International Court of Justice and
the International Criminal Court in order to enhance
the strength of democracy, the strength of human rights
and the force of law, which transcends the strength of
geopolitical conflicts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Every day, we continue to witness further acts
of aggression on the part of Israel, pushing our region
to unprecedented levels of tension and instability.
22-66242

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israel is committing massacres against civilians in
occupied Palestine and continues to implement policies
of settlement, Judaization, siege, arbitrary detention,
forced displacement and racial discrimination in the
occupied Arab territories, including the occupied Arab
Syrian Golan. Israel has also escalated its military
attacks on Syrian territories, infrastructure and
vital facilities.
The Syrian Arab Republic condemns in the strongest
terms the ongoing Israeli occupation of Arab lands. We
also strongly condemn Israel’s practices against Arabs
in Palestine and the Syrian Golan. Such practices are
grave violations of international law and international
humanitarian law. We must not remain silent vis-à-vis
those practices, or allow Israel to continue to operate
with impunity. We also stress that, when some countries
continue to support such Israeli practices or remain
silent about them, they become complicit in those
crimes, which lays bare the despicable double standards
they follow.
Syria reaffirms its support for the brotherly
Palestinian people in their struggle to liberate their
occupied land, establish their independent, sovereign
State, with Jerusalem as its capital, and guarantee the
right of Palestinian refugees to return to their homeland,
in line with international law and relevant United
Nations resolutions. We also reaffirm our support for
Palestine’s decision to obtain the long-awaited full
membership of the United Nations and call not to be
obstructed by certain members of the Security Council.
The occupied Syrian Golan is in the heart of every
Syrian. It is our right to recover it in full up to the 4 June
1967 lines. That right is unalienable and not subject to
bargaining or pressure. It is an imprescriptible right
guaranteed by international law and relevant United
Nations resolutions, especially resolution 497 (1981).
To those who have missed no opportunity over the
past few months to lecture us on the need to respect
the Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions of
international legitimacy, we ask them: why did they not
raise their voice against Israel’s continued occupation
of the Syrian Golan since 1967? Why did we not see
their enthusiasm in rejecting Israel’s decision to annex
the occupied Syrian Golan and impose its laws on
it? Why do they not demand that Israel implement
resolution 497 (1981), which considers the annexation
decision null and void and without legal effect? For
some countries in the Council, the call for respecting

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

the Charter and implementing Council resolutions is an
approach subject to selectivity and double standards.
Since 1967, the Israeli occupation authorities
in the Syrian Golan have been committing the most
heinous systematic violations of human rights law and
international humanitarian law. Furthermore, Israel
continues to add new chapters to its violations. Since the
beginning of the terrorist war on Syria in 2011, Israel
has been supporting terrorist organizations, primarily
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (Da’esh) and
the Al-Nusra Front, which is affiliated with Al-Qaida.
Israel has resorted to launching direct and repeated
military attacks against Syrian territories to weaken the
capabilities of the Syrian army to combat those terrorist
organizations. Recently, Israel has resorted to targeting
civilian facilities systematically and intentionally,
including civilian ports and airports while subjecting
the lives of civilians to danger, affecting the delivery
of international humanitarian aid to the Syrian people
and jeopardizing peace and security in the region and
the world.
Syria calls on the Security Council to end its
silence and to urgently assume its responsibilities to
stop the repeated Israeli attacks on Syrian sovereignty
and hold the occupation forces accountable for all their
violations and aggressive practices, which threaten
regional and international peace and security. We stress
that we will exercise our legitimate right to defend our
land and people by all necessary means.
My delegation once again calls upon the
representatives of the Secretariat to fulfil their mandate
and not to remain silent about, or cover up, Israeli
practices in their reports and briefings. In that regard,
my delegation is surprised that Mr. Wennesland insists,
in his briefing, on ignoring the Israeli practices in the
occupied Syrian Golan and Israel’s continuous military
attacks on Syrian sovereignty, some of which are even
launched from the occupied Syrian Golan.
At every meeting on this item, the observer of
the European Union delivers a statement to derail the
discussion from its main goal of exposing the practices
of the Israeli occupation. The European Union
addresses issues related to Syrian affairs that have
absolutely nothing to do with the topic of the meeting,
in an attempt to draw the attention of the Council away
from those aggressive Israeli practices.
It is not surprising that the European Union
launches false accusations against Syria while its

22-6624217/28

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

principles change to a clumsy defense based on explicit
manipulation of international law when it comes
to condemning the grave violations of Israel, the
occupying Power, and its arbitrary practices against the
people of the occupied Syrian Golan or its aggression
against the Syrian people.
It is not surprising that the voice of the European
Union fades away when it comes to condemning the
repeated Israeli attacks on Syria’s sovereignty and its
vital civilian facilities. Those attacks represent a clear
and grave violation of the United Nations Charter and
the relevant Security Council resolutions. At the same
time the voice of the European Union is loud only to
confirm its determination to extend and expand its
illegal and inhumane economic blockade, its collective
punishment of the Syrian people and its quest to
prolong the crisis in Syria, in complete disregard
of the catastrophic negative impacts of its coercive
measures. The European Union continues to disregard
the repeated calls from the Secretary-General to lift or
mitigate such measures.
It is shameful that the European Union insists on
imposing its political conditions on humanitarian and
development work in Syria, thereby impeding earlyrecovery efforts and the promotion of Syrian resilience.
Furthermore, that deprives them of a dignified life,
prevents the displaced and refugees from returning
home and pushes more Syrians into displacement and
migration. My delegation calls on the European Union
to correct its compass and stop its hostile policies
against my country, Syria, and cease its measures that
punish the Syrian people.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim Dongjoon (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for convening today’s open debate. In addition,
my delegation thanks the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his briefing. My Government
appreciates his ongoing efforts and complete dedication
to bring peace to the region.
My delegation is deeply concerned about the
ongoing settler-related violence in the West Bank and in
and around Jerusalem. All acts of violence perpetrated
by any side, especially against civilians, cannot be
justified. My delegation condemns all terrorist attacks
in the strongest terms. Any violence against civilians
18/28

28/10/2022

must stop immediately, and those who are responsible
for such acts must be held accountable. My delegation
also notes with serious concern that this year has
recorded the highest number of Palestinian fatalities
since 2008.
Furthermore, it is still worrisome that there has been
little progress in the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) and that the advancement of Israeli settlements,
demolitions and evictions continue on the ground. Such
actions will only exacerbate tensions, erode trust and
undermine the foundation for a political solution.
Amid those various challenges, the Republic of
Korea welcomes some recent positive developments.
We note that both the Israeli and the Palestinian sides
reaffirmed their support for the two-State solution
on the margins of the seventy-seventh session of the
General Assembly last month. Reiterating its support
for the two-State solution, in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions, international
law and bilateral agreements, my delegation hopes
that those positive signs will translate into concrete
and constructive steps, including the resumption of
good-faith negotiations. We believe that a negotiated
sustainable political solution is the only way to achieve
lasting peace in the region.
My delegation also echoes the Secretary-General’s
statement welcoming the signing of the Algiers
declaration by 14 Palestinian factions on 13 October,
and we hope that it will provide impetus towards
intra-Palestinian reconciliation.
My delegation expresses its grave concern about
the deteriorating humanitarian and economic situation
in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. The Republic
of Korea expresses its strong support for the ongoing
efforts by the international community to meet the
humanitarian and development needs of the Palestinian
people. In that regard, the Korean Government remains
steadfast in its support for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
including contributions for vocational, educational and
food-assistance activities.
The Republic of Korea reaffirms its strong
commitment to its constructive role in advancing peace
and stability in the region, and we remain hopeful that
a lasting solution can be found.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
22-66242

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Fatah (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of the
Group of Arab States, it is my pleasure to congratulate
Gabon on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council this month. We also thank you, Madam
President, for presiding over this important meeting.
We wish the presidency every success for the remainder
of the month. We also thank the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process for his briefing.
The Israeli aggression against the Palestinian
people continues and is increasing. That reflects a
situation that cannot persist. A resolution in the form
of ending the occupation and adopting the two-State
solution — an independent, sovereign and contiguous
Palestinian State, with occupied East Jerusalem as its
capital, on the basis of 4 June the 1967 borders — is
lacking. That is the only way of resolving the conflict
and achieving just and comprehensive peace. The
international community must make an immediate
move to bring an end to the Israeli escalation, which
is having harmful consequences for all. It must make
an active move to find a real prospect for achieving a
comprehensive and just peace, which cannot be reached
by means of aggression and undermining the two-State
solution through the continuation of the settlementbuilding activities, land confiscations and the expulsion
of Palestinians from their homes. Peace and security
for all can be achieved only through the resumption
of serious and active negotiations towards the twoState solution and the establishment of an independent,
sovereign Palestinian State on the basis of 4 June 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with
the international resolutions, Council resolutions and
the Arab Peace Initiative.
The Arab Group requests that urgent international
protection be granted to the Palestinian people, in
accordance with the proposals made by the SecretaryGeneral, which were welcomed by the General
Assembly, particularly given the ongoing and escalated
Israeli aggression against the Palestinian people.
We have witnessed escalations over the past few
days. It is clear message to the international community
that we cannot continue without a political commitment.
The Arab Group reiterates its commitment to achieving
peace as a strategic choice to resolve the Arab-Israeli
conflict in line with international law and the relevant
resolutions of the international legitimacy, including
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1515 (2003) and
2334 (2016) as well as the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative
with all its elements.

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

In that context, we would ask the Security Council
to play its role in bringing an end to the Israeli
occupation and for Israel to fully withdraw from the
Arab territories occupied since 1967, including East
Jerusalem. We also call on the Council to support
Palestine’s full membership in the United Nations in
order to practically uphold the Council’s positions and
responsibilities to support the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and achieve progress on
the two-State solution in line with the internationally
recognized parameters.
The Arab Group requests that the Security
Council shoulder its responsibilities and implement its
resolutions so as to put an end to all Israeli unilateral,
illegitimate, provocative and escalating measures as
well as the continued relentless violations by Israel
in order to build and expand its illegal settlements. In
addition, Israel must stop killing innocent people and
sweeping repeatedly Palestinian cities and villages,
including Al-Quds Al-Sharif, and flagrant violations
against the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque perpetrated by the
Israeli occupation army and extremist settler groups.
The Arab Group reiterates that Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
with its area of 144,000 square meters, is a worshiping
holy site exclusively for Muslims in line with relevant
international resolutions. In that context, the Arab Group
reiterates that Jordan’s custodianship of the holy sites is
essential as the only party responsible for administering
all areas of Al-Quds and the Al-Aqsa compound,
in accordance with international humanitarian law.
The Arab Group values the continued efforts of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan to preserve the historic
and legal status of Muslim and Christian holy sites,
address the Israeli measures against them and preserve
the Arab, Muslim and Christian identity of those sites
in the context of the Hashemite custodianship under the
auspices of His Majesty King Abdullah II.
The Arab Group also values the role of the Al-Quds
Committee under the chairmanship of His Majesty
King Mohammed VI of the Kingdom of Morocco.
The Committee seeks to carry out important work on
the ground through the Bait Mal Al-Quds Agency in
support of Al-Quds inhabitants.
The Arab Group welcomes the signing of the Algiers
declaration by Palestinian factions at the reunification
conference for achieving Palestinian national unity.
We appreciate the efforts made by His Excellency
the President of Algeria, Mr. Tebboune, to reach that

22-6624219/28

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

historic agreement. The Arab Group also values the
continued efforts made by the Arab Republic of Egypt,
under the auspices of His Excellency Mr. Al Sisi to bring
about Palestinian reconciliation and reconstruction for
the Gaza Strip.
The Arab Group again emphasizes the centrality of
the Palestinian question to the entire Arab nation and
of preserving the Arab, Islamic and Christian identity
of occupied East Jerusalem, the capital of the State of
Palestine. We also underscore the right of the State of
Palestine to absolute sovereignty over all of its territories
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, as well
as its maritime and air spaces, territorial waters, natural
resources and its borders with neighbouring countries.
The Arab Group calls on the international community
to urgently make every effort to guarantee the national
rights of the Palestinian people, especially their right to
self-determination.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the delegation of Gabon
for its appreciated efforts in managing the work of the
Security Council this month and for convening today’s
important open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. I would also
thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his valuable briefing.
The continuing crises and conflicts facing the
Middle East have led to enormous human and economic
losses and the displacement of millions of people. They
threaten navigation, trade, energy and water and food
security and deprive millions of young people in the
region of hope and optimism for a better and more
prosperous future. We therefore need to take collective
action in order to establish security, stability and peace
in this strategic and vital region, which is a cornerstone
of international peace and security.
The Kingdom of Bahrain, under the leadership
of His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa, King
of the Kingdom of Bahrain, with the support of His
Royal Highness Prince Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa,
Crown Prince and Prime Minister of Bahrain, has
always promoted international partnerships and joint
cooperation based on the deep-rooted values and
principles of mutual respect, dialogue and peaceful
coexistence, adherence to the Charter of the United
Nations and its purposes of respect for sovereignty,
20/28

28/10/2022

international law, commitment to good-neighbourliness,
non-interference in the internal affairs of countries and
the peaceful settlement of regional and international
conflicts and tensions.
The Kingdom of Bahrain reiterates its belief that
achieving a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East depends primarily on settling the PalestinianIsraeli conflict. We therefore stress that it is important
for the international community to work to achieve the
aspirations of the brotherly Palestinian people to live
in a secure, stable and prosperous homeland, as well
as their right to establish an independent State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with the twoState solution, as well as resolutions of international
legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The Kingdom of Bahrain welcomes the signing
by the Lebanese Republic and the State of Israel of an
agreement on the demarcation of the maritime borders
between the two countries, with the constructive
mediation of the United States of America. We hope
that that historic agreement will constitute a positive
opportunity to enhance both countries’ benefits from
natural resources, namely, oil and gas. That would
highlight the importance of dialogue and mutual
understanding in settling disputes and promoting
security, stability and peace for the good and interest
of all the peoples of the region, as well as their rights to
prosperity and sustainable development.
The Kingdom of Bahrain strongly condemns the
Houthi terrorist group’s refusal to extend and expand
the truce in the Republic of Yemen, as proposed by
Mr. Hans Grundberg, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, and agreed by the Government of
Yemen. That refusal demonstrates the terrorist group’s
intentions to continue its military activities inside
Yemen and beyond in order to achieve its illegitimate
goals and objectives and endanger security and stability
in the region.
The Kingdom of Bahrain reiterates its strong
condemnation of the recent dangerous escalation by way
of the terrorist attack carried out by the terrorist Houthi
militia with two drones targeting the Al-Dabba oil port
in the Hadramaut governorate of the sisterly Republic
of Yemen, in clear violation of all international laws
and norms and as a serious threat to navigation, global
trade and the marine environment.
While the Kingdom of Bahrain appreciates the
efforts of the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and
22-66242

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

its continuous support to bring peace and stability
to brotherly Yemen, it calls on the United Nations to
continue its efforts to reach a political solution to the
Yemeni crisis, in accordance with the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference and
resolution 2216 (2015), with a view to achieving peace,
security and stability for the brotherly people of Yemen.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain remains
committed to fulfilling its responsibilities towards
the Middle East region and the entire world, as well
as harnessing joint efforts and increasing capacities in
order to address the challenges and dangers affecting
countries and their peoples and ensure them a peaceful
and prosperous future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate you, Madam President, on your country’s
successful presidency of the Security Council this
month. We also thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing this morning.
My country’s delegation aligns itself with the
statements made on behalf of the countries of the Gulf
Cooperation Council, the Group of Arab States and the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
We are pleased to participate today in another open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, specifically
on the most important issue for the Arab region, namely,
the Palestinian question.
The international community agrees that the
best solution for achieving a permanent, just and
comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian question
is the two-State solution, according to which an
independent and lasting State of Palestine is established
based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. That
requires an end to Israel’s occupation of the occupied
Arab territories, including the Syrian Golan and the
occupied Lebanese territories, and the immediate and
complete cessation of settlement activities, as well as
ensuring the return of refugees and the restoration of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. The best
way to achieve that end is through negotiations between
the two sides, and consequently the international

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

community should do its utmost to facilitate the peace
process and resolve all final-status issues.
The issue of Jerusalem is one of the most important
final-status issues. We affirm that any attempts to
undermine the existing historical and legal status of
the Islamic and Christian holy sites in occupied East
Jerusalem or to Judaize them, as well as any attempts
to divide the blessed Al-Aqsa Mosque temporally and
spatially and to limit the freedom of Muslim prayer in
it, are null and void under international law and the
relevant United Nations resolutions. We are concerned
about the latest such attempt, this month, in which
hundreds of settlers stormed the Al-Aqsa Mosque. The
State of Qatar has strongly condemned those attacks,
both as a flagrant violation of international law and
as provocative to the feelings of Muslims around the
world. In that regard, the international community must
shoulder its moral and legal responsibilities to protect
the brotherly Palestinian people and their holy sites.
The State of Qatar welcomes the announcement by
the Government of Australia to cancel its recognition
of West Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. We believe
that decision to be consistent with the international
consensus and resolutions of international legitimacy,
and it supports international efforts to achieve peace
and improves the chances for a two-State solution.
Israel is continuing its illegal settlement policy
and other repressive policies against the Palestinians
through its annexation of their land and appropriation
and demolition of their property, as well as its use of
excessive force and arbitrary arrests, against a backdrop
of repeated cycles of violence and escalation that
requires us to make further efforts towards achieving
sustainable peace. The Gaza Strip is suffering in
particular from the painful humanitarian effects of
the military escalation and the blockade that has been
imposed on the Strip for more than 15 years. The State
of Qatar continues our efforts to provide humanitarian
support in order to improve the living conditions of the
residents of the Strip as part of our continuous support
to, and solidarity with, our Palestinian brothers.
The State of Qatar welcomes the signing of the
Algiers declaration by Palestinian factions, which
resulted from the reunification conference to achieve
Palestinian national unity. That declaration constitutes
a positive step towards achieving national unity and the
creation of an independent Palestinian State. We deeply

22-6624221/28

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

appreciate the role played by the brotherly People’s
Democratic Republic of Algeria to that end.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar is preparing to host
the FIFA World Cup next month, which will take place
in the Middle East for the first time. We hope that such
a historic event will be an opportunity to uphold the
values of peace and coexistence and to reflect positively
on achieving peace and security in the region.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Gertze.
Mr. Gertze: On behalf of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, I congratulate Gabon on its successful
presidency of the Security Council during October. I
also thank Mr. Wennesland for his briefing.
The Committee is alarmed by the dangerous
escalation in Israeli military raids across the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. That is
dramatically destabilizing the situation and taking
us further away from international consensus to
achieve a just peace in the Middle East, as outlined
in international law and countless Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, most recently in
Security Council resolution 2334 (2016).
Israeli military raids in Jenin and Nablus, as well
as other areas in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, are exacerbating an already
dangerous situation and leading to the killing and
injuring of more civilians, including women and
children. There is no justification for killing civilians.
We urge an immediate lowering of tensions and the
exercise of maximum restraint in full adherence to
the law, including international humanitarian law, and
reiterate the imperative of ensuring accountability for
unlawful and excessive use of force, in accordance with
international law. Violence is simply not the answer.
The situation in Jerusalem deserves renewed
attention. Repeated provocations and violations of the
historic and legal status quo by Israel, the occupying
Power, at Al-Aqsa Mosque must end. The consensus
is clear: such provocative rhetoric and actions inflame
tensions and threaten to ignite yet another needless cycle
of violence. The Committee reiterates that the historic
and legal status quo at the holy sites in Jerusalem must
be upheld and respected by all parties.
The ongoing expansion of illegal settlements and
settler-related violence needs decisive action. Last week,
22/28

28/10/2022

Israel approved hundreds of new settlement units in
northern Jerusalem, adding to the plight of Palestinians,
who suffer discrimination and dispossession in their
own city, in flagrant breach of international law and
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. Such illegal actions reinforce hopelessness,
undermine the viability of a two-State solution along
the pre-1967 borders and are a flagrant obstruction of
the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination.
In her first report to the General Assembly,
Ms. Francesca Albanese, Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967, notes the legality of the Israeli
occupation as it has
“proven not to be temporary, is deliberately
administered against the best interests of the
occupied population and has resulted in the
annexation of occupied territory” (A/77/356, p.5).
We call on Israel, the occupying Power, to adhere
to its obligations, to reverse the trend towards the
dispossession and forcible displacement of Palestinians
and to halt the transfer of its own population to the
occupied territory, which it continues to systematically
carry out in flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law. Settlements and annexation are
simply not the answer.
The Committee condemns, in the strongest terms,
Israel’s relentless targeting and shrinking of Palestinian
civil society space. Civil society organizations are
a pillar of democracy, and their ability to operate
freely is a prerequisite for an inclusive society. We
call on Israel, as the occupying Power, to uphold
its obligations to the Palestinian people in line with
international law, including their basic civil rights
and right to the freedom of expression. We also call
on Israel to reverse its baseless decision to outlaw six
Palestinian civil society organizations for being socalled terrorist organizations.
We further call on Israel to fully lift its illegal 15year blockade on the Gaza strip and to cease obstructing
efforts to strengthen the foundations for a Palestinian
State that coexists with Israel in peace and security. That
includes putting an end to all policies that have resulted
in the de-development of Gaza, which is paramount in
reversing the steep deterioration of the socioeconomic
situation in Gaza and undoing the fragmentation of the
Palestinian people. A land, air and sea blockade is not
the answer.
22-66242

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We note with appreciation the international
community’s generous contribution to the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA); however, the Agency
remains in dire need of sustainable and predictable
funding to meet the urgent needs of millions of
Palestinian refugees and thereby contribute to stability
in the Middle East. We urge Member States to renew
UNRWA’s mandate when it comes to the vote during
the current session of the General Assembly, as well
as to continue their financial support to the Agency,
including the possibility of expanded United Nations
budgetary support to ensure the continuity of its vital
humanitarian programmes.
Violations of international law, human rights abuses
and violence push back the day when Palestinians will
be able to enjoy their inalienable rights and achieve
independence. It is imperative to restore calm and create
the right conditions on the ground to bring about a just
and lasting solution to the Palestinian question — a key
to sustainable peace worldwide.
We welcome the recent signing of the Algiers
declaration on national reconciliation by Palestinian
factions, which constitutes a step towards national
unity and the holding the long-awaited legislative and
presidential elections in Palestine. We thank the Algerian
Government for facilitating that important agreement.
However, more work needs to be done. The status
quo is unsustainable. The international community,
including members of the Security Council, must act
immediately to prevent the further deterioration of
an already fragile situation. The only way forward is
through visible progress towards a political horizon
that puts an end to the Israeli occupation and brings
about the realization of the rights of the Palestinian
people, including their rights to self-determination and
independence, as well as a just solution for the plight of
the Palestinian refugees.
Palestine must become a State Member of the
United Nations. It must take its rightful place among
the international community. The people of Palestine
need our solidarity. From this Chamber, the Committee
invites all Member States to attend this year’s
commemoration of the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People, to be held on 29 November
in the Economic and Social Council Chamber. Let
us use that solemn event to reiterate our steadfast
commitment to the inalienable rights of the Palestinian

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

people. Seventy-five years on from the partition plan by
the General Assembly, it is high time to achieve justice
for the Palestinian people.
The Committee will continue to fully support all
efforts to achieve the two-State solution, with Israel
and Palestine living side by side in peace and security.
The injustice can be resolved only by implementing the
parameters that have already been identified according
to international law, United Nations resolutions and past
agreements between the parties to fulfil the promise of
a sovereign and independent Palestinian State, based
on the 1967 lines, with East Jerusalem as its capital and
where the Palestinian people can realize their freedom
and live in peace, stability and dignity. A just and
lasting peace is the answer.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba endorses the statements delivered by the
representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and by the representative of
Namibia in its capacity as Vice-Chair of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People.
It is regrettable that the Security Council has
continued to fail to address the just cause of the
Palestinian people, despite the historic demands of
the United Nations, the Non-Aligned Movement, the
League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and other international actors.
While this organ continues its refusal to take
measures to end Israel’s military aggression and
occupation of Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, Israel is continuing its policy of annexation
and increasing its illegal colonization practices.
Homes and properties continue to be destroyed, more
Palestinian families are forcibly displaced and Israeli
settlements continue to be built and expanded. The
blockade of the Gaza Strip is also still in place, as
are plans for the annexation of Palestinian territories
in the Jordan Valley and other parts of the West Bank
and East Jerusalem. The violence, arrests, detentions,
imprisonment, human rights violations and killings
of Palestinian civilians in the occupied territories
continue. The Palestinian people are suffering from
Israel’s apartheid practices on their own territory.

22-6624223/28

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We condemn the double standards, selectivity,
incoherence and political manipulation that harm
the cause of international peace and security and
undermine the legitimacy of the Security Council.
As a self-proclaimed defender of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and of international
peace and security, the United States is trying to erase
from our Organization’s historical memory its repeated
obstruction of Security Council action aimed at
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, along with the impunity
it has guaranteed Israel. We want to recall once again
that the current Government of the United States has
not reversed other unilateral and unjustified decisions
that run counter to the Arab nations’ legitimate interests
and maintain the potential danger of escalation in the
Middle East, thereby further delaying the possibility
of reaching the proclaimed solution to the conflict.
We reiterate our condemnation of the United States
Government’s unilateral decisions to recognize
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and establish
its diplomatic representation in that city, thereby
disrespecting Jerusalem’s historical status, as well as
the decision to recognize Israel’s sovereignty over the
Syrian Golan, which all constitute grave violations of
the Charter of the United Nations, international law and
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We reaffirm our strong support for a two-State
solution that will enable the Palestinian people to
exercise their right to self-determination and to live in
an independent and sovereign State within the pre-1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital, and that
also guarantees the right of return of refugees. Cuba
welcomed the recent reconciliation agreement between
Palestinian factions signed in Algiers under the auspices
of Algeria’s President Abdelmadjid Tebboune. We hope
that the new arrangement will consolidate Palestinian
unity and enable steps to be taken towards a solution to
the conflict through a serious and respectful negotiating
process that takes into account the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people. We will continue to strongly
support the State of Palestine becoming a full member
of the United Nations and its President’s call for an
international peace conference.
We reiterate our demand for Israel’s full and
unconditional withdrawal from the Syrian Golan and
all the occupied Arab territories. We demand an end
to foreign interference in Syria and full respect for its
sovereignty and territorial integrity, while supporting
24/28

28/10/2022

the quest for a peaceful and negotiated solution to
the situation imposed on our sister Arab nation. We
reiterate our support for the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action with Iran and for the inalienable right of
States to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. We
reiterate our condemnation of the unilateral withdrawal
of the United States from that agreement. And we
demand an immediate and unconditional end to the
arbitrary and illegal unilateral coercive measures that
the United States has imposed on sovereign nations in
the Middle East.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I am honoured to speak
on behalf of the 120 member States of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Gabon
on its successful presidency of the Security Council
this month and express the Movement’s appreciation for
the opportunity to present its position on the question
of Palestine.
During the NAM ministerial meeting on
21 September on the sidelines of the high-level
week of the seventy-seventh session of the General
Assembly, the Ministers adopted a political declaration
that, among other things, stressed that a just, lasting
and peaceful solution to the question of Palestine
in all its aspects — based on the internationally
endorsed parameters enshrined in the relevant United
Nations resolutions — must remain a priority on the
Movement’s agenda and a permanent responsibility
of the United Nations until it is satisfactorily resolved
in accordance with international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions. In that regard, the member
States of the Movement once again reaffirmed that
the ongoing historic injustice, with the 55-year-long
Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territory and
other Arab territories at its core, continues to pose a
serious threat to regional and international peace and
security. As the Palestinian people continue to be
deprived of their inalienable rights, including the right
to self-determination and independence, the prolonged
international paralysis on the issue is inexcusable, as
are dismissive arguments that the issue is intractable or
that peace is not possible at this time.
The international consensus on a just solution is firm
and clear, and there are abundant multilateral political
and diplomatic tools for promoting the achievement of
22-66242

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

a peaceful settlement in accordance with international
law, the relevant United Nations resolutions and the
Charter of the United Nations. We must use them
responsibly and urgently. We in NAM are ready to do
so, and we urge the Security Council to act forthwith to
shoulder its responsibilities in that regard. The Council
must uphold its duty under the Charter to maintain
international peace and security and act to implement
its own resolutions. The question of Palestine cannot
be the exception to international law or to the authority
of the Council. In particular, the Movement remains
deeply concerned about the fact that for too long the
Council has been unable to fulfil its mandate on this
important question, owing to the use of the veto by one
permanent member. The members of the Movement call
on the Security Council to overcome its paralysis on
the Palestinian question by upholding its obligations
with regard to the achievement of a just and peaceful
solution to this protracted conflict and tragic injustice.
That will not only open a new era for the Palestinian
and Israeli peoples and the region but will also restore
credibility to this organ and our international system
as a whole.
In that regard, NAM still believes that resolution
2334 (2016) provides the most effective and viable path
to peace. It sets forth the essential requirements and
parameters for the realization of a just outcome through
a two-State solution, based on the lines of 4 June
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance
with the long-standing terms of reference of peace
endorsed by the international community, which are
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, including the principle of land for peace,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map. It
also ensures the fulfilment of the Palestinian people’s
inalienable rights, including that of self-determination,
and the independence of the State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, together with a joint solution to
the plight of Palestinian refugees, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
NAM therefore reiterates its call for full respect
for resolution 2334 (2016) and for the effective
implementation of its provisions and obligations,
particularly by the occupying Power, and including
in terms of States’ obligations with regard to
distinction, which is a matter that is central to
ensuring accountability.
The Movement also underscores the need for the
intensification of international and regional diplomatic

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

efforts aimed at ending the Israeli occupation that began
in 1967 and achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive
solution, as also called for in resolution 2334 (2016), and
calls on the Security Council to urgently examine all
practical ways and means to ensure its implementation,
as it has pledged to do. Similarly, the member States of
the Movement continue to call for full respect for, and
the implementation of, all other relevant resolutions,
including with regard to the complete cessation of all
Israeli settlement activities and the status of occupied
East Jerusalem.
Respect for United Nations resolutions and
international law would inherently create the necessary
conditions for de-escalating the volatile situation on
the ground, which has been marked by rising violence,
particularly settler violence and terror, and has led
to more tragic loss of life among civilians, including
children. That would also create the necessary
conditions for ultimately ending the occupation — a
matter of urgency in order to justly resolve the conflict
in all its aspects and make Palestinian-Israeli peace and
security a reality for the benefit of both peoples, the
region and the international community as a whole.
It is imperative that action be taken immediately
to help de-escalate the volatile situation on the ground.
That must include a halt to all unilateral and unlawful
measures by Israel, the occupying Power, in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem.
Actions that violate Security Council resolutions,
including violations of the historic and legal status quo
of Jerusalem and its holy sites, are provocative and
dangerous, destroy the prospects for peace and should
not be supported or celebrated by anyone.
In that regard, we reiterate the call for full respect
of the historic and legal status quo of Jerusalem and
the historical Hashemite custodianship over the
Christian and Muslim holy sites in the city, as well
as for safeguarding their sanctity. In that context, the
Movement stresses that the Jordanian administration
of the Jerusalem Awqaf and Al-Aqsa Mosque affairs
is the only entity authorized under the provisions
of international humanitarian law to manage all the
affairs of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, in the entirety of its
144,000 square metres. It also stresses that maintaining
comprehensive calm requires Israel to respect the
legal and historical status quo of the Al-Aqsa Mosque/
Al-Haram Al-Sharif and to find a real political horizon
that guarantees the fulfilment of all the legitimate

22-6624225/28

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

28/10/2022

rights of the brotherly Palestinian people on the basis of
a two-State solution.

prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 11 of General
Assembly resolution 194 (III).

In that regard, the Movement also stresses the
important role of and welcomes the call for Al-Quds/
Jerusalem signed in Rabat on 30 March 2019 by His
Majesty King Mohammed VI of Morocco and His
Holiness Pope Francis to stress the important role that
Al-Quds/Jerusalem plays as a city of tolerance and
mutual respect among the people of the three monotheist
religions and the need to preserve its specificities and
features as a city of peaceful coexistence.

In the light of the continuing financial shortfalls,
NAM urges the international community to provide
UNRWA with sufficient and predictable funding,
including through enhanced support from the United
Nations regular budget, as recommended by the
Secretary-General, in order to ensure the continuity
of all its indispensable humanitarian development
programmes and to make a significant contribution to
regional stability.

NAM reiterates its rejection of the purported
annexation by Israel of occupied East Jerusalem and
underscores that the continued threats of annexation
by Israeli officials, the continued settlement activities
and the forced displacement of Palestinian families
from their homes and lands must be unequivocally
condemned. Any measures taken in that regard must
be forthwith rejected as null and void, without any
legal effect, and must be met with firm measures of
accountability for such grave breaches, including by
lawful counter-measures.

As Israel has clearly abdicated its obligations
as the occupying Power to protect the Palestinian
civilian population as prescribed by the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949, the Movement also reiterates its
long-standing call for international protection for the
Palestinian people. That is urgent in order to alleviate
the dire state of insecurity of the occupied population
and to prevent the loss of additional innocent human
lives. Failure to do so can lead only to further escalation
and the tragic loss of more civilian lives, as we are
witnessing now at this critical time.

With regard to the Gaza Strip, the situation remains
a great concern of the Movement, particularly the grave
humanitarian situation. NAM reiterates its call for the
complete lifting of the illegal Israeli blockade, which
continues to impose untold humanitarian, social and
economic suffering on more than 2 million Palestinian
children, women and men in Gaza. The crisis must
be comprehensively addressed in accordance with
international law and relevant United Nations
resolutions, including resolution 1860 (2009), and in
the context of the unequivocal calls and overriding
responsibility for ending the illegitimate belligerent
Israeli foreign occupation of the Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, since 1967.
In the absence of a just solution, NAM member
States reiterate their call for the continued provision
of the needed humanitarian, social and economic
assistance to the Palestinian people, including the
Palestinian refugees. The Movement therefore reaffirms
the continued importance of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), together with other United Nations
agencies and international organizations, in alleviating
their plight, and calls for full support for the extension
of UNRWA’s mandate until 30 June 2026, without
26/28

In that connection, the Movement reiterates its grave
concern at the lack of accountability for all violations
committed by Israel in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, many of which
may amount to war crimes. Israel must comply with
international law and be held to account if it continues
its blatant contempt of this organ and its international
legal obligations. The absence of justice only fosters
greater impunity, leads to the recurrence of crimes and
destabilizes the situation on the ground, thereby further
diminishing the prospects for peace.
The member States of the Movement therefore
continue to call for international action, particularly
by the Security Council, to ensure the cessation of,
and accountability for, the violations systematically
committed by Israel against the Palestinian civilian
population under its occupation.
With regard to the situation in the occupied Syrian
Golan, the Movement reaffirms that all measures and
actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the occupying
Power, such as its illegal decision of 14 December 1981
that purports to alter the legal, physical and demographic
status and the institutional structure, as well as Israeli
measures to apply its jurisdiction and administration
there, are null and void and have no legal effect. In that
regard, and in line with NAM’s principled position,
22-66242

28/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Movement once again demands that Israel abide
by resolution 497 (1981) and fully withdraw from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, in
line with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
In addition, NAM reiterates its condemnation of
the unilateral and arbitrary proclamation by the United
States of America on recognizing the Golan Heights
as part of Israel. Moreover, NAM member States
emphasize that Israel must withdraw from all Lebanese
territories, including Sheba’a Farms, the Kfar Shouba
hills and the northern part of Al-Ghajar village and
adjacent area north of the Blue Line, in accordance with
the relevant United Nations resolutions, in particular
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
In conclusion, the Movement seizes the
opportunity to reiterate its call for the international
community to act collectively, with responsibility, to
uphold international law and to exert and intensify
all necessary efforts in support of the just Palestinian
cause, the ultimate goal of which is to bring an end to
that historic and grave injustice. NAM member States
reaffirm their commitment to promoting a just, lasting,
comprehensive and peaceful solution to the question of
Palestine in all its aspects, including the plight of the
Palestinian refugees, and reaffirm their support for the
Palestinian people in their struggle to achieve justice
and fulfil their inalienable rights and legitimate national
aspirations, including to self-determination, freedom
and independence in the sovereign and independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brunei Darussalam.
Ms. Sulaiman (Brunei Darussalam): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate Gabon on its presidency
of the Security Council for the month of October and
thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his comprehensive
briefing this morning.
The question of Palestine is almost as old as the
United Nations itself. The suffering and struggles of
the Palestinian people living under occupation for
more than seven decades must not be ignored. Despite
the countless debates held and numerous resolutions
adopted, the question of Palestine remains unanswered.
Efforts towards a peaceful solution have not been as
productive as desired, and the realization of the twoState solution has failed to materialize.

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

As reported to the General Assembly, the Middle
East peace process did not resume, and the Middle
East Quartet has not created opportunities for
negotiation between the two parties concerned in the
past year. In that regard, we call on the international
community to sustain its attention and its efforts to
ensure that Palestinians’ rights and freedoms continue
to be addressed, including at the United Nations, with
utmost priority.
As we have seen in the past few years, the world
has faced challenge after challenge, from battling the
pandemic and its impacts, to geopolitical conflicts and
climate change effects resulting in energy and food
insecurity. Those challenges have greatly affected those
who are most vulnerable and at risk, adversely affecting
in particular countries in conflict such as Palestine. It
is therefore of utmost importance for us to ensure that
the grave situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, remains at the forefront of
the United Nations agenda.
Brunei Darussalam is gravely concerned with
the deteriorating security situation and escalating
instability in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. We continue to witness persistent acts of
violence by the occupying Power that have resulted in
the loss of innocent lives, including of children. We
reiterate our condemnation in the strongest terms of the
repeated blatant violations of Palestinian human rights
and dignity, as well as the continuing deplorable actions
by the occupying Power that go against international
law and resolutions adopted by the Council.
The international community must remain
resolute in safeguarding its commitments, including
upholding the two-State solution towards achieving an
independent State of Palestine based on the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. With respect
to that endeavour, Brunei Darussalam expresses its
serious concerns regarding any change in the status
quo of Jerusalem. We join the international community
in calling on the occupying Power to cease all forms
of aggression, atrocities and unfair practices against
the Palestinians.
Brunei Darussalam reiterates its full support for all
international efforts aimed at achieving comprehensive
and lasting peace and security in the Middle East, in
accordance with the rule of law, as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and all relevant United
Nations resolutions.

22-6624227/28

S/PV.9174 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

For more than half a century, foreign occupation
has tremendously hindered the ability of Palestinians
to exercise their basic human rights, including access
to education, preventing them from achieving their full
potential in contributing towards global development.
As we reach the halfway mark in achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals, we should not forget
how much wider the development gap is becoming
between the rest of us and Palestine. Palestine deserves

28/28

28/10/2022

the same opportunities that all of us in this family of
nations enjoy, to pursue a better future for its people.
On that note, Brunei Darussalam supports efforts
to promote Palestine’s full membership at the United
Nations as a step towards a sovereign and independent
State of Palestine.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

22-66242
