S/PV.7885

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7885th meeting

Thursday, 16 February 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Yelchenko. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ukraine)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Arancibia Fernández
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-04167 (E)
*1704167*

S/PV.7885

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General; to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Mladenov is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Jerusalem.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: On the night of 8 February, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and its affiliates in
the Sinai launched a series of rockets towards the Israeli
coastal resort of Eilat. Thankfully, no one was injured
or killed. I begin today’s briefing by unequivocally
condemning this act, as well as those who inspired,
implemented and celebrated it. I recall this incident
because it is a chilling reminder of the need for States
to work together and stand firm against terror.
The Middle East continues to be plagued by
extremism, bloodshed and displacement, which feed
intolerance, violence and religious radicalism far
beyond the region. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
sadly, is not immune to these sweeping regional threats.
Although leaders on both sides agree on the need to
continue Israeli-Palestinian security coordination,
there is increasing anger in the street, and radical views
are hijacking the discourse as moderate voices are
increasingly vilified and cast aside.
It is critical that we all understand that we must
never allow the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to drift into
the abyss of the extremism and radicalism sweeping
the region. Palestinians, Israelis and the international
community have a duty to act responsibly, avoid
escalating tensions, refrain from unilateral actions
and work together to uphold peace. Today, however,
unilateral actions are returning the parties to a highstakes collision course.
2/6

16/02/2017

On 6 February, the Israeli Parliament adopted the
so-called Regularization Law, which enables the use of
privately owned Palestinian land for Israeli settlements
in the occupied West Bank without the owners’
consent. The law has the potential to retroactively
“regularize” — under Israeli law — thousands of existing
settlement units built on land owned by Palestinian
individuals living under occupation, as well as dozens
of illegal outposts. Its passage marks a significant shift
in Israel’s position concerning the legal status of the
West Bank and the applicability of Israeli law therein.
It contravenes international law and, according to the
Israeli Attorney General, it is also unconstitutional. It
is expected that the Supreme Court of Israel will rule
on its constitutionality soon. If the law stays in place,
it will have far-reaching consequences for Israel, while
seriously undermining prospects for the two-State
solution and for Arab-Israeli peace.
This period also saw Government statements
announcing significant settlement expansion, which
were quickly followed by action. Within a three-week
period, the Israeli authorities promoted some 4,000
housing units in Area C, including tenders for around
800 units, the advancement of around 3,000 units and
the approval of plans for an additional 230 units. These
numbers are all the more worrying if compared to the
whole of 2016, when 42 units were tendered and some
3,000 were advanced in Area C. Settlements were
also advanced in East Jerusalem during the reporting
period, with the issuance of building permits for over
900 units.
Settlement activities are illegal under international
law and, as stated by the Middle East Quartet, they
are one of the main obstacles to peace. All core issues
should be resolved between the parties through direct
negotiations on the basis of relevant Security Council
resolutions and mutual agreements.
I continue to be concerned by the daily violence.
So-called lone wolf attacks against Israeli civilians,
though greatly reduced as compared to 2016, continue.
On 9 February, in the market of Petah Tikva in central
Israel, an 18-year-old Palestinian from Nablus shot and
stabbed six Israelis, who were injured in the attack. In
the West Bank, three Palestinians were shot and killed
by Israeli security forces in recent weeks, two allegedly
attempting attacks on Israeli soldiers, while a teenager
was killed during clashes with Israeli security forces. I
once again call for the calibrated use of force and stress
that live fire should be used only as a last resort, in
17-04167

16/02/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

situations of imminent threat of death or serious injury,
and that any resulting death or injury should be properly
investigated by the authorities.
The trend of demolishing Palestinian-owned
structures continues. Some 57 structures have been torn
down, displacing 108 people. Last year saw over 1,000
demolitions, the largest annual number of demolitions
on record and nearly double the figure for 2015. I once
again urge Israel to cease this destructive practice.
I welcome the Palestinian decision to hold the
postponed local elections on 13 May. However, I
also take note with regret of Hamas’ rejection of that
decision. Let me urge all factions to work together in
good faith to uphold democracy and to overcome the
internal divisions that arc undermining Palestinian
national institutions and the legitimate aspiration to
statehood. Local elections, if held simultaneously
in both Gaza and the West Bank, and conducted in
line with international standards, could contribute to
advancing reconciliation. Gaza and the West Bank
should be reunited under a single, legitimate and
democratic Palestinian Authority on the basis of the
Palestine Liberation Organization principles and the
rule of law, in accordance with existing agreements.
In Gaza, we have consistently warned that the
situation is not sustainable and that another escalation
is likely unless the pressing needs of the population are
more systematically addressed. I also note that Hamas
in Gaza has elected a new leadership. It is for that
leadership to ensure that Gaza remains calm and avoid
the risk of spiraling into another conflict. Rocket attacks,
tunnel construction and smuggling only heighten that
risk. After over three months of relative calm, the
launching of a rocket from Gaza towards Israel on
5 February — which landed without injury — reminded
us all of the risk of further destabilizing an already
combustible environment. In that environment, all
sides should exercise maximum restraint.
The volatile situation in Gaza continues to be
exacerbated by the persistence of a major humanitarian
and development crisis, related in large part to the
crippling closures of the Strip and the continuing
political divide. This winter has borne witness to
a serious electricity crisis, which in December left
Palestinians in Gaza with only two hours of electricity
per day. Tens of thousands of people came out in the
streets in mass protests; many, including journalists,
were detained. The crisis was temporarily resolved

S/PV.7885

with a generous contribution of $12 million from the
State of Qatar. As we speak, the United Nations is
working actively with the Palestinian Authority, all
stakeholders and key donors on a road map to ensure
that Gaza’s massive electricity problems are addressed
in a sustainable manner.
Turning briefly to Lebanon, I note that the
reactivation of State institutions has continued. The
President and Prime Minister have expressed their
confidence that an electoral law will be agreed with
the aim of holding timely elections. On 11 February,
in an interview, President Aoun stated “the need to
maintain Hizbullah’s weapons”. The United Nations
Special Coordinator for Lebanon is in discussion with
authorities on their continued commitment to relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolutions
l701 (2006) and 1559 (2004), which clearly call for
the disbanding and disarmament of all non-State
armed groups.
Relative calm continued in the the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area of operations
and along the Blue Line, with the exception of some
ground and air violations. On 19 January, UNIFIL
deployed on both sides of the Blue Line to mitigate
tensions, including weapons pointing-between the
Israel Defense Forces (IDF) and the Lebanese Armed
Forces in the context of the placement of a soil barrier
near El Adeisse by Lebanese municipal workers, in
violation of the Blue Line.
Meanwhile, in the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) area of operations, the
ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic
is holding, albeit in a volatile security environment on
the Bravo side. On 8 February, the IDF carried out a
strike on the Syrian side of the Golan in response to
a spillover fire incident involving a tank shell that
landed in an open area in Israeli-occupied Golan.
Spillover from Syria continues to heighten the risk of
further escalation between the two sides. Both sides,
however, have stated their continued commitment to
the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. Conditions
permitting, the full return of UNDOF to the area of
separation remains a priority.
Returning to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, recent
developments should be of concern to all of us. Some
may hold the illusion that the conflict can be managed
indefinitely and that the absence of a clear strategy to
advance peace is a strategy in itself. The Middle East

17-041673/6

S/PV.7885

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

16/02/2017

Quartet report and Security Council resolutions have
clearly outlined what is needed to advance a sustainable
and just peace. The two-State solution remains the
only way to achieve the legitimate national aspirations
of both peoples. Israel can take the necessary steps
to stop settlement expansion and construction in
order to preserve that prospect, while the Palestinian
leadership can demonstrate its commitment to tackling
the challenges of violence and incitement on its side.
That would create an environment that would facilitate
bilateral final status negotiations that the international
community can support.

situation in which the most radical sectors of their
respective Governments would prevail over those that
are truly committed to peace.

As Palestinians and Israelis face another period
of uncertainty and concern for what lies ahead. I
urge leaders on both sides to carefully contemplate
the future they envision for their people. Will it be a
future built on perpetual conflict, rising extremism
and occupation? Or will it be a future built on mutual
respect and an appreciation for the unimaginable
wealth of opportunities that would come with peace?
The answer seems obvious but, as history has painfully
demonstrated, the path to peace is riddled with hazards.
The United Nations remains resolute in its commitment
to helping Palestinians and Israelis strive to overcome
these challenges.

However, over these past 70 years, while Israel
has strengthened itself as a full and modern State,
Palestine continues to face serious difficulties in terms
of its development, its integration into the international
community and the consolidation of its territory, which
has led to grave consequences for its population and
increased tensions throughout the region.

The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for his statement.
I now give the floor to those Council members that
wish to make statements.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing, and
I reiterate once again the total support of Uruguay for
his management.
Uruguay, as a firm promoter of peace, reaffirms, as
it has since 1947, its unwavering support for the right of
Israel and Palestine to coexist peacefully within secure
and recognized frontiers, in an environment of renewed
cooperation and free of any threat or act that may
breach the peace. To that end, it is absolutely necessary
for the Israeli and Palestinian authorities to comply in
good faith with their obligations under international
law and with the resolutions of the Council, send clear
political signs of their intention to break the vicious
circle of violent disagreement and conflict, and refrain
from adopting unilateral decisions that undermine
dialogue. Nevertheless, we are far from witnessing any
such signals. We therefore urge the parties to carefully
consider the next steps to be taken and to avert a
4/6

General Assembly resolution 181 (II), which
established the partition of Palestine and thereby created
an Arab and a Jewish State, must remain the focus of
our actions. Uruguay voted in favour of that resolution
in the conviction that the decision would allow for the
establishment of two States, Israel and Palestine, living
in peace and within secure borders. Uruguay’s position
remains exactly the same as it was seven decades ago.

Uruguay, together with virtually all of the
international community, strongly supports the twoState solution, which, and allow me to be very clear
here, remains the only possible solution, as affirmed
yesterday by Secretary-General António Guterres, so
that Israel and Palestine can live in peace and security.
It is not possible to dissociate these two ideas: there
can be no just and lasting peace without a two-State
solution, and the two-State solution will never become
reality unless the parties create conditions conducive
to reaching a peaceful, negotiated outcome that is
mutually satisfactory and puts an end to all pending
issues in the context of this lengthy conflict. We urge
the parties to resume direct bilateral negotiations as
soon as possible, without preconditions, as an essential
step towards achieving that goal. But in order to
achieve that objective, current trends on the ground
must be reversed, failing which it will be very difficult
for Palestine to strengthen its State.
The adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), in
December, and the peace conference organized by
France in January were two clear signs of the urgency
that the international community feels with respect to
the need to reach a peaceful and successful conclusion
to this long delayed process. However, since the most
recent open debate on the Middle East, just one month
ago (see S/PV.7863), the news has frankly not been
very encouraging.
17-04167

16/02/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The announcement by Israel that it will build
thousands of new settlements in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem, as well as the retroactive legalization
of settlements built on private Palestinian land, violate
the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016) and resolution
242 (1967), which affirms the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force. These measures
do not help in any way to move towards peace, and
they jeopardize the possibility of achieving a twoState solution.
We reiterate once again our strong condemnation of
the cowardly terrorist attacks that continue to occur in
the area. We deplore the fact that the Security Council
has not been able to make its views known on the attack
carried out in Petah Tivka on 9 February. Uruguay
repudiates those acts and rejects any incitement to or
glorification of violence. We reiterate that in this regard
there is no room for tacit complicity.
Finally, we reiterate to the key actors in this process
that moderation is vital in order to avoid any statements
that could seriously undermine the future of the peace
talks and the two-State solution.
Mr. Arancibia Fernández (Plurinational State
of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing by the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, who updated
us on the situation in the Middle East, particularly
with reference to the situation involving illegal Israeli
settlements on Palestinian territory.

S/PV.7885

regularization bill, according to an article published by
The New York Times on 6 February, is a bill through
which the State of Israel retroactively regularizes
Jewish settlements in Palestinian territory, including
those located in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. The
bill retroactively legalizes thousands of settlements in
16 neighbourhoods covering 2,000 hectares of land
belonging to the Palestinians.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia believes that
the approval of this regularization bill by the Israeli
Government is an act of provocation to the international
community and constitutes a blatant violation of
resolution 2334 (2016), of 23 December 2016. It is
vital to recall that the aforementioned resolution
was approved by the majority of the members of the
Security Council, there having been only one abstention
and no vote against. The resolution reiterates the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force
and of all measures aimed at altering the demographic
composition, character or status of the Palestinian
territories occupied since 1967.
Moreover, it calls on the parties to refrain from
any provocative actions, incitement or inflammatory
rhetoric, with the aim of de-escalating the situation on
the ground, rebuilding trust and creating the conditions
necessary for promoting peace.

Bolivia has occupied a seat on the Security
Council for more than a month now and has witnessed
the ongoing violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights that the Israeli Government is
committing on a regular and continuing basis. On
22 January, we learned that the Israeli municipality of
Jerusalem authorized the construction of 566 units in
East Jerusalem, a Palestinian-majority neighbourhood of
the city, occupied and annexed by Israel. Subsequently,
on 24 January, the Israeli Government approved a plan
to build 2,500 housing units in settlement blocs in the
West Bank.

I should like also to remind the Security Council
that inaction on our part in the face of Israel’s
expansionist zeal would signify an acceptance of Israel’s
transfer of its civilian population onto Palestinian
land, which represents a blatant violation of the fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the Protection
of Civilians in Time of War, which is applicable to
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and in line with the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 70/89, of December 2015, and other
relevant resolutions. It would also mean repudiating
the fact that the Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, were
established in contravention of international law, as the
International Court of Justice has concluded.

On 7 February, through a letter contained in
document S/2017/115, the Permanent Observer of the
State of Palestine to the United Nations condemned
the approval by the Israeli Parliament of the so-called
regularization bill, which would allow the occupying
Power to legalize more than 5,500 settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territory. The so-called

Israel’s decisions and activities with respect to the
settlements will have detrimental effects on regional and
international peace initiatives and reduce the likelihood
of a two-State solution. On a previous occasion in this
same Chamber (see S/PV.7863), we strongly expressed
our repudiation of the fact that the Government of Israel
disregards the international community and refuses to

17-041675/6

S/PV.7885

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

guarantee the implementation of each and every one
of the resolutions that emanate from this organ of the
United Nations and especially resolution 2334 (2016).
In the same way, it is important to remember that
some members of the Council, on several occasions and
in different thematic contexts, have reiterated that the
decisions of the Council must be implemented and that
it is Council’s responsibility to see to it that they are.
In this regard, we urge the entire membership of the
Security Council to assume the responsibility assigned

6/6

16/02/2017

to us by the Charter of the United Nations to enforce
resolutions effectively and without delay, demonstrating
that the decisions of this organ of the United Nations
are a priority that frames our daily work in favour of
peace and security in the world.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

17-04167
