S/2012/468

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 June 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 20 June 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
In accordance with the request of the Security Council in paragraph 21 of its
resolution 2036 (2012), concerning the implementation of the mandate of the
African Union Mission in Somalia, I have the honour to transmit a report, dated
1 June 2012 (see annex), which I received from Mr. Jean Ping, Chairperson of the
African Union Commission.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-35861 (E) 220612

*1235861*

S/2012/468

Annex
Letter dated 1 June 2012 from the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission addressed to the Secretary-General
Pursuant to paragraph 21 of Security Council resolution 2036 (2012), in which
the African Union was requested to keep the Council regularly informed on the
implementation of the mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), I am pleased to forward herewith the second African Union
Commission progress report on AMISOM (see enclosure).
In addition to the political process, the report covers issues relating to the
deployment of AMISOM in the different sectors, the increase in the strength of its
force and its command and control structure.
I would be most grateful if you could kindly forward the report to the Security
Council members, for their information and action as may be required. The
Commission stands ready to provide any additional information that may be
necessary.
I would like once again, to reiterate the African Union’s appreciation to the
Security Council and to yourself for the invaluable support being rendered to
AMISOM and the commitment of the United Nations to the promotion of lasting
peace, security and reconciliation in Somalia.
(Signed) Jean Ping

2

12-35861

S/2012/468

Enclosure
Report of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission on
the implementation of the mandate of the African Union Mission
in Somalia pursuant to paragraph 21 of Security Council
resolution 2036 (2012)

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 21 of Security Council
resolution 2036 (2012) of 22 February 2012, in which the African Union was
requested to keep the Council regularly informed, through the Secretary-General, on
the implementation of the mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), through the provision of regular reports. The report covers political and
security developments and aspects relating to the deployment and operations of
AMISOM.

II. Political situation
2.
During the period under review, progress continued to be made towards the
implementation of the road map to end the transition. The six signatories of the road
map, namely the transitional federal institutions, the regional administrations of
Puntland and Galmudug, and Ahlu Sunna wal Jama’a, have endeavoured to
strengthen the momentum generated by the National Consultative Constitutional
Conferences, held from 21 to 23 December 2011 and 15 to 17 February 2012, in
Garowe, Puntland.
3.
The six signatories of the road map, namely the President of the Transitional
Federal Government, Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, the President of Puntland, Abdirahman
Farole, the Prime Minister of the Transitional Federal Government, Abdiweli
Mohamed Ali, the Speaker of the Transitional Federal Parliament, Sharif Hassan
Sheikh Aden, the Acting President of Galmudug, Abdisamad Nuur Guled and Ahlu
Sunna wal Jama’a representative Sheikh Mohamed Yusuf, held another meeting in
Galkayo, Somalia, on 27 March 2012. On that occasion, they agreed to, inter alia,
reduce the size of the National Constituent Assembly from 1,000 to 825 members,
with women constituting at least 30 per cent of the total membership. It was also
decided that the members of the National Constitutional Assembly would be
selected by 135 elders based on the 4.5 formula, assisted by a selection committee
of non-voting members, as well as representatives of the six signatories.
4.
A significant achievement during the reporting period was the completion by
the Somali stakeholders of the Constitution drafting process. On 20 April 2012, the
Prime Minister of the Transitional Federal Government received the final draft
Constitution from the Independent Federal Constitution Commission and the
Committee of Experts, in accordance with the stipulations of the Transitional
Federal Charter, the road map timelines and the Garowe Principles.
5.
In April 2012, the Somali signatories selected 135 elders, who will choose the
825 members of the National Constituent Assembly and select the new Parliament.
On 5 May 2012, the National Constituent Assembly conference was convened in
Mogadishu, bringing together 70 per cent of the 135 elders, to decide the selection

12-35861

3

S/2012/468

of the Assembly that will adopt the new Constitution and the new Parliament. The
conference was attended by the President of the Transitional Federal Government,
the Prime Minister, the Speaker of the Parliament and other key Somali
stakeholders.
6.
However, a number of political and technical challenges arose, which could
undermine the credibility of the entire exercise. The process of selecting the elders
has been extremely controversial and the draft Constitution is yet to be published for
debate, leading to speculations among Somalis about its content. Some have
described the draft Constitution as being anti-Islamic and promoting the
Balkanization of Somalia by partitioning the country into three territories, namely
Somaliland, Puntland and South Central.
7.
It was in this context that the principal signatories of the road map met in
Addis Ababa on 21 and 23 May 2012. On that occasion, they agreed that the elders’
meeting in Mogadishu would select the delegates for the National Constituent
Assembly no later than 20 June 2012 and that the National Constituent Assembly
would convene on 2 July 2012 to adopt the interim Somali Constitution by 10 July.
The new Somali Parliament will be selected by 15 July. The new Parliament,
composed of 225 Members, will then elect the Speaker and the Deputy Speakers, on
4 August, and the President, on 20 August. In the selection process, the elders will
be assisted by a Technical Selection Committee which will ensure that the nominees
meet the criteria set out at the Garowe Conferences. Other key decisions included
the expansion of the Technical Selection Committee for the National Constituent
Assembly and the new Parliament, which will now be broadened to represent the
clans and to include international observers. It was further decided that the
Technical Selection Committee, which worked for three days to harmonize and
incorporate the recommendations of the signatories into the draft interim
Constitution, would soon convene to present the amended document to the National
Constituent Assembly, in accordance with the new timelines.
8.
The adoption of the draft Constitution and the election of the new Parliament,
if achieved as planned, will facilitate the realization of other critical road map tasks:
the ratification of the National Security and Stabilization Plan, the reform of the
National Reconciliation Commission and the holding of presidential elections.
Already, 3 presidential hopefuls have arrived in the country, adding to about
14 others who have already declared their intention to run in the August 2012
elections.

III. Security situation
9.
During the reporting period, the security situation in the capital, Mogadishu,
significantly improved, although Al-Shabaab elements continue to infiltrate the city
and to carry out assassinations and suicide attacks. It is worth mentioning the
suicide attack at Villa Somalia on 14 March and the 4 April attack during the first
anniversary of the reopening of the Somali National Theatre, which killed
11 people, including the heads of Somalia’s Football and Olympic Federations.
10. In sector 1 (Lower and Middle Shebelle, including Mogadishu), there were
major gains. On 24 May, the Transitional Federal Government and AMISOM forces
took control of the strategic town of Afgoye (Lower Shabelle) and secured the
Afgoye corridor, which hosts up to 400,000 internally displaced persons. They are

4

12-35861

S/2012/468

now gradually pushing towards Balad (Middle Shabelle). However, there is growing
concern about the increasing subversive activities of some former warlords and
other individuals who are secretly undermining security in Mogadishu. Their actions
include incitement of clan rivalries and influencing soldiers and junior officers to
disrespect the hierarchy of the National Security Forces. Furthermore, as internally
displaced persons and refugees continue to return in large numbers to their places of
origin, several disputes over property and land have been reported.
11. In sector 2 (Lower and Middle Juba), the Transitional Federal Government,
backed by the Kenyan contingent, established three subsectors: northern, central and
southern. In the northern subsector, the towns of Damasa, Eleweny, Elade,
Burahache and Fafadun have been liberated. In the central subsector, the towns of
Diff, Dobley, Tabda, Hosingow and Belis Cogani are now in the hands of the
Transitional Federal Government. On 30 May, the city of Afmadow fell under the
control of the Transitional Federal Government forces and the Kenya Defence
Forces. In the southern subsector, the Transitional Federal Government and
AMISOM are further consolidating their control of Kolbio, Badhadhe, Burgabo and
Ras Kamboni, which were the first to fall following the offensive launched in
October 2011 by the Transitional Federal Government forces and the Kenya Defence
Forces. The military offensive against the insurgents is advancing well in that
subsector. The only towns that remain in the hands of Al-Shabaab are Kismayo,
Jamaa, Bu’aale and Jilib.
12. In Sector 3, there were significant advances by the Transitional Federal
Government and the Ethiopian National Defence Forces. Almost all of Gedo, Bay
and Bakool have been liberated, with the exception of the Dinsor district, in Bay,
and Tayeeglow district and some parts of Wajid, in the Bakool region.
13. Significant gains also continue to be recorded in sector 4, where the entire
region of Hiraan has been recovered by the Transitional Federal Government and the
Ethiopian National Defence Forces. Only the towns of Bulla Barde, Jalalqsi and Eel
Dheere remain in the hands of the insurgents.
14. Although significantly weakened, Al-Shabaab still has the ability to strike and
to receive funds and ammunition from the areas it controls, the diaspora and foreign
networks. The group is now withdrawing from major cities and going underground
by melting into clans or establishing new hideouts. In recent months, under pressure
in south-central Somalia, Al-Shabaab has attempted to establish new bases in the
northern Golis Mountains, an ideal hideout with its caves, forested areas and access
to the coast. Currently, the estimated number of Al-Shabaab elements in the Golis
Mountains is between 300 and 400, but that number could grow owing to infiltration
from south-central Somalia and access by coast from Yemen. This includes Somalis
radicalized in Yemen who are disguised as returnees to Puntland.

IV. Deployment of the African Union Mission in Somalia and
the United Nations Support Office for the African Union
Mission in Somalia support
15. While some slight delays have been observed in the implementation of
AMISOM operational benchmarks, significant progress has been achieved in
establishing AMISOM presence in other sectors outside Mogadishu. On 6 April,

12-35861

5

S/2012/468

100 Ugandan and Burundian forces deployed to Baidoa, as the advance team of 2,500
AMISOM troops that will take over from the Ethiopian National Defence Forces. On
12 April, approximately 1,500 Ugandan troops were deployed to Mogadishu, awaiting
their deployment to sector 3. On 2 June, 1,000 additional Burundian troops were
deployed from Mogadishu and will proceed to Baidoa. This will bring the force level
to 16,660.
16. The United Nations Support Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(UNSOA) has commenced pre-positioning essential equipment for sector 3 by road
via Kenya and Ethiopia. The first in a series of convoys transporting major
equipment, rations, tents and general supplies arrived at the Ethiopian border town
of Doolow in mid-May and has since proceeded to Baidoa. UNSOA has also secured
additional commercial cargo aircraft to increase its capability to deliver supplies by
air into Baidoa and Beletweyne. These aircraft have already delivered water
purification and air traffic control equipment, tents, fuel and other essential supply
items to the advance team in Baidoa. The immediate priority for UNSOA in Baidoa
includes the establishment of sector headquarters and a hospital and the installation
of a communications system. UNSOA is consolidating the necessary medical
equipment, drugs and consumables, so that the planned medical facility can be
established quickly. Logistical support arrangements for sectors 3 and 4 are being
formalized through a letter of assist between the United Nations and the
Government of Ethiopia to provide security, engineering and transportation support
in the two sectors.
17. The deployment of the contingent from Djibouti to sector 4 (Beletweyne) is
under way; a platoon-size advance element (35 military personnel) was deployed on
31 May. The deployment of the main body of the contingent is expected to be
completed by mid-June, which will bring the total force level to 17,530. The final
predeployment visit and the negotiations on the memorandum of understanding will
be conducted in the first half of June. At the request of the African Union, UNSOA
redeployed equipment for the Djibouti contingent from Mogadishu, on 19 April, in
preparation for eventual road transportation from Djibouti to Beletweyne, through
Ethiopia, once the contingent is ready to deploy. UNSOA has also pre-positioned
field defence stores, minor engineering equipment and generators for the
deployment to Beletweyne.
18. A joint AMISOM-UNSOA contractor team conducted an inspection of the
personnel and equipment deployed by Kenya, in sector 2, from 23 to 29 May. The
negotiations of the memorandum of understanding between the African Union and
the Government of Kenya were finalized in the same period. The memorandum of
understanding will be signed on 2 June.
19. The African Union and UNSOA, in consultation with the troop-contributing
countries, have developed letters of assist regarding the deployment of air assets.
The letters are awaiting signature by the Governments of Uganda and Kenya. The
AMISOM Strategic Concept had recommended a total of 14 rotary and fixed-wing
aircraft to support AMISOM operations. In its resolution 2036 (2012), however, the
Security Council authorized an aviation component of up to 12 helicopters
comprising 9 utility helicopters and 3 attack helicopters. It should be noted that the
numbers authorized for attack helicopters will impose limitations on concurrent air
operations, as AMISOM requires at the minimum a set of three attack helicopters
(6 in total) in sectors 1 and 2 to provide air support. In view of this operational

6

12-35861

S/2012/468

imperative, a proposal was made to the United Nations to consider reconfiguring the
authorized numbers so that AMISOM would be able to deploy six attack and
six utility helicopters. In the meantime, a letter of intent will be written to Uganda
and Kenya to immediately deploy two utility helicopters each, to support ongoing
operations, particularly for causality evacuation in sector 1, in the Afgoye corridor,
and in sector 2.
20. There have been no new developments regarding the establishment of a Guard
Force, since my earlier report. Pending the establishment of the Guard Force, the
AMISOM Force Commander will continue to provide limited guard duties within
existing resources and capability.
21. In an effort to further enhance the delivery of the United Nations support
package, AMISOM and UNSOA held a lessons learned workshop in Nairobi, on
30 April and 1 May 2012, to review the first three years of the United Nations
logistical support package to AMISOM and to provide concrete recommendations
regarding priority actions to be undertaken in the expanded AMISOM operations. In
addition to AMISOM and UNSOA, participants included representatives of the
United Nations Office to the African Union, the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia (UNPOS), the Eastern Africa Standby Force Coordination Mechanism and
key partners.
22. My Special Representative continues to engage with UNSOA on resource
requirements for the expanded AMISOM force, and how these can best be met. It is
imperative that AMISOM operations be adequately resourced in order to ensure the
effectiveness of the force. The African Union is highly appreciative of the continued
support from bilateral and multilateral donors.
23. Lastly, AMISOM continues to work in cooperation with UNSOA and the African
Union/United Nations Information Support Team on the implementation of its
strategic communication strategy. Public information activities continue to increase
public support for AMISOM.

V. Command and control
24. The Strategic Concept provides for the establishment of an effective command
and control architecture at the strategic and operational levels. At the strategic level,
there are two advisory structures assisting the Commission: (a) the Joint Coordination
Mechanism, comprising the Ministers of Defence of the troop-contributing countries
and other interested countries, which held its inaugural meeting in Addis Ababa, on
12 April; and (b) the Military Operations Coordination Committee, which is
composed of the Chiefs of Defence staff of the troop-contributing countries and
other interested countries and held its inaugural meeting in Addis Ababa on
9 March. The Military Operations Coordination Committee has since convened
twice. Both the Joint Coordination Mechanism and the Military Operations
Coordination Committee meet under the chairmanship of the Commissioner for
Peace and Security.
25. At the operational level, the command and control architecture calls for the
establishment of an expanded and balanced Mission and force headquarters to
facilitate the management of the Mission and the execution of its mandate. The
structure of the force headquarters has since been revised in line with the above

12-35861

7

S/2012/468

considerations. Following the recommendations of the Joint Coordination
Mechanism and the Military Operations Coordination Committee and extensive
consultations with the AMISOM troop-contributing countries, I approved the
command and control architecture for the expanded AMISOM operations, as well as
the allocation of posts for the force headquarters. In the light of this, the new Force
Commander, Lieutenant General Andrew Gutti, from Uganda, took over the
command of the AMISOM military component, on 2 May, from Major General Fred
Mugisha.
26. With regard to the recruitment for the remainder of the force headquarters
staff, the recruitment process will be in line with the Guidelines for the recruitment
of military staff officers for the AMISOM force headquarters as approved by the
combined meeting of the Joint Coordination Mechanism and the Military Operations
Coordination Committee on 12 April. The posts were allocated based on troop
contributions and agreed principles following consultations with the AMISOM
troop-contributing countries and other interested countries. Other African Union
member States have also been allocated posts based on relevant skills and
experience in peace support operations. The Commission is in the process of
conducting interviews for the key appointments and a rotation plan has been
approved for the staff officers, who will be deployed in three waves from mid-June
to end-July. The posts of the sector commanders have also been approved based on
consultations with the troop-contributing countries.

VI. Protection of civilians
27. The protection of the civilian population in Somalia remains of great concern
to the African Union and AMISOM in particular. While the stabilization of the
security situation in Mogadishu has contributed greatly to the protection of the civilian
population, new threats, including the increasing use of improvised explosive
devices by Al-Shabaab, and the deliberate targeting of civilians presumed to be either
cooperating with, or sympathetic to, the Transitional Federal Government and
AMISOM remain a concern. Based on experience gained in Mogadishu, the use by
Al-Shabaab of civilians as human shields and the shelling of Transitional Federal
Government and AMISOM forces from civilian-populated areas are strategies that
Al-Shabaab may continue to use. AMISOM will continue to exercise the utmost care
in such instances and will take all necessary precautionary measures to minimize
any potential harm that could be caused to the civilian population.
28. In an effort to strengthen AMISOM’s ability to protect civilian populations in
its area of operations, consideration is being given to the establishment of a Civilian
Casualty Tracking, Analysis and Response Cell, as outlined in Security Council
resolution 2036 (2012). To this end, discussions have been initiated with all key
stakeholders. It should be noted that while the establishment of the Cell can
contribute to the monitoring and reduction of civilian casualties during AMISOM
operations, such a mechanism is likely to be best suited to the kind of urban warfare
witnessed in Mogadishu prior to 2012. Accordingly, further consideration is being
given to other complementary mechanisms.
29. Coordination with the Transitional Federal Government, partners and other
actors that have roles and responsibilities in terms of the protection of the civilian
population will be important in this regard. In this context, the Commission will

8

12-35861

S/2012/468

host a workshop on mainstreaming the protection of civilians in AMISOM
operations at the end of June, with a view to assessing the progress made to date
based on current and new protection risks and outlining the best ways and means for
the Mission to coordinate with other actors as it expands into and secures new areas.
In the same vein, the AMISOM rules of engagement will also be reviewed.

VII. Outreach and stabilization in liberated areas
30. My Special Representative for Somalia continues to work with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) Facilitator for Somalia Peace and National
Reconciliation to facilitate support for the delivery of both the IGAD grand
stabilization strategy and the plan of the Transitional Federal Government for newly
liberated areas. In this respect, I am pleased to report that an agreement has been
reached with the Steering Committee on Stabilization of the Transitional Federal
Government regarding the establishment of an AMISOM/Transitional Federal
Government policy working group in order to enhance coordination and the
provision of support to the Transitional Federal Government stabilization plan.
31. The Transitional Federal Government has appointed Governors in the newly
liberated areas, namely Middle and Lower Shabelle, Hiraan, Gedo, Bay and Bakool.
These are interim arrangements for a period of three months, after which
consultative forums on the sharing of power and resources will be organized
followed by elections at the local level. These Governors will be responsible for
ensuring security arrangements, disarmament and the delivery of basic services to
the population. The military operations of AMISOM, as outlined in the Strategic
Concept and the AMISOM concept of operations, will therefore also take due
cognizance of local reconciliation and stabilization efforts.

VIII. Support to Transitional Federal Government security sector
and justice institutions
32. On 30 March, the Commission convened, in Addis Ababa, a conference on the
empowerment of Somalia’s security sector. The conference was attended by the
United Nations and other partners and sought to galvanize greater international
community attention in support of the enhancement of the strategic and operational
effectiveness of the National Security Forces and other related sectors. The
conference was followed, on 11 April, by a working group meeting in Nairobi,
which discussed the immediate operational needs for all sectors; prioritization in
line with a strategic view of where support is most needed; criteria for effective
support to the Somali security sector and justice institutions and delivery
mechanisms. On 25 April, the technical working group further discussed the draft
concept of operations for the integration of allied forces and a detailed draft
document on the immediate and long-term needs of the Somali National Security
Forces and Justice and Custodial Corps. The final document with the immediate and
long-term funding needs was completed on 30 May and will be submitted to the
African Union Peace and Security Council for consideration.
33. In the spirit of close cooperation, the Somalia National Security Agency and
AMISOM convened the third information-sharing meeting in Mogadishu, from 2 to

12-35861

9

S/2012/468

4 April 2012. The objective of the meeting was to exchange information on the
current state of Al-Shabaab following the loss of major cities and the significantly
improved political and security situation in the newly liberated areas. The meeting
was also attended by representatives from Burundi, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya,
Somalia and Uganda and the African Centre for the Study and Research on
Terrorism. The meeting made a number of recommendations on developing the
capacity of the Somalia National Security Agency and Transitional Federal
Government forces in the priority areas of communication, through the provision of
secure means of communication, counter-insurgency, counter-terrorism and counterimprovised explosive device training.
34. In a related development, on 2 April, AMISOM and the Somalia National
Security Agency inaugurated the Joint Unit of Fusion and Liaison to provide timely
and accurate information to Transitional Federal Government and AMISOM forces
fighting Al-Shabaab. The AMISOM/Transitional Federal Government Joint Unit of
Fusion and Liaison was established in line with the recommendation made at the
information-sharing meeting held in Kampala in November 2010.

IX. Observations
35. The reporting period witnessed significant progress on all tracks. The
finalization of the drafting of the Constitution and the convening of the elders’
meeting are important steps towards the achievement of the road map goals.
However, a number of challenges remain, especially with regard to the inclusivity of
the processes under way and the tight timeline for the establishment of the National
Constituent Assembly.
36. The overall security situation in Mogadishu has improved significantly.
AMISOM recently expanded its area of control into the Daynille district, which has
also contributed to the improved security situation in Mogadishu. At the same time,
the threat of improvised explosive devices, suicide attacks and assassinations
persists. The security situation in other sectors has also been consolidated.
Notwithstanding the aforesaid, new challenges mostly linked to property disputes
and law and order incidents, owing to the large influx of internally displaced
persons, are emerging. The deployment of the formed police units will help the
Somali Police Force in mitigating these challenges.
37. The expansion of the military component of AMISOM is being achieved,
although with certain delays. The deployment, as advance elements, of 100 military
personnel from Burundi and Uganda in sector 3, and of 36 Djibouti military
personnel in sector 4, the movement of equipment to sector 3, the insertion of
additional Ugandan troops into Mogadishu for onward deployment to Baidoa and
the movement of equipment of the Djiboutian contingent are all significant steps in
the completion of the operational benchmarks. In addition, the memorandum of
understanding with Kenya has been finalized.
38. The key benchmark of establishing the new command and control architecture
has been achieved. The Military Operations Coordination Committee and the Joint
Coordination Mechanism are now operational. The allocation of staff officer posts
for the expanded force headquarters has been finalized. The new Force Commander
has already assumed duty and the recruitment process for finalization of the
remaining candidates is under way and will be fast tracked to ensure full staffing of

10

12-35861

S/2012/468

the force headquarters by July. Other outstanding issues, including the deployment
of the Guard Force, will be addressed as a priority in the coming days.
39. There is also better clarity regarding support to the Transitional Federal
Government. The development of the concept of operations for the National
Security Forces is a step in the right direction. However, much remains to be done to
bring the capabilities of the Somali Security Forces to the desired level, to ensure
that they are capable of providing lasting peace and security in Somalia.
40. Overall, I am satisfied with the Mission’s progress during the reporting period,
despite delays in the achievement of certain operational benchmarks. Once again, I
would like to reiterate the African Union’s gratitude to the United Nations and other
bilateral and multilateral partners for their continued support. As AMISOM
intensifies its operations, this support will remain critical. In this respect, the
reconfiguration of the number of authorized attack and utility helicopters should be
considered as a matter of urgency.

12-35861

11
