S/2002/442

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 April 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 17 April 2002 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 11 April 2002
from the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency addressed to
you.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-34213 (E)

220402

*0234213*

S/2002/442

Annex
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish]

Letter dated 11 April 2002 from the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency addressed to the President of
the Security Council
I refer to Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) of 28 September 2001, in
which the Council noted with concern the close connection between international
terrorism and illegal movement of nuclear materials and, in that regard, emphasized
the need to enhance coordination of efforts at the national, subregional and
international levels in order to strengthen a global response to this serious challenge
and threat to international security. The Council also called upon all States, inter
alia, to find ways of intensifying and accelerating the exchange of operational
information, especially regarding the threat posed by the possession of weapons of
mass destruction by terrorist groups, and to become parties as soon as possible to the
relevant international conventions and protocols relating to terrorism.
As mentioned in my letter of 7 December 2001 (see S/2001/1164), the General
Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency, in its resolution
GC(45)/RES/14 B of 21 September 2001, requested me to review thoroughly the
activities and programmes of the Agency with a view to strengthening the Agency’s
work relevant to preventing acts of terrorism involving nuclear material and other
radioactive materials. An initial report pursuant to that request was considered by
the Agency’s Board of Governors at its session in November 2001. Excerpts from
that report were contained in the attachment to my letter.
At the request of the Board, I continued consultations with member States to
review our proposed response to the threat of nuclear terrorism and submitted the
outcome for the Board’s consideration at its March 2002 session. The Board
approved in principle the Agency’s plan of action which covers eight areas: physical
protection of nuclear material and nuclear facilities; detection of malicious activities
(such as illicit trafficking) involving nuclear and other radioactive materials;
strengthening of State systems for nuclear material accountancy and control;
security of radioactive material other than nuclear material; assessment of
safety/security related vulnerabilities of nuclear facilities; response to malicious acts
or threats thereof; adherence to international agreements and guidelines; and nuclear
security coordination and information management for nuclear security related
matters. In this context, I should emphasize that the activities proposed are not a
substitute for national measures, nor can they diminish the primary responsibility of
the State on all matters of security; rather they are designed to supplement and
reinforce national efforts in areas where international cooperation is indispensable to
the strengthening of nuclear security. Excerpts from my latest report to the Board on
protection against nuclear terrorism are contained in the attachment to the present
letter.
The Board agreed to the establishment of an extrabudgetary fund and called
upon member States as a matter of urgency to contribute, on a voluntary basis, to
such funding. The Agency has already received additional extrabudgetary
contributions to support its response to the global problem of combating the risk of

2

S/2002/442

nuclear terrorism. These funds will be utilized for the immediate implementation of
the action plan noted above.
I should be grateful if you could bring this letter and its attachment to the
attention of the members of the Security Council and arrange for its distribution as a
document of the Council.
(Signed) Mohamed ElBaradei

3
