General Aseembly-Sixth Session

62

II. FACTORS INDICATIVE OF THE FREE ASSOCIATION (WHETHER IN A FEDERAL OR UNITARY
RELATIONSHIP) OF A TERRITORY ON EQUAL
STATUS WITH OTHER COMPONENT PARTS OF
THE METRlH'OLIT AN OR OTHER COUNTRY
A.

GENERAL

l. Political aavilncr.ment: Political advancement of the
population sufficient to enable them to decide upon the future
destiny of the territory with due knowledge.
2. Opinion of the population: The opinion of the population
of the territory, freely expressed by informed and democratic
processes, as to the status or change in status which they desire.
3. Geographical considerations: Extent to which the relations of the territory with the capital of the central government may be affected by circumstances arising out of their respective geographical positions, such as separation by land, sea
or other natural obstacles.
4. Ethnic ilnd cu.lturaJ considerations: Extent to which the
population are of different race, language or religion or have
a distinct· cultural heritage, interests or aspirations, distinguishing them from the peoples of the country with which they
freely associate themselves.
5. C onstitutiona/ considerations: Association (a) by virtue
of the constitution of the metropolitan country or (b) by virtue of a treaty or bilateral agreement affecting the status of
the territory, taking into account (i) whether the constitutional
!,;Uar:mtees extend equally to the associated territory, (ii)
whether there are constitutional fields reserved to the territory, and (iii) whether there is provision for the participation
of the territcry on a basis of equality in any changes in the
constitutional sy~tcm of the State.

B.

STATUS

I. Legislative representation: Representation without discrimination in the central legislative organs on the same basis
as other inhabitants and regions.
2. Citizenship: Citizenship without discrimination on the
same basis as other inhabitants.
3. G(JVernment officials: Appointment or election of officials
from the territory on the same basis as those from other parts
of the country.
C.

l :-in:RNAL CONSTITUTIONAL CONDITIONS

1. Suffrage: Universal and equal suffrage, free periodic
elections by secret ballot, freedom of choice of electoral candidates.
2. Local rights and status: Equal rights and status for the
inhabitants and local bodies of the territory as enjoyed by inhabitants and local bodies of other parts of the country.
3. Local o fficit1ls: Appointment or election of officials' in the
territory on the same basis as those in other parts of the
country.
4. Internal legislati{)n: Complete legislative autonomy of the
territory, by means of electoral and representative systems, in
all matters which in accordance with the normal terms of association are. in the case of non-unitary systems, not reserved to
the central 6overnment.

568 (VI). Cessation of the transmission of in•
formation under Article 73 e of the Charter
in respect of the Netherlands Antilles and
Surinam
The General Assembly,
Having regard to its resolutK>n 222 (III) of 3 November 1948 rc-::i.uesting the ~.fembers concerned to
communicate information reg..J.·ding any change in the

constitutional position and status of a Non-Self-Governing Territnry, as a result of which the resµunsible
government concerned thinks it unnecessary to transmit information in respect of that Territory under
Article 73 e of the Charter,
Considering that it has received from the SecretaryGeneral28 a copy of the communication dated 31 August
1951 from the Netherlands Government, which states
that, in the opinion of that Government, the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam have now ceased to be NonSelf-Governing Territories within the meaning of
Article 73 e of the Charter of th<: United Nations, and
that consequently the Netherlands Government has decided to terminate the transmission to the SecretaryGeneral of information under Article 73 e concerning
these Territories,
Having regard to resolution 448 (V) of 12 December
1950, by which the General Assembly requested the
Special Committee on Information transmitted under
Article 73 e of the Charter to examine such information as may be transmitted and to report thereon to the
General Assembly,
I-laving regard to the information made available by
the Government of the Netherlands relating to the
Netherlands Antilles and Surinam and to the report
of the Special Committee,
Having decided 29 to appoint an Ad H oc Committee to
carry out a further study of the factors which should
be taken into account in deciding whether a territory
is or is not a territory whose people have not yet attained a full measure of self-government,
H®ing been informed that a conference among
representatives of the Netherlands, the Netherlands
Antilles and Surinam on an equal footing is to be held
in March 1952 to decide upon a system of co-operation
for the common affairs of the three countries and the
establishment of a new constitutional order to replace
the present interim arrangement, 30
1. Reaffirms the statement contained jn paragraph
1 of General Assembly resolution 222 (III) welcoming
any development of self-government that may have
taken place in Territories previously enumerated as
Non-Self-Governing;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of
the Netherlands for communicating full information in
compliance with paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 222 (III), and decides to transmit this information to the Ad H oc Committee created by resolution
567 (VI) of the General Assembly;
3. Considers that in 1952 the General Assembly
should examine the communication of the Netherlands
Government in the light of any report prepared by the
Ad H oc Committee, and taking into account whatever
new arrangements as to common affairs may be developed by the 1952 conference of representatives of
the Netherlands and of the Netherlands Antilles and
Surinam;
4. Decides to include in the agenda of the next
regular session of the General Assembly the question
• See document A/C.4/200.
• See resolution 567 (VI), p. 60.
• See Official Records of the Gene,-aJ Assembly, Sixth Susio,.,
S»pplement No. 14, p. 7.

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Fourth Committee
of the cessation of the transmission of information
undr.r Article 73 e of the Charter as regards the
Netherlands Antilles and Surinam.
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.
569 (VI). New title for the Special Committee on
Information transmitted under Article 73 e of
the Charter

The General Assembly,
Considering that the present title of the Special Committee on Information transmitted under Article 73 e
of the Charter is too long and not conducive to the
broadest dissemination of knowledge of the important
work being done by the Committee,
Considering that a knowledge of this work should
not be reserved to specialists and experts but, on the
contrary, should receive wide publicity through the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat of
the United Nations,
Decides that the Committee shall henceforth be
known by the following title: "Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories".
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.
570 (VI). Question of South West Africa
A

The Genenzl Assembly,
Believing that an agreed solution of the question of
South \Vest Africa would not only bring greater peace
and harmony to the Continent of Africa, but would
contribute significantly to the relieving of tensions in
wider areas of the world,
Considering that the acceptance of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice of 11
July 1950 31 is essential to the rule of law and reason
in international affairs, thus strengthening the cause oi
the United Nations,
Having by resolution 449 A (V) of 13 December
1~SO accepted the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice with respect to South \Vest Africa,
Recalling that the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice with respect to the Territory
of South West Africa sets forth, inter alia, that:
(a) The Territory of South West Africa is a Territory under the international Mandate assumed by the
Union of South Africa on 17 December 1920,
( b) The Union of South Africa acting alone has
not the competence to modify the international status
of the Territory of South \vest Africa, and that the
competence to determine and modify the international
status of the Territory rests with the Union of South
Africa acting with the consent of the United Nations,
( c) The Union of South Africa continues to have
the international obligations stated in Article 22 of the
Covenant of the League of Nations and in the Mandate
for South West Africa as well as the obligation to
31
See International Status of South (Vest Afrirn, Ad11isar:y
Opinion: I.C.J. Reports 1950, p. 128.

63

transmit petitions from the inhabitants of that Territory, the supervisory functions to be exercised by the
United Nations to which the annual reports and the
petitions are to be submitted,
Having established 32 an ad hoe committee of five, consisting of the representatives of Denmark, Syria, Thailand, the United States of America and Uruguay, to
confer with the Union of South Africa concerning the
procedural measures necessary for implementing the
advisory opinion oi the International Court of Justice,
Hewing authorized this committee, as a!1. inte~im
measure to examine the report on the admm1strahon
of the Territory of South West Africa covering the
period since the last report, as well as petitions and any
other matters relating to the Territory that may be
transmitted to the Secretary-General,
Having received the report of the Ad H oc Committee
on South Wesf Africa, 33
Noting that the Union of South Africa submitted to
the Ad Hoe Committee on South West Africa a proposal which the Ad H oc Committee found unacceptable
because it did not allow for an adequate implementation of the advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice and because the proposal made no provision
for the supervision of the administration of the Territory of South West Africa by the United Nations,
Noting that the Ad H oc Committee submitted to the
Union of South Africa a counter-proposal based on
the existing Mandates agreement and providing for a
procedure for the supervision of the administration of
the Territory of South West Africa by the United
Nations as nearly as possible analogous to that which
existed under the League of Nations and, to the extent
practicable, involving international obligations no more
extensive or onerous than those existing under the
League of Nations,
Noting that the Government of the Union of South
Africa, in reply to the Ad H oc Committee's counterproposal, had stated that it was willing to resume negotiations only on the basis of its own proposal, and had
informed the Committee that the Union of South
Africa was unable to accept the principle of submission
of reports on the administration of the Territory,
Noting with concern that the Ad H oc Committee was
unable to comply with the resolution of the General
Assembly authorizing it to examine the report on the
administration of the Territory ot South West Africa
because no report was received, and that no petitions
were transmitted by the Union of South Africa,
1. Commends the Ad Hoe Committee on South
West Africa for its earnest and constructive efforts to
find a reasonable basis of agreement;
2. Regrets the fact that, in the course of the negotiations with the Ad H oc Committee, the Union of
South Africa, while prepared to negotiate on the basis
of certain articles of the Mandate, indicated its unwillingness to give adequate expression to its inter-national obligations with respect to South West Africa,
and in particular with regard to the supervisory re~ponsihility of the United Nations toward this Territory;
32
See resolution 449 A (V) of 13 Deccmher 1950.
"'See documents A/1901 and Adds. 1 to 3
