\'l.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

215

Assembly resolution 38/20 of 22 November 1983 and of
the present resolution;

38/119.

6. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session of the views and
suggestions expressed at the above-mentioned meeting, if
it is convened.

Thc General Assemhl_,-,
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of Ali Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 3452
(XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Bearing in mind article 7 of the lnternational Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights. 170
Recalling a/so its resolution 32/62 of 8 December 1977,
in which it requested the Commission on Human Rights
to draw up a draft convention against torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, in
the light of the principies embodied in the Declaration.
and its resolution 32/63 of 8 December 1977,
Reca/lingfurther that the Sixth United Nations Congress
on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, in its resolution 11 of 5 September 1980, expressed the
belief that the draft convention should be finalized at thc
earliest possible time, 171
Considering that it was not possible to complete thc
work on the draft convention during the thirty-ninth scssion of the Commission on Human Rights,
1. Welcomcs Economic and Social Council resolution
1983/38 of 27 May I 983, in which the Council authorizcd
a meeting of an open-ended working group of the Commission on Human Rights for a period of onc week prior
to the fortieth session of the Commission in order to complete the work on a draft convention;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
complete, at its fortieth session, as a matter of the highcst
priority, the drafting of a convention against torture and
othcr cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, with a view to submitting a draft, including provisions for the effective implementation of the future convention. to thc General Assembly at its thirty-ninth
session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-ninth session the item entitled '"Torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".

100th p/enary meeting
16 Decemher 1983

38/118.

Principies of Medical Ethics

The General Assemhly,
Recalling its resolution 37/194 of 18 December 1982,
by which it adopted the Principies of Medica! Ethics relevant to the role of health personnel, particularly physicians, in the protection of prisoners and detainees against
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment,
Alarmed that not infrequently members of the medica!
profession or other health personnel are engaged in activities which are difficult to reconcile with the Principies of
Medica) Ethics,
Recognizing the need for the full application ofthe Principies of Medica) Ethics and desiring that the Principies be
given wide publicity,
1. Urges ali Governments to take measures with a view
to promoting the application by ali health personnel and
Government officials, in particular those employed in
institutions of detention or imprisonment, of the Principies of Medica! Ethics relevant to the role of health personnel, particularly physicians, in the protection of prisoners and detainees against torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to disseminate the
Principies of Medica) Ethics widely and in as many languages as possible and to issue a pamphlet containing the
text of the Principies in the six official languages of the
United Nations;
3. Ca/Is upon ali Governments to give the Principies of
Medica) Ethics the widest possible distribution, in particular among medica) and paramedical associations and institutions of detention or imprisonment, in an official language of the State;
4. Invites ali relevant intergovernmental organizations,
in particular the World Health Organization, and nongovernmental organizations concerned to bring the Principies of Medica! Ethics to the attention of the widest possible group of individuals, especially those active in the
medica) and paramedical field;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session on the steps taken
by the United Nations and the relevant specialized agencies, as well as by Governments, for the dissemination and
implementation of the Principies of Medica! Ethics.
100th p/enary meeting
16 Decemher I 983
170 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
171

See Sixth United Nation.i Congress on the Prevenuon o(Cnme and the
Treatment ofOlfenders, Caracas, 25 August-5 Septemher 1980: Repon prepared by the Secretaria/ (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.81.IV.4),
chap. 1, sect. B.

Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment

100th p/enary meeting
16 Decemher 1983

38/120.

Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa

The General Assemhly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
concerning preparations for the Second International C'onference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa 172 and the sections on Africa contained in the report of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 17 •1
Recalling its resolutions 37/197 of 18 December 1982.
entitled "International Conference on Assistance to Rcfugees in Africa", and 38/5 of 28 October 1983 on cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity,
Bearing in mind resolution AHG/Res.114 (XIX) on thc
Second Conference, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of
State and Governmcnt of the Organization of African
17 ~ A: 38, S26.
17.l O!f¡cwl Records uf the (;enera/ Assemhly, Thirty-eighth S,·sswn, .\11¡•p/ement No 12 (A/38/12 and f'orr. l) and Supplement No. 12A (A/38.• I 2
Add.l).

216

General Asscmbly --Thirt~-eighth Session

Unitv at its nineteenth ordinarv scssion. held at Addis
Ababa from 6 to 12 June 1983. Í74
Gral'c/\' conccrncd at thc persisten! and scrious problcm
of large numbcrs of refugees on the African contincnt.
Awarc ofthe economic and social burden borne by African countries of asylum on account of the presence of
these refugees and its conscquences for tbeir national
devclopment and of the heavy sacrifices madc by them.
despite their limited resources.
Recognizing the universal collcctivc rcsponsibility of
sharing tbe urgent and overwhelming burden of the problem of African refugees through effcctivc mobilization of
resources to meet the urgent and long-term needs of tbc
refugees and to strengtben the capacity of countrics of asylum to providc adequately for tbe refugees whilc the)
remain in those countries. as well as to assist the countries
of origin in tbe rebabilitation of voluntary returnees.
Recof?ni::ing that tbe achievement of durable solutions
to refugee problems, in particular voluntary repatriation
and local integration, calls for generous humanitarian and
developmental assistance to the affected countries, as well
as for efforts to address the causes of refugee situations.
1. Takcs note with apprcciation of the report of tbc
Secretary-General concerning preparations for tbe Second
lnternational Conference on Assistancc to Rcfugces in
A frica:
2. Approl'cs tbe proposed Conferencc arrangements
contained in paragrapb 17 of tbc report of tbe Secretan General:
3. Rcqucsts the Secrctary-General to invite ali States to
participate in tbc Conference at the ministerial leve! and to
invite also the relevan! organs, organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organi1,ations to participate in thc Conference at a bigh leve!;
4. Appea/s to the international community, ali States.
specialized agencies and regional intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to provide tbe utmost
support for the Conference with a view to offering maximum financia! and material assistance to refugees 111
Africa and to ensuring tbe success of tbe Confcrencc:
5. Exprcssc.1· its dccp apprcciation to tbe countrics of
asylum for tbe gcnerous contribution and tbe sacrificcs
that tbey are making to alleviate tbe pligbt of refugees:
6. Commcnds thosc countries tbat are supporting
programmes for refugees and returnees for tbeir continucd
assistanee and calls upon them. as well as other States and
international organizations. to assist and co-operate with
the United Nations Higb Commissioner for Refugees in
tbe promotion of durable solutions:
7. Rcqucsts the Secretary-General. 111 close cooperation witb the Organization of African Unity and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. to ensure tbat, in tbe period leading up to thc Conference, ali appropriate measures are taken so tbat Member States, in particular principal donors. are kept fully
informed oftbe priority needs ofthe affected countries and
tbat contacts are established in the capitals conccrned to
mobilize the necessary support and resources:
S. Notes with satisfaction the action taken by thc
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to initiate public information programmes to increase public
awareness of the rcfugee situation in A frica and the objecti ves of the Conference:

lJ. Rn¡11csts the Dcpartmrnt of Public lnformation of
thl' Sccrctariat and othcr competent bodics of tbc llnited
Nations systcm to co-operatc do,cly witb thc llnited
Nations Higb Commissioncr for Refugccs to cnsure that
thc maximum amount of publicity is givcn to tbc refugec
situation in Africa. ,1s wcll as to tbc Conferencc and its
oh¡ccti ves:

174 See A/381312. annex.
17 5 Otficial Record., o( thc (icnera/ A."cmhlr. J"hirt,·-i'lghth SC\sl()n. S11¡,
p/emenl No. 12 (A/38/ 12 and Corr. 1).
176 Jbid .. Supp/ement No. J2.·1 (A;38- 12• Add. l l

177 !hui., l'furll'-('ll;hth .\'1'\\/1•11. rlnrd ('omn11111·c, 42nd mt•cting. paras
'8-V

1O.

Rcq11cs1.1 tlw Sccrctary-Crencral to repon to thc

<irneral Asscmbh at its tbirty-ninth scssion on the implemcntation of tbL' prcscnt rcsolut1on.
/{)()//¡ ¡1/cnarr IIICCl/1/g

ltJ Dffclllhff /983

38/121.

Report of the llnited Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

Fhc (il'l/cral h,c111hll".

l!al'ing considl'rcd the rcport of tbe United Nations

Higb Commissioncr for Rcfugccs on tbe activities of his
Officc. 17 ·' as wcll as tbe report of the Exccutive Committcc
of thc Programmc of thc H igb Commissioner on tbe work
of its thirty-Íourtb scssion. 176 and having beard the statcmcnt madc by thc Higb Commissioncr on 14 Novcmber
l lJ83. t''
Rc,·a/ling its resolution 37 195 of 18 Decembcr 198::!.
Rcaf/imli11g thL' cminently bumanitarian and nonpolitical character oftbc activitics oftbc Otlice oftbc Higb
<·ommissioner.
No1111g 11·11/, dcc¡1 co11cN11 tbat problcms of rcfugees and
displaced persons of concern to thc High Commissioncr
rcmain acutc in all parts of the world. notably 111 Africa.
Asia and Latín Amcrica.

Strc.1sing the fundamental importance of the Higb Commissioner's intcrnational protection function and the necd
for States to co-operatc witb tbe High Commissioncr 111
the cxercisc of tlus csscntial function.
l:'.\'¡1rcss111g se11,,11s <'Onccm on'r tbe dillicultics cncountcred by the Higb Commissioncr in tbc exercise of bis
rnternational protcction function in tbc face of continucd
violations of tbc basic rights of pcrsons of concern to bis
Ollicc.
Dccpl¡· conccmed that in various rcgions the safcty and
welfare of refugecs and asylum-seekers bave been seriously
1copardi1cd on account of military or armed attacks. acts
of piracy and othcr fi.1rms of brutality.

. lcknml'/cdging ldth appreciation thc note of the Executive Committec on tbc strengtbening of the management
policy of tbe Ofücc of tbe llnited Nations High Commissioner for Refugccs. submitted by the High Commissioncr. 17 ~ ami thc High Commissioner's efforts to
strengthen tbe management of bis Ollice.
Noting tbat tbc Exccutive Committee has requestcd the
Higb Commissioncr to undcrtake a comprebensive study
of the full financia! and practica! implications of the inclusion of Arabic. ( '11incsc and Spanisb among tbc official and
working languagcs of tbc Exccutivc Committec.
,Votlllg 1rith dee¡1 ap¡m'Ciallon tbc valuablc support
extended by many (iovernments to tbc High Commis,1oncr in carrying out his dutics.

l 7H A A(.% HCR H SC.2 15 Add. l
