United Nations

S/PV.6592

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6592nd meeting
Wednesday, 27 July 2011, 11.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wittig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Ms. Ziade
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Tatham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-43235 (E)

*1143235*

S/PV.6592

The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations; Lieutenant General Patrick
Nyamvumba, Force Commander of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur; Lieutenant
General Chander Prakash, Force Commander of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo; Major General
Alberto Asarta Cuevas, Force Commander and Head of
Mission of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon; and Major General Muhammad Khalid,
Force Commander of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia to participate in this meeting.
I would also like to warmly welcome the other
Force Commanders and Chief Military Observers
present with us today.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Le Roy.
Mr. Le Roy: We are grateful to you,
Mr. President, for giving all our heads of mission the
opportunity to appear before the Council. Four of them
will speak. The first, Lieutenant General Nyamvumba,
will speak on the issue of the protection of civilians in
a non-permissive environment. Lieutenant General
Prakash of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will speak on the impact of the
conditionality policy on the operation. Major General
Asarta Cuevas of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon will speak on safety concerns in south
Lebanon and their impact on daily operations. Major
General Khalid of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia will speak on the role of military components
in early peacebuilding.
The President: I now give the floor to Lieutenant
General Nyamvumba.
Lieutenant General Nyamvumba: I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me to address

2

the Security Council on the protection of civilians in a
non-permissive environment. Today, I will discuss
issues of the operational environment, experience and
strategic approach and efforts of the African UnionUnited Nations Mission in Darfur (UNAMID) in
implementing its mandate vis-à-vis the protection of
civilians. I will first briefly talk about Darfur’s
non-permissive
environment
and
UNAMID’s
protection of civilians strategy. I will then discuss the
efforts UNAMID has made to provide protection to
civilians. Finally, I will talk about the challenges of the
issue under discussion.
Let me begin with the operational environment of
Darfur. Suffice it to say that the environment across the
length and breadth of Darfur is indeed non-permissive.
It is a large area with harsh climatic conditions, a lack
of adequate roads and infrastructure, and limited local
resources. Darfur is huge and mostly without minimum
infrastructure facilities, which creates considerable
barriers to reaching populations at risk and in need.
The poor state of the roads often delays movement and
restricts operational activities, especially during the
rainy season, from June to October.
Besides this, the non-permissive environment for
the protection of civilians in Darfur is also a result of
localized armed clashes between the Government of
the Sudan and belligerent groups, as well as localized
tribal conflicts and clashes, usually over natural
resources. Other factors include organized banditry, the
widespread availability of small arms, sexual violence,
child recruitment, and arbitrary arrests and detention.
In some areas, we have seen that due to the
localized fighting between the Government of the
Sudan and armed groups, UNAMID’s movements, both
on land and in the air, have sometimes been restricted
by warring factions that unquestionably impede our
efforts to protect civilians. Additionally, in the absence
of any definite peace agreement or ceasefire between
all the belligerents in Darfur, the conflict continues,
resulting in the Government of the Sudan and the
armed groups again restricting access to those areas; in
an insecure environment for humanitarian components;
and in the further suffering of the inhabitants. With
diverse interest groups and stakeholders involved, the
security situation remains volatile, and inter-factional
or tribal conflicts continue to occur between all these
warring parties.

11-43235

S/PV.6592

Ultimately, the protection of the people of Darfur
is dependent on the readiness and capacity of the
Government of the Sudan to carry out its sovereign
responsibility to protect its citizens. Accordingly,
UNAMID’s protection strategy, inter alia, identifies
specific objectives and tasks to engage with and assist
the Government of the Sudan in fulfilling its protection
responsibilities in accordance with international human
rights law. Our protection strategy at UNAMID is
based on UNAMID’s protection of civilians mandate,
as issued under resolutions 1769 (2007), 1828 (2008)
and 1935 (2010), and the communiqué of the seventyninth meeting of the African Union Peace and Security
Council. The mandated tasks are to protect civilians
across Darfur and to ensure safe, timely and
unhindered humanitarian access, the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel and the protection
of humanitarian convoys.
UNAMID’s protection of civilians strategy was
prepared in full consultation with the United Nations
country team. It is both built on and helps to guide the
UNAMID/United Nations country team’s integrated
strategic framework; the United Nations Sudan
humanitarian work plan; the UNAMID protection of
civilians mission directive; the UNAMID Force
Commander’s directive; and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations/Department of Field Services
operational concept on the protection of civilians in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. In keeping
with its strategic roles and responsibilities, UNAMID
has developed a situational awareness and early
warning system. It also monitors, reports and evaluates
incidents and conducts operational planning and
implementation, coordination, communications and
public information.
In the light of its mandate, and based on analysis
of the protection environment in Darfur, the UNAMID
strategy outlines four main objectives, which are, first,
to ensure the fulfilment by the Government, armed
groups and other non-State actors of their
responsibility to protect civilians, in accordance with
international human rights and humanitarian law;
secondly, to protect civilians from physical acts of
violence; thirdly, to ensure freedom of access to the
populations at risk; and lastly, to prevent violations of
human rights and ensure effective response,
particularly with regard to women and children.
I shall now turn more specifically to our activities
with regard to the protection of civilians. Despite the

11-43235

many obstacles in our operational environment,
UNAMID has been relentless in its efforts to launch
several initiatives aimed at improving its protection of
civilians. We have maintained a more robust presence
throughout Darfur, particularly in areas where fighting
has affected civilian communities. We have improved
the Mission’s early warning and early response
mechanism by issuing weekly analytical protection of
civilian reports, in addition to conducting weekly civilmilitary coordination meetings.
We have significantly increased our patrol
activities to include robust patrolling in various
villages by day and night; protecting internally
displaced
person
(IDP)
camps;
protecting
marketplaces; assisting disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes; and providing
humanitarian, logistics and administrative escorts.
UNAMID’s military, along with other components of
the Mission, has already established a broader footprint
across Darfur. In 2010, UNAMID’s military conducted
a total of 33,963 patrols; by contrast, in the first six
months of 2011, the number has already reached
23,554. This is clearly a marked improvement, which
signals our increased effort to protect innocent
civilians. UNAMID has been able to assist in
stabilizing team sites in Shangil Tobaya, Khor Abeche,
Hamidiya, Hassa Hissa and Kalma camps.
UNAMID has facilitated access for humanitarian
actors to deliver assistance, including in Jebel Marra
and Jebel Moon. In the case of Jebel Marra, we are
actively seeking to establish a temporary operating
base in Feina as a humanitarian hub for outreach to
other locations in the area. In all of these areas, there
has been a significant improvement in the security
situation, and as a result significant numbers of
IDPs — approximately 1,500 per month since
January — have started returning to their homes. We
have assisted in the movement of families within
Sector North and the resettlement of returnees from
Chad in Sector West. The Mission has been involved in
settling disputes over farms and water among nomads,
and tribal clashes.
In May and June, UNAMID, in collaboration
with the humanitarian country team, initiated efforts to
reach out and deliver relief assistance to areas that had
not been accessed before.
The quick-impact projects have also provided
dividends in terms of delivering on various needs of

3

S/PV.6592

the populations. The exercise code-named Operation
Spring Basket has been conceptualized within the
framework of the UNAMID strategy on the protection
of civilians as a means of improving the delivery of
humanitarian relief through the expansion of access to
hard-to-reach areas and to more people in need.
Following the negotiations held with the
Government of the Sudan and the armed movements,
Operation Spring Basket commenced on 1 May with a
total of nine assessment missions, completed during
the months of May and June 2011. The missions have
been able to deliver a limited supply of vaccinations
for women and children, as well as educational and
shelter materials for a girls’ school in Northern Darfur.
Protection is indeed a joint effort by UNAMID
and the humanitarian community. However, that
community is culturally independent and has its own
schedule and priorities, and at times it is not
comfortable delivering aid with the military involved.
Organizationally, while the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs is charged with coordination,
it has no authority, incentives or penalties to increase
participation by the United Nations family or nongovernmental organizations.
UNAMID has provided escorts as well as
corridors for the delivery of humanitarian services,
including those related to food, water, hygiene,
vaccination and shelter. Some of those activities have
succeeded in curtailing maternal deaths and reducing
the infant mortality rate. The HIV/AIDS Unit is also
working with the UNAMID military, police and
civilian components to build the capacity of mission
personnel on matters related to the integration of
HIV/AIDS into their various activities. Since January
2011, the UNAMID HIV/AIDS Unit has provided
valuable services to more than 1,000 ex-combatants
demobilized in different parts of Darfur. The third
phase, planned for July and August 2011, is expected to
continue with a stronger and larger focus on the actual
delivery of humanitarian relief.
Our efforts with regard to the protection of
civilians also face different challenges. The first and
foremost is that in the absence of a comprehensive,
inclusive and legitimate ceasefire by all armed
movements, the security of civilians remains a major
concern. It is to be noted that on many occasions
UNAMID has been prevented from having access to
certain areas because of fighting, which continues to

4

create challenges for the protection of civilians. Other
challenges include the fact that peacekeepers have also
been targeted, with seven of them killed in 2010 and
2011.
Finally, poor training and ill-equipped troopcontributing countries have been identified as one of
the major setbacks affecting efficiency concerning the
protection of civilians in Darfur. It is indeed
unfortunate that, in spite of deliberate orders, some
troop-contributing countries have failed to act in
accordance with the training focus for the Mission
mandate.
I have provided here a flavour of the strategies on
the protection of civilians and the guidelines of
UNAMID and have outlined the realities on ground.
Against that backdrop, I have highlighted our efforts
and activities aimed at improving human lives.
Protection of civilians in Darfur is definitely a
demanding and arduous job. However, our
determination and efforts will be sustained. We shall
continuously strive to overcome the challenges by
whatever means are available to us, and we shall
continue to count on the support of the Security
Council.
The President: I thank
Nyamvumba for his briefing.

Lieutenant-General

I now give the floor to Lieutenant-General
Chander Prakash.
Lieutenant-General Prakash: It is an honour for
me, as Force Commander of one of the largest United
Nations peacekeeping missions — the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) — to be given an
opportunity to address the Council this morning on the
conditionality policy and its impact on operations.
The policy has been in operation in MONUSCO
for just over 18 months, and we now have a reasonably
good feel for what it can do and the associated issues.
These I will elaborate on a little later, but before doing
so, it might be helpful if I started by talking about what
the policy actually entails and how it is being
implemented by MONUSCO.
Protection of civilians in support of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
remains the primary focus of our work. Among the
other tasks with which the Mission is charged, we are
mandated to support the efforts of the Government in

11-43235

S/PV.6592

bringing ongoing military operations against the Forces
Démocratiques de Libération du Rwanda (FDLR), the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) and other armed groups
to a completion, specifically by supporting the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC) through jointly planned operations. But, as
stated in resolution 1925 (2010) and carried through its
current mandate — resolution 1991 (2011) —
MONUSCO support for the FARDC is strictly
conditioned on compliance by the FARDC with
international humanitarian and human rights law, and
refugee law. This caveat is what is now referred to as
the conditionality policy, and it governs the way in
which the Mission approaches the task of supporting
the FARDC and other Congolese authorities.
The policy has been translated into a detailed
mission standing operating procedure, setting out very
clear requirements that need to be met in order for
support to the FARDC to be provided. The nature of
the support includes primarily fuel, rations,
transportation, fire support, expert advice and casualty
evacuation. Certain ongoing FARDC actions against
the armed groups, such as Operation Amani Leo and
Operation Iron Stone, inter alia, are being carried out
with considerable support from MONUSCO. That
support is conditional on there being sufficient joint
planning of operations, particularly with respect to
protection of civilians. Support is limited to units and
commanders with acceptable human rights records.
Implicit is the requirement for adequate screening of
key personnel and visibility of FARDC actions in the
field. Support is denied at the planning stage to units or
commanders believed to have committed grave human
rights violations, including mass rapes and the
employment of child soldiers.
In this regard, a thorough screening process is in
place. Even after the support is provided, if at some
stage non-compliance with the conditionality policy
comes to light, support can be withdrawn after due
notification to the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and if they then fail to take
appropriate action, as was the case when serious
human rights violations were committed by one of the
battalions recently. The standard operating procedure
remains the subject of fine-tuning.
The implementation of the conditionality policy
is regularly reviewed by the senior management group,
in consultation with representatives of the
humanitarian community, including the Office for the

11-43235

Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The impact of
the conditionality policy is now visible.
There are, of course, some positives. In certain
areas, the policy has had a positive impact on the
conduct of operations by the FARDC. It has brought
the MONUSCO Force and FARDC closer to jointly
planning operations and developing operational
concepts that are applicable to the unique conditions
that prevail in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Both sides have learned from each other, and, as a
result, operations have become much more
sophisticated in their design and implementation.
Importantly, protection of civilians has been factored in
at the start of the planning process, as inputs are sought
from a large number of stakeholders, including the
Joint Human Rights Office within the Mission. The
Mission’s efforts and those of the FARDC are now
much better coordinated, with obvious benefits in
terms of what can be achieved on the ground. The
requirement for MONUSCO is to closely scrutinize the
distribution of logistics support, which has its obvious
operational benefits. It has helped to ensure that our
support gets to the troops in the field as intended, to
ensure that they are properly fed and sustained, thereby
contributing to individual morale and motivation.
The very existence of the conditionality policy, as
well as President Kabila’s “zero-tolerance” policy, has
reminded
Commanders
of
their
personal
responsibilities in exercising effective command and
control over their own troops in operations. For their
own sake, as well as for that of the unit, they have had
to pay more attention to what is being done by the
troops in their name.
By and large, the recent behaviour of
MONUSCO-supported FARDC units has been
satisfactory, and the conduct of most joint operations
has not been impacted by adverse publicity. In an army
made up of professionals, ex-rebels and Mayi-Mayis,
which has attracted criticism for preying off the local
population, we now have started seeing encouraging
signs of improvement in personal discipline and human
values.
There are certain issues. Despite certain obvious
benefits, the policy presents certain issues and
challenges for the Mission. The limited resources
available to the Mission to implement the
conditionality
policy,
in
addition
to
other
commitments, means that there is a restriction on the

5

S/PV.6592

number of FARDC units that it can support. At a
certain point in time, we run out of military observers
and contingents to carry out the monitoring functions.
We also run out of civilian staff to conduct the
necessary screening checks. In addition to this,
experience has shown there are many commanders who
do not meet the criteria. So, one of the consequences of
our own conditionality policy is that our capacity to
reach and influence all parts of the FARDC order of
battle is not as great as we would want it to be.
That having been said, even if we had sufficient
resources we would still find ourselves in the situation
where there is no longer a strong appetite within the
FARDC for conducting joint operations, particularly in
the Kivus. They argue, with some vindication, that
operational surprise and security are lost due to the
protracted preparations and wide consultation. The
trend is therefore away from joint operations towards
unilateral FARDC operations, over which the Mission
has limited oversight or influence.
It is a fact that we have been breaking new
ground with the introduction of a conditionality policy.
We had nothing to fall back on in terms of tried and
tested guidance for implementing the policy. Only as
time has passed have we become more confident about
the best ways of operationalizing the policy. There
have been stresses and strains along the way, including
with our FARDC partners, who have complained about
inadequate consultation and engagement, particularly
in the early days when considering withdrawal of
support to offending units. Requests for changes of
commanders have aroused feelings of intrusion into
areas of national sovereignty.
Our own troops have also faced the dilemma of
trying to work out where to place priority —
monitoring
supported
FARDC
or
countering
anti-Government forces? This has not been easy,
particularly for junior field commanders, who are
trained more to deal with clarity than ambiguity. Who
is on which side? When should they act, and how?
Conditionality has certainly added to the burden on
such officers and made the operational landscape more
blurred and challenging.
Let me make some recommendations. Having
sketched out some of the ways in which the
conditionality policy can impact on operations, I would
now like to make a few suggestions on how it might be
enhanced for future missions. First and foremost, the

6

conditionality policy cannot stand on its own for longterm gains; it must be simultaneously followed up and
supported by broader military reforms, such as proper
integration, and security sector reform.
Secondly, while it is desirable to make the
screening system broad and deep, apart from being
resource-intensive, it tends to reduce the number of
commanders and units available for operations that can
be supported by MONUSCO. The extent to which the
exercise is undertaken needs to be looked at again. We
need to find a balance between what is desirable and
what is feasible, in order for the policy not to become
so invasive that it conflicts with the achievement of our
overall mandate.
Thirdly, where possible we should seek to
introduce this policy at mission start-up rather than
further downstream. It is easier to implement when
everything else is new, and the impact could potentially
be much greater.
To conclude, conditionality policy has had both
positive and negative impacts on operations. There are
certain broader issues and human values at stake. To
my mind, this policy is there to stay, but there is scope
for further development and refinement. If the policy
were seen as jointly owned by our national partners,
this would be of great help. While it would still be a
vehicle for safeguarding the United Nations image and
reputation, it could also create an opening for the host
nation to influence and take informed decisions on
what and who is supported.
The President: I thank Lieutenant General
Prakash for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Major General Alberto
Asarta Cuevas. Let me take this opportunity to reiterate
the Council’s strong condemnation of the attacks
perpetrated against the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon yesterday in Saida and to convey through him
our condolences to the injured and their families.
Major General Asarta Cuevas: I thank you very
much, Sir, for your kind words and for giving me the
opportunity to address the Council today.
Last week, the Council met to discuss the latest
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2011/406). I know that the
Council was briefed by Special Coordinator Williams
and the Department for Peacekeeping Operations.

11-43235

S/PV.6592

Today, I would like to take this opportunity to
highlight one of my main concerns in southern
Lebanon: the issue of safety and security and its impact
on the operations of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL). I will then also touch on the
broader issue of the status of the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) and the focus for the coming
period to ensure further progress in its overall
implementation.
On the whole, southern Lebanon and northern
Israel have enjoyed the five quietest and calmest years
in many decades. The situation in UNIFIL’s area of
operations also remained relatively stable during the
first half of 2011, when the political situation in the
country was at an impasse. Nevertheless, in recent
months, UNIFIL has experienced a series of events that
reflected the range of threats that the Mission is
exposed to and that affect the security situation.
Yesterday, at around 6 p.m. local time, an
explosion targeted a UNIFIL convoy along the coastal
road near the town of Saida, which is outside UNIFIL’s
area of operations. According to preliminary
information, the attack injured six UNIFIL
peacekeepers. Three of them were transported with
minor injuries to hospital for treatment, where their
condition is said to be stable. They will be repatriated
today to France. UNIFIL forensic experts are
coordinating closely with the Lebanese Armed Forces
to determine the circumstances surrounding the
incident. This was the fifth attack against UNIFIL since
the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006).
Council members will also be aware of the attack
against a UNIFIL convoy that occurred on 27 May on
the highway to Beirut, when a remote-controlled
roadside bomb exploded, injuring six Italian
peacekeepers. Two were seriously wounded, while four
suffered light to moderate injuries. In addition, two
Lebanese civilians sustained minor injuries. This was
the first attack in more than three years. No one has
claimed responsibility for the attack.
The
Lebanese
authorities
and
UNIFIL
immediately launched an investigation, as have the
Italian authorities. These investigations are still
ongoing. The attack was condemned by all senior
political leaders across the political spectrum. The
cooperation with the Lebanese authorities in
conducting the investigation and in instituting
additional risk-mitigation measures, such as Lebanese

11-43235

Army escorts, has been good. In addition, I, as the
designated official for security in south Lebanon,
undertook to reduce the risk of a similar attack by
adopting additional protection measures, including for
military convoys and other movements inside and
outside the UNIFIL area of operations, and for
enhanced force protection. Nevertheless, it is
impossible to completely prevent such terrorist attacks.
On 15 May — and this is also covered in the
Secretary-General’s report — a large demonstration
took place on the occasion of what the Palestinians
commemorate as Nakba Day. I will not repeat in detail
the sequence of the tragic events that, according to the
information provided to UNIFIL by Lebanese
authorities, resulted in 7 persons being killed and more
than 100 injured. We have discussed our preliminary
findings on the events with the parties and, having sent
the UNIFIL investigation report to them, will do so in
more detail at the next tripartite meeting, planned for
August.
UNIFIL has also conveyed to the parties its
recommendations for preventing such incidents in the
future. Specifically, the Lebanese authorities should
carry out a full assessment of all security and other
risks of violations of resolution 1701 (2006) and of
measures required to maintain law and order before
authorizing any demonstration in the vicinity of the
Blue Line. The Lebanese Army did not authorize
demonstrations in the vicinity of the Blue Line during
the Naksa period in early June, thereby preventing a
repetition of such violence. These measures have
indeed proven to be effective, and they demonstrate yet
again the resolve and determination of the Lebanese
Armed Forces and the people of southern Lebanon to
work towards lasting peace and stability in the south.
Finally, throughout the month of June, the
Mission experienced a number of incidents of
unfriendly behaviour by individuals or groups of
individuals towards UNIFIL patrols and restricted
freedom of movement of UNIFIL. These incidents do
give me real cause for concern.
In many instances, the Lebanese side cites a
perceived infringement of the individual’s or local
community’s privacy by the UNIFIL troops taking
photos or inadvertently entering private property as the
reason for the unfriendly behaviour towards our troops.
However, not all such situations can be explained in
this way, and we cannot exclude that there may also be

7

S/PV.6592

instances when the population may be encouraged to
act in this way in an attempt to discourage UNIFIL
from carrying out its activities and thereby fulfilling its
mandate throughout the area of operations.
How has UNIFIL reacted to these events? We
have increased force protection and risk-mitigating
measures, which often means that more personnel are
required to carry out the same activities. We also
conduct more operational activities, together with the
Lebanese Armed Forces to the extent that the capacity
of the Lebanese Army allows but without limiting the
performance of UNIFIL in carrying out activities,
especially those we consider essential. The Council can
rest assured that neither terrorist attacks nor unfriendly
encounters with the population will deter UNIFIL from
carrying out its mandate. We continue to do so with the
same resolve as ever.
At this point, I would also like to convey to the
Council how greatly the Mission has benefited from
the unwavering support it has received over the years
from the Council, as expressed most strongly in
resolution 1773 (2007). On the basis of that resolution,
UNIFIL regularly reminds the parties of their
responsibilities to scrupulously respect the safety and
security of United Nations personnel and the freedom
of movement of UNIFIL and reiterates with Lebanese
interlocutors the Council’s call for closer cooperation
between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Army.
Despite the security challenges I spoke about
earlier, the security situation in the south, as I
mentioned before, remains generally relatively stable,
and south Lebanon has enjoyed the five quietest and
calmest years in many decades. This is in many ways
the result of the close cooperation between UNIFIL and
the Lebanese Army, which helped establish a new
strategic environment in southern Lebanon.
Almost five years since the adoption of resolution
1701 (2006), it is an appropriate moment to look again
at the main objectives of the resolution and how we
need to proceed in order to achieve them.
Resolution 1701 (2006) called for a full cessation
of hostilities. It also called for Israel and Lebanon to
support a permanent ceasefire and a long-term solution
of the conflict based, inter alia, on full respect for the
Blue Line by both parties and security arrangements to
prevent the resumption of hostilities, including the
establishment between the Blue Line and the Litani
River of an area free of any armed personnel, assets

8

and weapons other than those of the Government of
Lebanon and of UNIFIL.
In addition to carrying out its military operational
activities, UNIFIL established the tripartite forum, in
which it discusses with senior representatives of the
Israel Defense Forces and the Lebanese Armed Forces
violations of resolution 1701 (2006), military
operational issues and confidence-building measures
between the two sides. The tripartite forum has
developed into a key mechanism for liaison and
coordination between the parties, and both parties have
committed themselves to it and use it actively. The
forum continues to play a critical role in advancing the
Blue Line marking process, in finding practical
solutions to contentious issues and thereby in defusing
tensions and preventing the escalation of incidents in
areas along the Blue Line.
The Lebanese Armed Forces are a strategic
partner for UNIFIL in maintaining the new strategic
environment in south Lebanon and in implementing
resolution 1701 (2006). The joint Department of
Peacekeeping Operations-UNIFIL technical review,
which was completed at the beginning of 2010,
therefore recommended that a regular strategic
dialogue mechanism between UNIFIL and the
Lebanese Armed Forces be set up. The Lebanese
authorities — Government and Army — welcomed this
recommendation, and the mechanism has been
established and has taken up its work.
The process will assist the Lebanese Armed
Forces in establishing appropriate operational
capabilities for implementing tasks mandated in
resolution 1701 (2006) and will eventually facilitate
the gradual handover of responsibility to the Lebanese
Armed Forces. The strategic dialogue mechanism will
proceed on the basis of analyses of the UNIFIL and
Lebanese Army ground forces and maritime assets and
will set a series of benchmarks reflecting the
correlation between the capacity and responsibilities of
UNIFIL vis-à-vis the capacity and responsibilities of
the Lebanese Armed Forces.
With the tripartite forum and the strategic
dialogue mechanism, UNIFIL is in a good position to
advance the military operational issues mandated to it
in
resolution
1701
(2006).
The
successful
implementation of these processes will, hopefully,
ensure that the situation in south Lebanon and along

11-43235

S/PV.6592

the Blue Line will remain calm and that the cessation
of hostilities between the parties will be maintained.
Essentially, that would ensure maintaining the
status quo of relative calm, but in a precariously fragile
environment. However, I believe we — the United
Nations, UNIFIL, the Security Council and the
international community — should not be satisfied
with maintaining this status quo. Rather, the calm and
relative stability that UNIFIL and the Lebanese Army
and the Israel Defense Forces have established and
maintained across the Blue Line provide a window of
opportunity for a political process to address the issues,
which are beyond the remit of a peacekeeping mission
such as UNIFIL can support a political process by
ensuring a conducive security situation, but it cannot
replace a political, diplomatic process.
I therefore believe it is necessary to refocus all
our efforts on achieving the main objectives of
resolution 1701 (2006), namely, a permanent ceasefire
and a long-term solution to the conflict.
UNIFIL enjoys the support of the population in
the south, and the Lebanese national consensus on
resolution 1701 (2006) has been maintained. The
ministerial statement of the new Government reiterates
Lebanon’s strong commitment to resolution 1701
(2006) and to UNIFIL’s mandate. At the most recent
tripartite meeting, on 13 July, the head of the Lebanese
delegation confirmed that there has been no change in
the orders to the Lebanese Armed Forces with respect
to implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and
cooperation with UNIFIL.
While the new Government’s period in office has
been short, UNIFIL has noted that the Government and
the Army are acting in that spirit. This was confirmed
by Prime Minister Mikati in his first visit to south
Lebanon, on 16 July, which included a symbolic visit
to UNIFIL headquarters, constituting a strong
statement of support for our Mission.
The Government of Israel also remains
committed to the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006). Since the adoption of the resolution, UNIFIL
has enjoyed the unanimous support of the Security
Council for its operation in south Lebanon. That
support remains of vital importance in order for
UNIFIL to be in a strong position to continue to carry
out its mandate.

11-43235

These are key factors for continued success in the
implementation of UNIFIL’s mandate. At the same
time, however, UNIFIL’s success in eventually handing
over responsibilities to the Lebanese Army and
drawing down its own forces will ultimately depend on
a political process to resolve the issues underlying the
conflict. UNIFIL is providing a window of opportunity
that should be seized in order to make progress towards
achieving the main objectives of resolution 1701
(2006), which I reiterate, namely, the establishment of
a permanent ceasefire and a long-term solution of the
conflict.
Very soon the Council will discuss the extension
of UNIFIL’s mandate. As Head of Mission and Force
Commander of UNIFIL, I would highly appreciate the
continued support of the Security Council and in
particular its express support for the safety and
freedom of movement of UNIFIL personnel, as well as
the objectives of the strategic dialogue process.
The President: I thank Major General Asarta
Cuevas for his briefing.
I now give the
Muhammad Khalid.

floor

to

Major

General

Major General Khalid: As the Force
Commander of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), I feel honoured to have been mandated to
share in this forum my thoughts and experiences on the
role of the military component in early peacebuilding. I
will deal with the subject by first underlining the
peacebuilding process so as to ascertain the space
available for application of the military instrument.
Then I will outline its role in early peacebuilding and
how it can be achieved. At the end, I will highlight
certain areas that I feel would need attention before
mandating the deployment of the military component.
Post-conflict societies are characterized by
non-existent or very weak security mechanisms —
armies in shambles, disorganized paramilitary forces
under little or no control, abundant arms and
ammunition in private and Government possession, and
lack of trust in and legitimacy of Government control
over police and military forces. Against such a
backdrop, peacekeeping troops attempt to support the
transition of wartime security tasks and the political
and economic system by providing a peaceful and
secure environment for a sustainable and durable peace
process.

9

S/PV.6592

Since the cold war era, the concept of
peacekeeping has been entirely transformed. The
military component, apart from providing a safe and
secure environment and monitoring ceasefires between
opposing parties, carries out a host of other activities
that fall under the purview of peacebuilding. That
entails all actions to identify and support structures that
will tend to strengthen peace in order to avoid a relapse
into conflict.
Let me add that the peacebuilding process is
multidimensional, intricate and specialized in nature. It
is not necessarily the domain of the military but rather
is the specialized job of experts in this field. It involves
the process of and activities in resolving violent
conflicts and establishing sustainable peace. It focuses
on national capacity-building, which takes place in
collaboration with political, operational and tactical
fronts at national and subnational levels.
Normally, the military component is first to be
deployed in any conflict-ridden area, as other set-ups
take more time due to certain procedural delays and the
non-conducive environment.
The military component, by virtue of its
organizational strength, can absorb and facilitate other
components, besides undertaking a variety of roles to
minimize the miseries of the inhabitants of a conflict
zone. It also facilitates a jump start to the
peacebuilding process before other United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations arrive
and get established.
Likely roles of the military component in the
early peacebuilding process may include providing a
safe and secure environment, combating organized
crime, policing tasks and support to police in cases of
mass unrest, engineering tasks to restore infrastructure
to facilitate humanitarian relief efforts and initiate
certain quick-impact projects, medical outreach and
epidemic control, handling and management of
refugees, assisting security sector reform and capacitybuilding of national armed forces and police, and a
broad range of logistics and other support to United
Nations agencies and other partners engaged in
peacebuilding activities, including transport, airlift and
communications. In most phases, the military can
provide a secure and conducive environment in which
to recommence the political process through elections
or referendums or perhaps both.

10

For such a comprehensive process to proceed, an
enabling environment must be created. This is where
the role of the military component, as an enabler in the
early stages of the peacebuilding process, can play out.
Providing a security umbrella to various organs
and functionaries of the international body is the most
important function of the military. That is achieved
through observer missions for the implementation and
enforcement of peace agreements with a view to help
build confidence in the early phase, brought about
through good offices and impartial monitoring of
commitments endorsed by the parties. The
commitments may include ceasefires, border
engagements, agreed divisions of power or assets,
peace negotiations, peace or ceasefire enforcement, and
restoration of law and order. They may also include
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration as per
agreed terms, demining activities, unexploded
ordnance disposal, removal of explosives and booby
traps for the safety of peacekeepers and the local
population and other United Nations agencies, and
escort, patrol and security tasks, thereby enhancing
peacebuilders’ freedom of movement and operations.
This is in brief the context and the role where, I
believe, the military component fits in. However, if
military intervention is contemplated, the need for a
post-intervention strategy is also of paramount
importance. The objective of such a strategy must be to
help ensure that the conditions that prompted military
intervention do not repeat themselves or simply
resurface.
Before employing military instruments to resolve
problems in the post-conflict scenario, certain essential
aspects must be kept in mind in order to accrue the
desired dividends.
First, a comprehensive approach is the only way
in which military interventions as peacebuilders can
achieve success. The military must not be used as a
substitute for political engagement in the context of a
peacebuilding problem.
Secondly, correlation of ends and means is
extremely important. If the military is to be deployed,
it should be deployed with adequate strength at the
early stages and drawn down thereafter, not vice versa.
Last but not least, the military presence tends to
create a culture of dependence among the host
population, which can hinder national reconstruction

11-43235

S/PV.6592

and human resource development. Such tendencies
must be guarded against, and capacity-building in the
host country must remain a priority.
To conclude, I would say that the role of military
components in the early stages of the peacebuilding
process is inescapable and crucial. The military
components play two main roles in the early
peacebuilding process.
First, the military component provides a secure
and safe environment for other internal and external
actors to operate. Secondly, the military makes its
resources available for the attainment of the mission’s
overall objective, over and above its security functions,
during the stabilization, transition and consolidation
phases of the peacebuilding process. Being the first
component to be deployed, the military component
starts the peacebuilding, directly or indirectly, right
from Day One and provides a launchpad from which
other peacebuilding forces will be unleashed for
systematic initiation of a comprehensive process.
The President: I will now turn to Council
members. I remind colleagues to be mindful of the
lateness of the hour when speaking.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): My first words must be to
express appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Le Roy
for the guidance he has provided for this debate,
particular in organizing the Force Commanders. I want
to warmly welcome the presence of the Force
Commanders in the Council. The clarity and
incisiveness of their perspectives on the issues under
consideration bear out the wisdom and importance of
this interaction, which aims to foster greater synergy
between the field and the Security Council. Let me
commend them especially for their immeasurable
sacrifices in leading the various peace missions.
Since our last engagement with Force
Commanders, in August 2010 (6370th meeting), there
have been several important developments throughout
the United Nations system toward making our
peacekeeping efforts more effective. We have seen a
more purposeful implementation of peace agreements
and maintenance of ceasefires. We have established
two new peacekeeping missions — the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and, following the
closure of UNMIS, the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA).

11-43235

However, major challenges remain in such
critical areas as civilian protection, bridging the gaps in
capacity in human and material resources, and capping
troop casualties. The topics under consideration this
morning are therefore apt and responsive to trends in
contemporary peacekeeping discourse.
My point of departure this morning will be the
key issue of the conditionality policy of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
examined by General Prakash.
We share his assessment and views, and we
remain
convinced
that
it
is
prima
facie
counterproductive for MONUSCO to provide support
to or carry out joint operations with the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC)
where the latter has known human rights violators in
strategic and command positions. Indeed, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Roger Meece,
once noted, “the conditionality policy has resulted in
the removal of some of such FARDC commanders
involved in the perpetration of crimes against civilians
in the regions where MONUSCO has a strong
presence”.
To strengthen such positive assessments, the
conditionality
policy
must
be
adequately
complemented by sustained efforts to build the
capacity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
maintain internal security through disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation,
resettlement
and
reintegration — and, of course, security sector reform.
With structural fragmentation, absence of clear
command and control, operational weakness and
improper discipline, FARDC is often unable to
effectively provide protection for civilians. In debating
the conditionality policy, therefore, my delegation
prefers a strategic alliance between MONUSCO and
FARDC that will complement the capacity of FARDC,
retain MONUSCO’s relative oversight and ultimately
boost the operational effectiveness of the Force.
The primary expectation of civilians in the
communities where peacekeepers deploy is that they
will be afforded appropriate protection. Protection of
civilians is therefore at the heart of the mandate of
most United Nations peacekeeping missions, including
the African Union-United Nations Mission in Darfur
(UNAMID).

11

S/PV.6592

With reports of aerial bombardments, artillery
shelling and heavy fighting between the Sudanese
armed forces and armed movements, particularly in the
areas of Shangil Tobaya in Northern Darfur and Djebil
Mara in Western Darfur, deterring attacks on civilians
remains a daunting challenge in Darfur. Although the
primary responsibility to protect civilians rests with the
Sudanese authorities, greater cooperation between the
Government of the Sudan and UNAMID will
undoubtedly ensure better protection of civilians.
My delegation commends UNAMID for
employing a more robust posture to protect civilians
and for increasing active patrolling in Western Darfur.
In particular, we welcome its enhanced logistical
support to humanitarian organizations and support for
the child protection mainstreaming agenda.
Since the adoption of Council resolution 1701
(2006) and the deployment of troops of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), south
Lebanon has gradually moved toward stability. The
progress can be partly attributed to UNIFIL’s close
coordination with the Lebanese armed forces and the
Israeli Defense Forces (IDF). However, the security
situation remains very fragile. The deadly incident of
15 May along the Blue Line and the terrorist attacks on
27 May on six UNIFIL peacekeepers call for further
reflection. Yesterday there was another attack on five
peacekeepers at Sidon.
My delegation unequivocally condemns these
attacks. We call on the parties — the Lebanese armed
forces and the IDF — to fulfil their obligations under
resolution 1701 (2006) to ensure the safety and
security of UNIFIL personnel. Indeed, the parties must
leverage the regular tripartite meetings convened by
the UNIFIL Force Commander to strengthen
confidence and reinvigorate hope in the UNIFIL forces.
United Nations peacekeeping is at a critical
juncture. Meeting the demands for peacekeeping
operations has stretched the Organization’s capacity to
the limits, exerting enormous pressure, enormous
strain, on its peacekeeping efficiency. Our
peacekeeping
operations
are
increasingly
multidimensional, requiring greater coordination and
cooperation between the various constituents,
including the military, civilian police and regional and
other, informal, organizations. The challenges have
been varied, ranging from preventing the appearance of

12

conflicts to restoring peace when the conflicts
eventually do appear.
Deploying troops with the necessary training,
equipment and logistical support to effectively
undertake the complex and potentially dangerous task
faced by peacekeepers remains a key determinant of an
operation’s success. In that connection, my delegation
reiterates that adequate emphasis be placed on the
deployment of troops with the capacity to respond
adequately to the cultural nuances in each field station.
That, from our point of view, should also be a priority
when considering inter-mission cooperation, as was
recently seen in the United Nations Mission in Liberia
and the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI).
The early resolution of peace across many of our
missions is increasingly dependent on the work of
civilian experts in key areas such as the rule of law,
human rights and child protection. Recent
developments in UNAMID and UNOCI lend further
credence to the significance of building sustainable
national capacities in these areas. In this regard, we
encourage the Office of the Rule of Law and Security
Institutions to coordinate its activities with relevant
actors within and outside the United Nations, including
the non-governmental organizations that inherently
have the capacity to remain in the field well after the
conclusion of a United Nations peacekeeping mission.
As we continue to confront the diverse challenges
to peacekeeping, we must leverage the lessons learned
from previous experiences. We can begin by
identifying the issues that have most often held
missions back from assuming their full range of
capabilities. An effective early warning system can
forestall conflict, limiting threats to international peace
and security. Member States and regional bodies
should seek more effective strategies to identify and
address the deep-rooted causes of conflict within their
countries and regions. That will ultimately help to
ensure that when peace comes, it will be deeply rooted
and sustainable.
I want to affirm that Nigeria remains fully
committed to collective security, as enshrined in the
United Nations Charter. While paying tribute to those
who have paid the ultimate price in the line of duty so
that others may live in peace, let us take this
opportunity to renew our resolve as peacekeepers to

11-43235

S/PV.6592

respecting and preserving the fundamentals of United
Nations peacekeeping.
The President: Let me remind Council members
that they have the opportunity here to address
questions and comments not only to our briefers, but
also beyond, to all Force Commanders present in the
Chamber.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to start by
paying special tribute to Mr. Alain le Roy. Faced with
demanding and difficult tasks, he has done an
extraordinary job. Brazil greatly appreciates his work
in general, but I would like to make particular
reference to his constant and very constructive
interaction with troop-contributing countries, as well as
the launch, along with Ms. Malcorra, of the New
Horizon initiative. My Government thanks him for his
service and wishes him well in his future endeavours.
I would like to join in welcoming the heads of
military components to the Council, and to express my
country’s heartfelt appreciation for the excellent work
that they are doing in very challenging circumstances. I
thank the Force Commanders of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Mission in Liberia for the reflections that they
have shared with us today. Having troops and
observers in most of those missions, Brazil knows firsthand the high quality of their leadership and
commitment.
The briefings that we have heard today help us to
gain a better understanding of how the decisions we
take affect the situation on the ground. Here in New
York, we must strive to ensure that we give
peacekeepers the political guidance and support they
need to carry out their mandates. However, we must
also take care not to micromanage them or curb the
space for the creative thinking of the mission
leadership, which are just as crucial to success.
I wish to focus my remarks on the capabilitydriven approach to peacekeeping, proposed by the New
Horizon initiative. We are right to demand results from
mission leaders, but we must also give them the tools
they need to do their job. On the whole, although
important progress has been made, we should continue
to strive to get the necessary skills and capacity onto
the ground.

11-43235

The military are usually the largest component of
missions. For the local population, they are often the
face of the mission. Therefore, it is important to ensure
that they receive the necessary training in areas such as
civil-military cooperation, cultural sensitivity, conduct
and discipline. Peacekeepers will be more effective if
they are capable of relating to the local population.
In the civilian area of peacekeeping, the
harmonization of service conditions will have a
significant long-term impact on a mission’s ability to
attract and retain civilian staff of the highest calibre.
The civilian capacity review was a major contribution
to our thinking on the issue. Discussions on
implementing the recommendations should begin as
soon as possible.
To achieve sustainable peace, the Council, the
Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries
and other stakeholders must all work together to give
commanders on the ground the support they need. I
wish to assure all the Force Commanders present here
today that Brazil remains committed to that goal.
Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Our
delegation would like to begin by thanking the
presidency of the Council for organizing this meeting
with the Force Commanders, to whom I pay special
tribute. We would also like most especially to thank
Mr. Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his participation in and guidance of this
discussion’s success.
My delegation values the important work
undertaken by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Force Commanders, their staff and the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, led by
Ambassador Ogwu of Nigeria, who have made
valuable contributions in that field.
One challenge that is the subject of ongoing
interest is improving the synergy among the
Secretariat, the Security Council and troopcontributing countries. We have made progress in that
regard. At the same time, we would suggest that the
Council continue enhancing that interaction, which we
believe to be vital. Similarly, we underscore the
progress made in developing doctrine and improving
the operations of United Nations peacekeeping
missions. The dynamic of operations in the field and
the United Nations logistical capacity to ensure the
security and well-being of staff on the ground are
thereby improved.

13

S/PV.6592

With regard to the West Africa Coast Initiative to
tackle international organized crime in that region,
Columbia believes it very important to offer our
experience in that area, having deployed national
police units to work with Guinea-Bissau and Sierra
Leone. We also have an active presence in the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.

strengthening the rule of law, the implementation of
mechanisms to prevent the resurgence of conflict, and
post-conflict peacebuilding. We therefore reiterate the
need for the Council to give peacekeeping operations
clear, credible and executable mandates tailored to the
foreseen objectives and results, as well as the resources
necessary to achieve all the tasks assigned to them.

One challenge facing us is improving the capacity
to mobilize United Nations troops on the use of and
doctrine of using rotary-wing aircraft, helicopters and
fixed-wing aircraft. In that regard, we propose further
analysis of logistical, human and technological
capacities in order to optimize their results. We need to
procure high-technology teams for peacekeeping
operations,
in
particular
in
communications,
intelligence and observation in the field, for early
warning and forecasts of violence.

With respect to peacebuilding, I welcome the
progress achieved in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Liberia. In late 2011, those countries will
hold major, decisive elections, which will be a litmus
test for the missions there. Their success will determine
the eventual configuration of withdrawals from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Liberia, and
will thereby help us to elaborate strategies for
transferring security functions to the respective
Governments. In that respect, the Council must
continue to closely track the situations being addressed
by those two peacekeeping operations so that we can
incorporate appropriate changes in their mandates,
particularly in terms of logistical and operational
capacities.

Finally, we recognize the need to prioritize the
protection and defence of civilians by United Nations
forces, just as we have prioritized upholding the
principles
and
mandates
enshrined
in
the
Organization’s Charter. Only thereby can we strengthen
the relationship between the United Nations and the
forces that represent it and the populations on the
ground.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): Peacekeeping operations, which are one of the
key functions of our Organization, have in recent
demonstrated their utility and effectiveness in the
maintenance of international peace and security. In that
regard, I would like first and foremost to thank Mr. Le Roy
and the Force Commanders for their briefings.
Gabon reiterates its great appreciation of the
commitment and professionalism of the Force
Commanders and the other peacekeepers who
undertake difficult work, often in a very hostile
environment and at times with limited resources. The
enlightening briefings that we have just heard reflect
the daily realities of all peacekeeping missions
represented here and are viable indicators of the real
difficulties facing peacekeeping operations. My
delegation also appreciates receiving such information,
which enables the Council better to take necessary
decisions and adapt to evolving situations on the
ground.
We commend the incorporation in the mandates
of peacekeeping operations of new multidisciplinary
approaches, such as the protection of civilians,

14

I should like to ask a question of the Force
Commander of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. What is his assessment of the threat posed
by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)? How does he
envision cooperation among all the United Nations
missions in the region, particularly with respect to
fighting the LRA?
In conclusion, my country will continue to
support the United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We welcome interactive meetings such as today’s with
the Force Commanders in order to keep the Council
abreast of developments in their missions on the
ground and to report to us on the challenges they face.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I would like to
thank the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy for having
introduced the Force Commanders and for having
given us this opportunity to hear directly from the
people on the ground. I believe that this is particularly
important since peacekeeping really is the main tool at
the disposal of the Security Council, involves the
largest percentage of the United Nations budget and is
certainly the particular activity that occupies the
maximum amount of time of the Council.

11-43235

S/PV.6592

India has contributed more troops and police
officers to peacekeeping operations than any other
country. With more than 100,000 personnel in over
40 peacekeeping operations, we are very familiar with
what all of this entails, what is possible and what
peacekeeping operations are capable of. We have also
engaged in the normative side of this particular debate,
both in the Council and the General Assembly. A
seminar was recently held in New Delhi in the tradition
of that constructive engagement. It broke new ground
in drawing from the operational experience of
peacekeepers in the further evolution of the
peacekeeping agenda.
Peacekeeping has matured. More than 80 per cent
of peacekeeping resources today are devoted to
operations that are more than five years old. As we
launch two new missions — the first new operations in
several years — we need to take stock of the situation.
I would like to stress the following points.
The first is the lack of resources and the whole
issue of trying simply to tell people to do more with
existing or even less resources. I understand efficiency
gains; I understand the need to squeeze more; but I
think it needs to be clearly understood that operating
on shoestring budgets and with ever-increasing
mandates is certainly just not possible or effective.
Moreover, mandates need to have clarity. The
Force Commander from my country, India, noted
ambiguity in mandates and how it translates into
people lower down the command chain really not
knowing what is expected of them. I think we in the
Council owe it to ourselves and the forces that we
deploy on the ground to be clear in that respect and to
understand that mandates and resources need to be
married and in synergy. In that context, it is
particularly important that the process of interacting
with troop-contributing countries, which has already
been begun, should be carried out in a much more
intensive manner in which we have much greater
clarity on what can actually be produced and done with
the kind of resources that are being placed at the
disposal of the force that we are creating.
I would also like to highlight one other very
important element — the willingness to work in
partnerships. Here, let me draw members’ attention to
Africa. Two-thirds of the Council’s meetings and
outcomes concern Africa. It is also central to United
Nations peacekeeping. India strongly supports the

11-43235

development of greater African Union capacities in
peacekeeping. In this connection, I would like to quote
from the address of our Prime Minister at the second
India-Africa Forum summit in Addis Ababa in May. He
said:
“India
has
consistently
supported
the
development of African capacities. As a token of
our commitment to supporting Africa’s
endeavours for seeking African solutions, I am
happy to announce that India will contribute
$2 million for the African Union Mission in
Somalia.”
Similar assistance needs to be provided by other
Member States to build the African Union’s capacity in
peacekeeping. India is also committed to the early
operationalization of the African Standby Force
through special training arrangements.
We know that the weakest suffer the most in
conflict. Women and children have suffered and
continue to suffer appallingly in conflicts around the
world. The international community has not just the
responsibility but the obligation to do its utmost to
ensure the security of women and children, particularly
in conflict and post-conflict situations. Indian troops
and police officers, which include the first fully female
units deployed under the United Nations flag, will do
their utmost to protect the vulnerable in their areas of
operation.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the Force
Commanders and the men and women under their
command. It is they who turn the Council’s words into
deeds. I would also like to pay tribute to those
peacekeepers who have made the supreme sacrifice
when serving the United Nations in its efforts to create
a better and safer world.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) for arranging this meeting for the
Council today. I, too, would like to express
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for
his excellent leadership of the DPKO during a very
difficult and challenging period. We wish him all the
best in his future endeavours.
I would like to thank the Force Commanders for
their statements today. We very much appreciate the
role that they play every day in peacekeeping
operations. I want to take this opportunity to express to

15

S/PV.6592

Major General Asarta Cuevas and my French
colleagues the United States sympathy for the injuries
suffered yesterday by French peacekeeping troops in
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), and our hope that they will recover fully
and quickly. This is, of course, an all-too-clear example
of the risks that brave peacekeepers face daily as they
fulfil their roles.
To the Force Commanders, I just want to say that
we very much welcome this opportunity to hear from
them first-hand about the challenges and risks that they
face in implementing United Nations mission
mandates. The Council seeks to match mission
mandates with the needed leadership and capacity to
implement them successfully.
We are very much interested in understanding the
operational, logistical and leadership issues that Force
Commanders face. The core of every peacekeeping
mission is its people and their ability to support efforts
to build a more stable peace. We are interested in the
operational steps being taken to develop mission-wide
strategies to protect civilians, including from sexual
violence, and the role for uniformed peacekeepers as
part of the mission. We very much welcome discussion
of the innovative measures, such as firewood patrols,
community liaison assistance, issuance of cell phones
to community leaders, and response and investigative
teams that include a mix of civilian, police and military
expertise.
Just as important are the gaps that Commanders
face — the factors that either expand or constrain
logistical or leadership effectiveness in achieving their
mandates. These might be the tools to support
missions, such as doctrine, pre-deployment or
in-mission training; tools to help missions operate
efficiently, such as early-warning capacity, intelligence
and timely analysis; or tools to facilitate mobility, such
as aviation capacity and budgetary and administrative
issues.
I have a few questions for the Generals.
I would like to hear General Asarta Cuevas speak
about the military arsenal of Hizbullah. The report of
the Secretary-General of 1 July (S/2011/406) notes that
Hizbullah still maintains its own substantial, growing
and destabilizing military arsenal. I am wondering
what steps UNIFIL is taking to assist the Lebanese
armed forces in removing those illegal weapons and
armed personnel south of the Litani River.

16

I very much appreciate General Nyamvumba’s
focus on the robust presence of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) in his remarks. We express the hope that
the lessons that UNAMID has learned in establishing
such a robust presence could be shared with other
missions. I would like to hear him comment on that.
We remain very concerned about the severe
capacity gap in aviation assets faced by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and I would like to
hear General Prakash address the question of
whether — or rather how — that gap is affecting the
Mission’s ability to implement its mandate as outlined
in resolution 1991 (2011). What are the trade-offs with
the Mission’s tasks, and what is the Mission no longer
able to do?
Finally, I would like to hear from General Khalid
about inter-mission cooperation. There has been good
inter-mission cooperation between the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the United Nations
Mission in Liberia, and I wonder what lessons have
been learned from that cooperation and whether he sees
a possibility to put inter-mission cooperation to use
elsewhere.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for his
presence at today’s meeting. I have listened attentively
to the statements made by the four Force Commanders
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. I wish to
express my warm welcome to all the Force
Commanders present here at today’s meeting. They are
working under extreme difficulties all across the world,
implementing the Council’s mandates and making
contributions to world peace and security. The Chinese
delegation pays tribute to them and to all peacekeepers
all across the world.
For over 60 years United Nations peacekeeping
operations have been making great contributions to
maintaining world peace and security. In recent years,
with the changing environment, peacekeeping
operations are also faced with a series of new
challenges.
I do not have questions to raise at this time, but I
have listened to the statements of the Force
Commanders, and I want to make some comments on
principle. I wish to emphasize the following four
points.

11-43235

S/PV.6592

First, we must strengthen coordination between
peacekeeping and peacemaking. As important as
peacekeeping is, it is not a panacea. To establish lasting
peace, the key is to promote political dialogue and
reconciliation. The Secretary-General and his Special
Representatives can play a greater role in this regard in
mediation.
Secondly, it is important to strengthen
coordination and coherence between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. The parties concerned should pay
attention to and tackle the root causes of conflicts, in
particular economic and social development. A holistic
approach must be taken in considering the relationship
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and the
division of labour between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding must be clearly defined. Timely
formulation and gradual improvement of an exit
strategy are very important.
Thirdly, we must effectively implement the
mandate to protect civilians. The host countries must
bear primary responsibility for protecting civilians.
Peacekeeping operations, while implementing the
mandate of protecting civilians, should abide strictly
by the Council’s resolutions and follow the principle of
impartiality, so as not to become a party to the conflict.
At the same time, they should respect the sovereignty
of the host country, so as to do more to promote
political and national reconciliation.
Fourthly, we must also strengthen the capacitybuilding function of peacekeeping operations. We hope
that the countries with the resources and the technical
capacity to do so will increase their input so as to
provide the necessary resources and technical
guarantees for peacekeeping operations. We support
United Nations efforts to improve the speed and
efficiency of deployment of peacekeeping operations
and make them more targeted and flexible and to
strengthen coordination and partnership with host
countries and regional organizations.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): At the outset, we would
like to express our appreciation to you, Sir, for
organizing this important debate. We also wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for his laudable work
at the helm of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, and to the Force Commanders of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in

11-43235

Darfur (UNAMID), the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL) for their comprehensive
presentations.
Lebanon
believes
that
United
Nations
peacekeeping operations require a partnership among
the Security Council, the Secretariat, troopcontributing countries and host countries. After paying
careful attention to the presentations of the Force
Commanders, we would like to salute their dedication
and service for peace. This direct interaction avails us
the opportunity to understand the urgent needs from the
field and in turn helps the Council to better respond to
those needs.
I have two questions. One is similar to that asked
by the delegation of the United States concerning
cooperation between MONUSCO and UNAMID.
Perhaps General Nyamvumba could give us his
thoughts about the major logistical challenges facing
UNAMID.
In our region, the Middle East, an end to the
Israeli occupation in Palestine, Syria and the remaining
parts of Lebanon — the root cause of the conflict — is
a prerequisite for any comprehensive resolution and
successful exit of United Nations peacekeeping
missions.
Everyone has referred to what happened
yesterday in the south of Lebanon. When a
peacekeeping mission is tested and peacekeepers
attacked, only solidarity and determination remain key
for putting an end to any kind of recurrence. In this
context
Lebanon
expressed
its
unequivocal
condemnation of the attack. Suffice it to mention here
that the President of the Republic of Lebanon, General
Michel Sleiman, made a statement in which he
condemned the attack and urged authorities “to
multiply efforts to uncover the perpetrators and punish
them”.
He said that in Beirut, and here in New York my
delegation associated itself with the press statement
issued by the Security Council to condemn the attack
(SC/10341). My delegation expresses sincere sympathy
to the injured peacekeepers and their families, and we
are confident that General Asarta Cuevas will convey
our deep appreciation to the men and women working
in UNIFIL.

17

S/PV.6592

Almost five years after the adoption of resolution
1701 (2006), the Government of Lebanon is strongly
committed to the implementation of that resolution in
its entirety. We call on the international community to
put an end to Israeli violations of our sovereignty by
land, air and sea. In his most recent report
(S/2011/406), the Secretary-General refers to those
violations and calls for their immediate cessation, since
they undermine not only the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006), but also the work and
credibility of UNIFIL and the authority of the
Lebanese Armed Forces.
Only two days after the vote of confidence in the
new Government, the Prime Minister of Lebanon
visited southern Lebanon and UNIFIL headquarters.
During that visit, he acknowledged the important role
that UNIFIL is playing in the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006). In that regard, we sent a letter
two days ago requesting a renewal of UNIFIL’s
mandate with no amendments.
When Major General Asarta Cuevas spoke about
strategic dialogue and cooperation, he referred to the
consultations that took place last week. Let me
reiterate before the Council what my delegation had to
say regarding this. The Lebanese army is fully engaged
in a strategic dialogue with UNIFIL. Lebanon
commends the efforts and sacrifices of the UNIFIL
forces operating in South Lebanon, and expresses its
appreciation to all contributing countries. It attaches
great importance to strengthening coordination and
cooperation with UNIFIL, in accordance with the
agreed rules of engagement, in order to ensure proper
implementation of the mission entrusted to it.
Assistance in building up the capabilities of the
Lebanese Armed Forces is necessary. A stronger
Lebanese army would enable the Lebanese
Government to continue to extend its authority over its
territory.
I should like to ask Major General Asarta Cuevas
a question. What, in his opinion, would be the best way
to prevent disproportionate use of force by Israel along
the Blue Line, similar to what happened on 15 May,
when civilian demonstrators were shot at, despite the
fact that they had not crossed the Blue Line?
The President: I suggest we interrupt the list of
speakers and turn to the Force Commanders. I call first
on Lieutenant General Prakash.

18

Lieutenant General Prakash: Of the two
questions asked of me, the first, from the representative
of Gabon, concerned my assessment of the threat of the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) in the region, and what
cooperation can happen between the interregional
missions to neutralize it.
The threat of the LRA in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is real. While its numbers are
not large, the threat cannot be wished away. On
average, we get reports of about 15 to 20 incidents of
LRA activity every month. Over a period of time, the
brutality of the attacks has lessened, the number of
killings has fallen, and the number of civilians being
abducted has also been greatly reduced. This reduction
in the LRA’s activity can, to a great extent, be
attributed to a number of proactive operations that the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
has been undertaking in the area.
That said, I would reiterate that the threat is real
and cannot be wished away. The fact is that the terrain
is rugged, the numbers they operate in are small, the
areas where they operate are inaccessible, and the
borders are porous. We have established a joint
intelligence operations centre in Dungu that became
operational this year and is a step towards sharing
information between the partners: the Uganda People’s
Defence Force, the Forces armées de la République
Démocratique du Congo and our mission, MONUSCO.
Also, in May, we had an inter-mission force
commanders’ conference in Entebbe where we shared
information about the LRA. That said, this is not
enough, and there is more scope for sharing
information and conducting more effective operations
against the LRA, provided we are given the right kind
of resources to do it.
The second question was about the existing
capability gap in our aviation assets and how it affects
the Mission. The non-availability of aviation assets —
both utility and attack helicopters — is of great
concern for the Mission. As the years have gone by, the
negative activity has shifted west, away from the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and more
towards the jungles, to areas that are accessible only by
helicopter. The Council is well aware of the fact that
there is no road infrastructure in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Today, of 93 bases that we have
in the country, 31 are air-supported; that is, one-third
of the temporary operating bases/company operating

11-43235

S/PV.6592

bases are in areas that can be logistically supplied only
by air assets. If we do not get the right kind of air
assets to support those bases, not only will we not be in
a position to establish more bases that are required in
inaccessible areas, but we will find it difficult to
support even the existing 31 bases.
The fact that since 4 July we have had no attack
helicopters has greatly reduced our deterrence
capability against the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda in the Kivus. We have no
capability for undertaking any proactive actions against
the armed groups in the Kivus. Since the elections are
approaching, we also feel that future requirements for
air assets are going to be much higher. There will be
conflict between meeting the requirements for
protecting civilians and for transporting electoral
material. That is when we will be totally stretched, and
I feel at this stage that our ability to do our basic task
of protecting civilians will also be highly constrained.
The President: Let me remind the Council of the
lateness of the hour. Military people are known for
being succinct and to the point; I do not know if the
same can be said of us diplomats. I would appeal to the
Council to make the best use of the time available to
us, and to limit all our statements. We have another
seven Council members left to speak, and we should
limit our statements to what is absolutely necessary for
the remaining time.
Let me now turn to Major General Asarta Cuevas.
Major General Asarta Cuevas (spoke in
Spanish): Please allow me to answer the questions in
my own language, Spanish, so that I can respond more
precisely.
Concerning the so-called Hizbullah arsenal, in the
mandate in resolution 1701 (2006), the primary
responsibility to ensure that there are no weapons other
than those belonging to the Lebanese Armed Forces
and UNIFIL falls to the Government of Lebanon and
the Lebanese Armed Forces. Under our mandate, under
resolution 1701 (2006), the primary responsibility for
ensuring that there is no type of weapon other than
those of the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL in
UNIFIL’s area of operation falls on the Government of
Lebanon and the Lebanese Armed Forces. Under our
mandate, UNIFIL cannot go into private homes or onto
private property unless there is credible evidence and
an immediate threat relating to a violation of resolution
1701 (2006).

11-43235

Our troops which are deployed in southern
Lebanon, between the Litani river and the Blue Line,
consist of about 12,500 soldiers and more than 1,000
civilians. Those soldiers, who are from 35 different
countries, are involved in between 10,000 to 12,000
operational activities a month. During those
operational activities, we have discovered, in the five
years since the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006),
stores of ammunition, bunkers and weapons, but all of
that predates the conflict — the 2006 war. To date also,
taking into account the fact that we cannot go onto
private property or search homes — that is an
obligation of the Lebanese Government and the
Lebanese Armed Forces — there has been no evidence
of the illegal trafficking of weapons. What I mean by
that is that neither I personally nor any of my soldiers
have seen the arsenals that have been referred to. We
would like to see them to determine if they do in fact
exist.
I should like to say also that the most recent
launching of rockets from our area of operations
against Israel took place in October 2009, so for almost
two years now, thanks to the efforts of the population
of the south, the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL,
the cessation of hostilities has been maintained and
there have been no rocket launchings against Israel.
Turning to the second question, which was asked
by the representative of Lebanon, I should like to refer
to the recommendations that UNIFIL made to the
parties following the tragic incidents that took place on
15 May, Nakba Day, this year. Those recommendations
included the fact that only the Lebanese authorities are
responsible for law and order within Lebanon, and that
they had to take the measures necessary to prevent
incidents along the Blue Line, which, as is well known,
is a very sensitive area, where most incidents take
place; it has been the line of withdrawal of the Israeli
forces since the war of 2000. Therefore, to prevent
such incidents from occurring, what is necessary is
comprehensive oversight of the population.
Also in our recommendations, which I will read
word for word, we said that the Israeli forces should
refrain from responding in such situations, unless it is
clearly required for their own immediate self-defence,
taking into account the fact that both countries,
Lebanon and Israel, have the right to self-defence. But
the Israel Defense Forces must not resort to the
excessive use of force and must always take action that
is commensurate with the offence, and therefore they

19

S/PV.6592

should also include equipment, units and experts for
controlling demonstrators and for crowd control.
We also said that both countries — Israel and
Lebanon — should ensure that in these types of
situations, they use troops that are properly trained and
equipped to try to prevent this type of incident from
occurring. In the tripartite meetings and in the
meetings I have with the parties, I always say the same
thing:
(spoke in English)
Do not give, do not take.
(spoke in Spanish)
Do not provoke, and do not react to any provocation.
That is the best way of avoiding incidents along the
Blue Line.
I think that I have answered the questions, but if
further clarifications are required, I would be happy to
provide them.
The President: I now give the floor to
Lieutenant-General Nyamvumba, to whom two
questions were also addressed.
Lieutenant-General Nyamvumba: Two questions
were posed to me, one by the representative of the
United States and the other by the representative of
Lebanon.
The United States question was whether we could
share our experience with other missions. Indeed, that
is very relevant, and part of the purpose of our
gathering here in New York is, among others, to share
our experiences from different missions. But besides
that, we also have a forum, particularly what we refer
to as inter-mission cooperation. I express my
appreciation to General Prakash, who hosted our
regional Force Commanders’ meeting in Entebbe in
May. We will take note of this and will continue to
share our experiences with other missions, particularly
those that have a protection of civilians mandate. We
also welcome other experiences from other missions.
On the issue of the major logistical challenges
facing the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), I did outline some of
them, but, to be more specific, one is the long supply
lines. All present are aware that the major seaport is in
Port Sudan, which is about 2,000 kilometres from
Darfur, with little or no infrastructure. In terms of our

20

operations, the biggest hurdle is the lack of
infrastructure on the ground. During the rainy season,
as I said earlier, our patrols and our activities actually
drop drastically because of the inaccessibility of areas.
Even as I speak, we have dropped from 160 daily
patrols to about 100 because of the impassability of
roads.
Finally, there is the issue of aviation capacity.
There is still a very big gap with regard to utility
helicopters. I will take this opportunity to appeal to
those that have the means to support the mission to
make some of those capacities available, because,
indeed, they go a long way towards enhancing the
capabilities of the mission.
The President: I now give the floor to MajorGeneral Khalid.
Major-General Khalid: Questions were asked of
me by the representatives of the United States and
Lebanon. I think that inter-mission cooperation is of
paramount importance. I say so because the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) has
no reserve, and with the number of missions across the
globe, they do not have enough forces to deal with
every unforeseen eventuality.
Let me tell the House that I am going to speak to
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
(C-34) tomorrow on the same topic, which has been
given to me by DPKO, and I will be touching in detail
upon that issue in my speech tomorrow.
But just to reply in brief with respect to the
lessons learned: we sent an infantry battalion and Mi-8
helicopters to the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (UNOCI) in November. The infantry battalion
came back in January, the utility helicopters came back
in June; the gunship helicopters were sent in March
and are still there. I am glad to tell you that both
UNOCI and the United Nations Mission in Liberia are
making use of those Mi-24 gunships for joint tasking
and joint border patrolling.
Turning to lessons learned, they come, in effect,
under four major headings, or concerns: legality,
logistics, military capabilities and coordination. I will
touch on each of these very briefly.
By legality, I mean saving time at the last minute
regarding the apprehensions of the troop-contributing
countries. This should form part of the memoranda of
understanding.

11-43235

S/PV.6592

Turning to logistics, missions should cater for,
coordinate and perhaps even at times deal with
dumping of rations or fuel prior to the launching of
missions so that incoming troops do not face any
problems. At the level of the Department of
Peacekeeping
Operations
at
United
Nations
Headquarters, a comprehensive strategy must be
applied — and I am sure this is the case. It must be
reviewed periodically in consultation with all missions
which have been tasked with inter-mission cooperation.
There may not be a giant border in all cases of intermission cooperation, and road conditions may not be
good or there may not be any roads at all, so this must
be catered for by land, air and sea so as to avoid any
unnecessary delays at the last minute, which is
normally a critical stage. The logistics must be clearly
defined.
For better coordination, all such missions must
have inter-mission coordination cells, which should
maintain contact with a view to achieving better
coordination and remaining up to date with the latest
developments.
Last but not least, in cases where different
languages are spoken in the missions and countries
concerned, a team of interpreters must be present to
ensure that forces encounter no problems upon arrival
and that they are put to effective use.
The President: I will now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): I thank the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Alain Le Roy, the head of the Office of Military
Affairs, Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye, and the
Force Commanders for their informative statements
this morning.
We welcome the Force Commanders who have
joined us today in the Council. New York is indeed far
from the battlefield, so the opportunity to hear
firsthand from the military leadership from the field is
indeed valuable. We see merit in convening such
engagements on a regular basis, and we thank the
German delegation for this initiative.
The Security Council has stated clearly in the
past — and South Africa fully endorses this view —
that United Nations peacekeeping operations are
deployed only as an accompaniment and not as an

11-43235

alternative to political strategies for the resolution of
conflicts.
Over the years, peacekeeping has become a
complex and multifaceted undertaking due to the
changing nature of conflicts. We are mindful of the
compounding effects and challenges prevailing in the
era of intra-State conflicts. In most cases, belligerents
are increasingly well resourced and equipped, often
wield great influence and do not conform to the rules
of engagement. No longer are conflict-affected areas
only failed States; they possess strong military
capacities and robust political leadership.
In response to these challenges, the United
Nations has to act with the necessary dynamism and
agility. It is therefore critical, for us in the Council and
the United Nations political and military leadership on
the ground, to be continuously concerned with
mobilizing and maintaining the political support of all
stakeholders, especially of those nations in which the
Council mandates peacekeeping missions, and to
respect the sovereignty of all States.
The Council also has a particularly important role
throughout a mission’s lifespan to support efforts to
improve cooperation and coordination with regional
and subregional organizations and other partners. The
Security Council’s responses to the crises on the
African continent are a constant reminder of the
ongoing need for greater cooperation and coordination
with regional organizations, especially the African
Union. Nothing will replace African leadership and
solutions for African problems.
Today we should reflect on, inter alia, our ability
to optimally leverage the security umbrella provided by
peacekeeping operations in the field and to find
political solutions to conflicts. The Council should
adopt coherent, comprehensive strategies that
effectively translate the mandates of peacekeeping
operations into clear, credible and achievable
outcomes. We should reflect on ensuring that
operations are sufficiently matched with appropriate
resources and that they are adequately prepared and
deployed in a timely manner at the desired operational
strength and capacity. We should make sure that the
monitoring
and
evaluation
mechanisms
for
peacekeeping operations are adequate and that the
Council is sufficiently aware of the resource and field
support implications of its decisions.

21

S/PV.6592

These are just some of the important issues that
could help our collective efforts to understand the
challenges that we face at a military level across the
spectrum of peacekeeping operations. We believe that
by collectively addressing these issues we will make a
significant contribution to improving the overall
performance of United Nations peacekeeping.
Protecting the lives of ordinary civilians, who are
all too often the innocent victims of instability and
strife in conflict zones, is paramount. International law
provides that the primary responsibility to protect
civilians rests with the States. The protection of
civilians is by its nature politically very sensitive, yet it
is a critical and vital mandated task. Given the nature
of recent conflicts, the protection of civilians becomes
a necessity, and the role of regional organizations and
the international community is even more important.
We are encouraged by ongoing efforts to address
the shortage of military assets such as helicopters. We
cannot afford to deploy troops in foreign territories and
then expect them to be everywhere at once without the
necessary resources or, in some cases, when not
operating at full strength. We owe it to our troops on
the ground to ensure that they receive the desired level
of support.
However, we must always emphasize the
importance of United Nations peacekeeping operations
always acting in accordance with the principles of
impartiality, as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and in accordance with international law and
human rights law.
In conclusion, my delegation pays tribute to all
the men and women in uniform who have served and
who continue to serve in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and we commend their dedication and
courage. We pay special tribute to those who have paid
the ultimate price in the service of peace and humanity.
Mr. Bonne (France) (spoke in French): I too wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
meeting, which has become a regular feature, as it
provides a rare but valuable opportunity to exchange
with the force commanders and to hear the views from
the field.
I thank the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Force Commanders of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the

22

United Nations-African Union Hybrid Mission in
Darfur (UNAMID), the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL) for their briefings.
First, I would like to recall France’s commitment
to peacekeeping, which is one of the most important
and certainly most symbolic activities of the United
Nations. Here I would like first of all to commend the
exceptional work carried out by the Blue Helmets on
the ground in often difficult and dangerous conditions,
where no one else goes, in order to implement
mandates whose complexity directly reflects that of the
crises that our Organization seeks to tackle.
France wishes to continue participating in efforts
to improve the functioning of peacekeeping operations.
Since their inception, these operations have been the
privileged instrument through which the Council
exercises its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Improving the
effectiveness of such operations is thus a matter of
strategic importance.
In following up the 2009 initiative by France and
the United Kingdom, our goal remains to improve the
political and military monitoring of operations by the
Security Council, to ensure greater effectiveness in the
logistical and financial management of operations, to
clarify doctrine with regard to a number of complex
issues such as the protection of civilians, and to clarify,
and rationalize as far as possible, mandates, as
necessary. That is the purpose of the regular
consultations that the Council now holds on crosscutting issues concerning peacekeeping. We believe
that they should continue.
With regard to all of the issues I just raised, we
believe that we have made progress. We welcome in
particular the implementation of the global field
support strategy. We would also like to welcome the
Senior Advisory Group’s report on strengthening
civilian
capacity
in
post-conflict
situations
(S/2011/85). We believe that it will make it possible to
amend the way that peacekeeping operations function
in terms of such important issues as the economic
impact of operations on national development and the
role of women in peacekeeping.
We will therefore continue our work, especially
in the area of strengthening the chain of command in
peacekeeping operations, improving cooperation with
troop contributors and providing for more rigorous

11-43235

S/PV.6592

financial follow-up in support of peacekeeping. I note
that the budget for peacekeeping operations has soared
in recent years. It is true that the needs played a big
role in this, but it is also true that in a tight budgetary
climate for financial contributors, it is essential that we
have the means to manage the budget in a responsible
and controlled manner.
I, too, have some questions to ask the Force
Commanders present here today. First, I have a general
question. Are the reform efforts undertaken in New
York felt in the field? Do the practices on the ground
change as a result of decisions taken or
recommendations made in the Council? How can we in
the Council better take into account the views from the
field and the feedback from Force Commanders?
More specifically, I have questions for Major
General Asarta Cuevas on UNIFIL. We, too, firmly
condemn, of course, the attacks on UNIFIL troops. We
appreciate the solidarity expressed after yesterday’s
attack, in which our soldiers were victims. Of course,
we will not tolerate the security and safety of military
and civilian staff deployed in Lebanon being furthered
threatened. We understand the difficulty of the task at
hand, but what can we do to ensure that the soldiers in
the field are better protected? Also, how can we
enhance cooperation with the Lebanese Armed Forces?
And how can we ensure that the tasks currently carried
out by UNIFIL are progressively handed over?
My question for the Force Commander of
MONUSCO concerns the adaptation of the civilian
protection strategy in the current context of preparing
for elections. In this pre-electoral climate, is there any
need to change the force’s approach and its civilian
protection strategy, given the constraints that we have
been advised of?
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing
this briefing. We thank the Under-Secretary-General
for his comments and the Force Commanders of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the United
Nations Mission in Liberia, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for their insightful
remarks. We also welcome the presence of the other
Force Commanders of
the United Nations
peacekeeping operations and praise their commitments

11-43235

and efforts, as well as the outstanding work of all the
personnel in peacekeeping missions.
One of the key recurring issues in discussions on
peacekeeping has been the need for the Council to
provide peacekeeping missions with clear, credible and
achievable mandates matched by adequate resources in
order to fulfil their mandated tasks. Bringing timely
and relevant information to the Council is therefore
indispensable for decision-making. To that end, we
emphasize that each resolution needs to be clearly and
accurately reflected in the concept of operations during
its implementation.
Starting at the beginning of the year, significant
documents on the interrelation between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding and between security and
development have been released. Discussions on these
issues must identify a practical way forward for the
main challenges and obstacles and offer solutions for
capacity-development, coordination and field guidance.
The growing complexity of tasks entrusted to
peacekeeping missions and the scarcity of specific
resources, in particular civilian support capacities, can
place the success of a mission at risk. Bosnia and
Herzegovina welcomes activities related to the review
of the international civilian capacities. We believe that
ongoing activities with regard to the recommendations
of and discussions on this study will lead towards
concrete improvements and practical and feasible
proposals in this area. Moreover, cooperation between
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support should bring about viable
solutions, positive changes and tangible results on the
ground.
In this regard, we underline the importance of
cooperation, consultation and exchange of views with
troop- and police-contributing countries. Mobilizing
Member States’ support is essential for dealing with a
capability-driven approach that concentrates on skills,
equipment and capacity.
It is evident that missions with protection
mandates include diverse activities aimed at ensuring
the safety and physical protection of civilian
populations.
Information-gathering,
timely
and
accurate data about the local situation and
circumstances, and their analysis are crucial.
Nevertheless, missions should have appropriate
resources to analyse those data and to assist in
restoring an environment in which the host State is able

23

S/PV.6592

to exercise its primary responsibility to protect its
citizens. This aspect certainly includes other
processes — such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, security sector reform, supporting
electoral processes and the empowerment of local
communities — in order to facilitate the transition to
sustainable peacebuilding.
The need to implement an effective exit strategy
must be coordinated with the quality of personnel and
equipment and linked to corresponding operational
mandates and objectives. The cultural sensitivities of
the area of deployment should also be taken into
account
in
order
to
avoid
unnecessary
misunderstandings between a mission and the host
country and its communities.
This year we have witnessed the authorization of
two new missions: the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei and the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan. Bosnia and Herzegovina is
of the view that the Organization needs to perform to
the best of its ability to apply its know-how and the
lessons learned from previous peacekeeping missions,
while the Council must provide the missions with the
strategic guidance and adequate support they need. In
that regard, the Mission in South Sudan has to
contribute to improving governance capacity and the
rule of law.
The mandate is undoubtedly of vital importance
in providing guidance for the future reconfiguration of
a mission. Developments on the ground must be taken
into account, making the mandate of a mission more
realistic and attainable.
Finally, we emphasize that a peacekeeping
mission is part of the political solution to conflict, but
that it cannot be a substitute for the solution.
Therefore, activities on the ground must be
strengthened, together with efforts on preventive
diplomacy, early warning or conflict mediation, and
focused on national priorities and national actors.
Paying attention to those aspects needs to be an
integral part of each peacekeeping mission in order to
avoid the recurrence of conflict, contribute to a
country’s development and lasting peace and, above
all, guarantee international security.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I will try to be
very brief. I thank Ambassador Wittig for inviting
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy and the Force
Commanders from the African Union-United Nations

24

Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) to brief
the Council. I would like to thank them for their
insights this morning, and more importantly for the
work of the Force Commanders and police
commissioners and the hard work of all the women and
men who are under their command, frequently, as we
know, in very challenging circumstances and at great
personal risk. These risks were highlighted by the
recent attacks on UNIFIL. I join others in condemning
the attack earlier this week and in wishing a speedy
recovery to those who were injured.
The United Kingdom very much supports the
ongoing initiative, which has become something of a
tradition now, to ensure that force commanders and
police commissioners have an opportunity to brief the
Council during their annual conference in New York. It
is important to ensure that we do as much as is feasible
to improve the Council’s understanding of the
operational demands placed on troops and police by the
peacekeeping resolutions we write.
As we demonstrated during our November
presidency of the Council, we have access to new
technology to ensure that we can hear from operational
commanders more frequently, and we believe that we
should take up that opportunity on a more regular
basis. It will be important that we can hear in due
course from the new Force Commander of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei.
In the light of what I have heard from the Force
Commanders and from colleagues on the Council, I
would like to make observations on four brief points.
First is the protection of civilians. I took from the
presentation of General Nyamvumba a clear message
about the importance of the responsibility to protect
civilians under attack or threat of attack. That is
fundamental to peacekeeping responsibilities. I am
interested here in the linkage between that and the use
of a robust posture — a concept which is well
understood among UNAMID senior leadership. I am
aware that for some this is a controversial issue, but I
join my Nigerian colleague in expressing robust
support for robust posture. I am aware that the
Secretary-General has referred to UNAMID’s
robustness as having contributed to a reduction in

11-43235

S/PV.6592

attacks on the Mission, and I think that is an important
point.
Second is the impact of conditionality policy. I
listened to General Prakash’s remarks on conditionality
with great interest. Conditionality is a requirement to
ensure that peacekeepers are not supporting activities
that fall outside international humanitarian law. The
application of such a policy must, obviously, be
rigorous.
But we have to also keep an eye on operational
effectiveness. General Prakash spoke about the balance
between the desirable and the feasible. I am interested
in the concept of that balance — how to strike it — if
there is time, but I appreciate the fact that we are
running against the clock. I would be interested in
General Prakash’s view as to whether there are useful
general principles for this balance that can be
identified for wider application, or whether this is
something that needs to be determined very much on
the ground.
General Prakash also gave some useful guidelines
about implementing conditionality, in particular that it
is easier to implement at the start rather than
downstream. I think that is an important consideration
in the light of the new peacekeeping operation under
way in Southern Sudan.
My third observation is about inter-mission
cooperation, where I would briefly like to echo my
Nigerian colleague once again, and my United States
colleague, in expressing strong support for the
principle of inter-mission cooperation. There are
situations where this makes good operational sense,
and the asset-sharing between UNMIL and the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) is an
important example. I think the potential for this needs
to be fully explored.
My final observation is on clear mandates. I think
it was my Indian colleague who spoke about the
importance of clear mandates. We have all referred to
the risks and hardships that our peacekeeping
operations have to endure. I think the least that we can
do is to provide the peacekeeping missions with clear
mandates. It is all too easy for us around the Council
table to try and bridge differences through ambiguity
or elaborate wording. We always need to be mindful of
the problems this can pose to peacekeeping operations
in the field as they carry out their important work.

11-43235

Finally, listening to the Force Commanders this
morning, I was reminded once again of the enormous
value that we get from the direct view from the field. I
would like to thank them very much for taking the time
from their annual conference to speak to the Council. I
hope we will be able to hear from them in the future on
a regular basis.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I will try to be brief, given the time
constraints.
We are pleased to again welcome here the Force
Commanders of the United Nations peacekeeping
missions. It is heartening to see this kind of dialogue,
which was initially proposed by the Russian Federation
last year during its presidency of the Council, put into
practice. I would like to here support my British
colleague, who has enriched the practice. The Council
now has the opportunity for more frequent such
meetings using videoconferencing and other modern
technology. Members of the Council should check our
watches with those of our military colleagues to
examine the current problems in the field that are truly
being faced by peacekeepers, and the military
challenges. This practice will ultimately ensure that the
Council is provided with effective military expertise.
I will not go over the importance we attach to
peacekeeping. Like many colleagues, we believe it is a
truly crucial tool of the United Nations for the
maintenance of peace and security. Our peacekeepers
participate in many peacekeeping operations in the
Middle East and various regions of Africa and in Haiti.
We are aware that United Nations peacekeeping is not
fixed in place. It continues to be actively needed. As
has been noted, there are two new peacekeeping
operations in the Abyei region and in South Sudan.
In our view, people in military uniforms, who
make up two thirds of the peacekeepers, play a leading
role in terms of addressing three crucial tasks:
supporting efforts of national Governments to stabilize
the situation and restore peace, protecting civilians,
and monitoring compliance with ceasefire agreements.
But United Nations peacekeeping activities continue to
evolve, including from both conceptual and operational
perspectives. Therefore it is important to adapt in order
to deal with current problems and respond to new
political realities.
Many of the speakers here today have talked
about the fact that there are new challenges and what

25

S/PV.6592

kind of challenges there are — challenges that require
joint decisions between military actors and the
diplomats of the Security Council.

Our hope is that this meeting will make it
possible to work together on further enhancing United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

We therefore believe that there are several
general points — for example, the unconventional
situations faced by the Blue Helmets. But there are
unwavering
principles
regarding
peacekeeping.
Peacekeepers must strictly abide by their mandates and
avoid involvement in any political conflict or silent
support to a party to a conflict. Such action could lead
to extremely negative consequences and undermine the
reputation of the United Nations.

Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like others, we
believe that peacekeeping and peacebuilding are truly
at the crux of the United Nations today. All members
know how deeply my country is committed to these
tasks. We have been active in several missions during
the past 30 years. We therefore thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this very timely debate. It
is extremely useful to have this opportunity to interact
with Force Commanders and to hear their points of
view directly, so I thank the Generals for their very
comprehensive presentations, which were extremely
useful, as were the answers that they gave to some of
the questions raised.

Clearly, we support comments made by other
colleagues that the mandates of peacekeeping
operations must be clear, feasible and in keeping with
the situations. Therefore, there is still a need to address
the issue of ensuring the necessary level of military
advice for the steps undertaken within United Nations
peacekeeping.
Again we recall our proposal to revitalize the
activities of the Military Staff Committee, which could
elaborate recommendations on operational aspects of
peacekeeping and take part in missions to assess the
preparedness of contingents and infrastructure for
peacekeeping operations. In turn, this would make it
possible to provide the Council with up-to-date
information.
Obviously, the issue of enhancing United Nations
peacekeeping requires more effectively tapping into the
resources of regional organizations and engaging them,
since we agree that peacekeeping is an ancillary
function to the primary functions of the Governments
of countries, for example, engaging the forces of that
State or Government.
The shortfall of financial, logistical and technical
resources means that there is a need to leverage
existing capacities. Therefore we believe it is important
to clearly distinguish between functions in
peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding. Under
current peacekeeping mandates those are clearly
linked, but United Nations peacekeepers should only
be given the initial tasks of peacebuilding. The process
of socio-economic reconstruction and related tasks
must be assigned to more specialized structures of the
United Nations system in areas of development, and
also regional organizations with the relevant capacities.

26

However, let me pay tribute and commend all the
women and men who are in missions, the Force
Commanders and the Police Commissioners for the
way in which they carry out their tasks, often — as we
have already heard today — in very difficult
conditions. They deserve our constant support.
I have a couple of comments on what has been
said, and I endorse much, if not everything, that has
already been said, so I will be brief.
The conditionality policy can be used as a tool
but, as was underlined by Lieutenant General Prakash,
some caution is needed in its application. The issue for
us — as he himself said — is that there is scope for
development and refinement in the conditionality
dimension and the positive and negative elements it
entails. I fully agree with him that there is a problem if
the application of the conditionality starts to have a
negative impact on mission operational activities. I
also thank Lieutenant General Prakash for his reference
to the threat of the Lord’s Resistance Army. We
ourselves suggested the useful debate that we had on
that last week (see S/PV.6588).
Moving on to the protection of civilians, to which
we all attach the utmost importance, there has been
significant improvement over the years on that very
important dimension. We commend the efforts of the
Secretariat and the positive progress made by missions
in that area. To Lieutenant General Nyamvumba, I
would say that the issue is to what extent a mission, if
not mandated in that sense, should use force to protect
civilians in a non-permissive environment.

11-43235

S/PV.6592

My third comment is addressed to Major General
Asarta Cuevas. Again like others, we condemn the
attacks on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) yesterday and in May, which
unfortunately took lives. We consider the situation
unacceptable, and the parties should abide by United
Nations resolutions and by their responsibilities. Our
French colleague raised the important issue of how we
can best ensure the protection of the soldiers in a very
difficult situation. As the General mentioned the other
day, last week we had a very useful debate on the
situation in Lebanon and it is very clear that the
presence of UNIFIL has had a very important and
positive impact on creating a stable and calm situation,
albeit still very fragile. I think that that there was broad
consensus that UNIFIL’s presence in the area is still an
extremely important element.
As I stated during that debate — and we are very
happy about it — we will shortly reinforce the
Portuguese contingent within UNIFIL with 12 officers
from Timor-Leste. I think that that also has a very
symbolic dimension to it because Timor-Leste, being a
country where there is still a United Nations mission,
for its part it is already participating in other United
Nations missions.
I thank Major General Khalid for his statement
and his answers. I think that the issue of strong intermission cooperation is extremely important and can be
decisive in some areas. Of course, I share his view of
the role in early peacebuilding efforts in keeping law
and order, allowing for people to return to their normal
livelihoods and, obviously, getting a political process
under way. We often say that peacekeepers are the first
peacebuilders as long as there is a peace to keep and
build. But I think that that is a useful way of looking at
it.
Here, I conclude that — and this has been stated
before — missions need the means, tools, adequate
training and leadership, but, as our South African
colleague stressed, there is a need for an overall
political and coherent strategy in order for missions to
do their job properly.

I think that it will, indeed, become a tradition.
Secondly, I express high appreciation of their difficult
service in very demanding circumstances and, of
course, through them, of the 120,000 men and women
in the field. Thirdly, I would like to join others in
paying tribute to Alain Le Roy. He has just left the
Chamber, but he knows how highly we regard his
outstanding commitment and leadership in managing
the peacekeeping operations and in taking forward the
challenges of adapting them to the new requirements.
Let us now turn to the questions and answers.
There was one from the representative of France, I
think, of an overarching nature, that is, the question of
reform and how that impacts on missions on the
ground. I take it that it also refers to the New Horizon
agenda. Following a hint by Alain Le Roy, I would
suggest that, in accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, we invite
Major General Obi, Force Commander of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan, and Major General
Ramos Pereira, Force Commander of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, to participate in
this meeting and to address those questions because we
can diversify a little and give them an opportunity to
respond on the reform issue.
I give the floor to Major General Ramos Pereira
to answer the question on reform put by the French
representative.
Major General Ramos Pereira: As the Force
Commander of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, I now face the challenge of
implementing the new mandate that the Security
Council is seeking on reform. I would like to say that
the situation in Haiti is still stable and under control.
For me and my troops, it is very good to have a very
clear mandate with guidance and the capacity to fulfil
our mission. It is important also to mention that, as the
Council is fully aware, the environment in Haiti is
volatile, so it has to account for the situation there.
If there are more questions, I am available to
answer them.
The President: I give the floor to Major General

The President: Due to the lateness of the hour, I
will skip my national statement. Most of it has already
been covered by others. I will just make three brief
remarks.

Major General Obi: I am the Force Commander
of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan.

First, I thank the Force Commanders for being
with us and giving us this opportunity for an exchange.

I would like to say that the reforms introduced so
far have had a very positive impact on our operations

11-43235

Obi.

27

S/PV.6592

in the field in a number of ways. I would like to start
with the issue of the quality of troops that was raised
here today. We need a very high quality of troops in the
field to be able to execute our mandate.
One of the reforms deals with that subject, and to
that effect infantry units are standardized in terms of
personnel and equipment. That has made it easier for a
force commander to appreciate what is available to
him. He is able to assess what personnel are available
to him and to task them appropriately.
In terms of the quality of troops, I also want to
say that the introduction of pre-deployment training
and pre-induction inspections of equipment has helped
in ensuring that we have a higher quality of troops,
which has also helped in our mandate implementation.
The aspect of integration is one of those areas
that have been well emphasized in recent reforms. My
Mission, the United Nations Mission in the Sudan, has
been integrated, and to that extent we have been
enabled to work jointly with the civilian, military and
police pillars and the United Nations country team. A
case in point is the protection of civilians strategy,
which takes into account the fact that the protection of
civilians is not just a military responsibility, but
involves all. Here, we have been able to incorporate
our efforts through training, the development of
concepts, the sharing of information, and the creation
of joint operations centres and joint movement centres.
These are all developments that have been found to be
very useful in the field and have greatly assisted us.
During the recent crises in Kordofan and Abyei, we put
them widely into practice. All pillars shared
information, met very actively in crisis management
teams, and were largely able, collectively, to address
the challenges that faced us.
These reforms have been useful to us in the field,
in addition to getting us together in meetings of force
commanders — as in the case of the Entebbe meeting,
which was referred to earlier — to exchange
information. That is also a new development that we
have found to be very useful.
The President: I call on Lieutenant General
Prakash to address the questions and comments that
have been made.
Lieutenant General Prakash: The question that
I want to answer is whether a change of strategy is
required with respect to the protection of civilians by

28

the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) in the pre- and post-electoral periods.
My view on the subject is that the present
strategy in place is working well. We have recently
taken a look at it. We have worked out modalities as to
how we are going operate. We have arranged various
contingencies to deal with various situations that may
arise. What clearly emerges is not that the strategy is
not in place, but that the enablers are not in place. For
example, there is a likelihood of armed groups ramping
up their activities and, as the elections approach, there
is likely to be more civil unrest. If such things are
going to happen, we will need more enablers. The
enablers need to come on time and to be in the right
place at the right time. As long as the enablers are
provided, I think there is no need to change strategy.
The President: I give the floor to Major General
Asarta Cuevas to address the questions and comments
that have been made.
Major General Asarta Cuevas (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I should like to thank all
members of the Council for their kind words addressed
to our French soldiers in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) who suffered a criminal
terrorist attack yesterday.
The French Ambassador asked three questions.
The first was about how our soldiers can be better
protected. The second was about coordination with the
Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF). The third related to the
transfer of responsibility to the LAF.
Turning to the question about how our soldiers
can be better protected, I must say that UNIFIL has
enough robust means and protection to achieve its
missions. The protection of vehicles is a national
responsibility. In this case, France, Spain and Italy
have had no problem providing us with armoured
vehicles. Following the attack of 27 May on an Italian
patrol, in which six soldiers were wounded, I sent a
directive to my soldiers containing additional security
measures. The most important of those measures
included the orders that convoys, where possible,
should always take place at night and with jammers;
that two vehicles at a minimum must always travel
together; that our soldiers should wear flak jackets and
helmets; and that, whenever possible, the LAF should
also provide bodyguards and maintain ongoing contact
with the joint operations centre.

11-43235

S/PV.6592

It is important to stress that those instructions were
for convoys travelling outside our area of operations,
because the two terrorist attacks on us — the first in May
and the other yesterday — took place outside of UNIFIL’s
area of operations. Similar attacks took place in 2008 in the
same zone. What that means is that, in cooperation with the
LAF and the population, we can control our area of
operations, but outside that we do not have control. That is
the national responsibility of the Lebanese Government and
Armed Forces. They must guarantee security along the
coastal highway, which is basically UNIFIL’s only route for
relief troops and supplies and to access the Beirut port and
airport where our soldiers arrive at and leave the country.
Having discussed convoys, I will turn to the safety of
individuals, towards which we have taken certain additional
measures, including a ban on the use of marked UNIFIL
vehicles for personal use outside the area of operations.
However, if individuals need to leave the area of
operations — to go on vacation via the airport, for
instance — we have painted 14 unmarked vehicles, using
various colours, that are made available to soldiers and
other UNIFIL personnel for individual needs.
We have taken one additional measure that I
proposed to General Kahwaji and the chief of intelligence
of the LAF for the southern sector. That measure involves
daily reconnaissance of the highway that connects our area
of operations with the port and airport of Beirut. For us, it
amounts to an extension of our area of operations, but it is
not actually within that area. We therefore need to work
closely with the Lebanon Government and the LAF. I have
proposed daily reconnaissance of that road, at different
times each day, together with the Lebanese Armed Forces
and security forces, but only in sensitive areas that are
highly vulnerable to attack.
I have been waiting for a response for two months.
Finally last Friday, I sent a formal letter to the Commander
in Chief of the Lebanese Armed Forces, proposing this
initiative yet again and asking for a response. Sadly,
yesterday there was another attack. I am not saying that we
could have avoided it had we taken the measures I
proposed, but we might have.
I also want to update the Council on what happened
with the incident yesterday. There were four vehicles, three
of which were armoured, while the third was not. The
attack was against the fourth vehicle, which was an
armoured vehicle with jammers. Of a total of 12 soldiers,
six were wounded, all lightly except one who has an eye in
quite bad condition, but he will not lose it. Of those, three

11-43235

were flown home to France today. The other three are still
working in their units. We were actually lucky.
Turning to the second question about our
coordination with the LAF, it is excellent in our operations
area. They have officials and representatives at all levels
and in every location. They are aware of our activities on a
daily basis and there is complete transparency. Beyond the
area of operations, at the Force Commander level we
coordinate with the chief of intelligence and the
Commander in Chief of the LAF. If they have information
or anything important that I need to know, they
communicate it right away.
Regarding the transfer of responsibilities from
UNIFIL to the LAF, in keeping with the joint technical
review that I mentioned earlier, we have a strategic
dialogue in place with the LAF. The purpose of the
dialogue is to assess UNIFIL capacity and the tasks that it
must fulfil pursuant to its mandate under resolution 1701
(2006). It is also to assess LAF capacity and which of our
missions it can undertake, with the ultimate goal of leaving
the Lebanese Armed Forces to fulfil all the tasks conferred
on UNIFIL under resolution 1701 (2006). We recognize
that UNIFIL cannot be in Lebanon forever. At some point,
we must withdraw. The LAF will have to assume the
responsibilities currently now assumed by UNIFIL. When
will that day come? We do not know, but we are working
towards it.
By way of conclusion, I can say that the most recent
meeting on 7 July saw the creation of four
subcommittees — one for infrastructure, one for command
and control, another for troop capacity and movement, and
another for operational issues. All of that is geared to
making headway towards being able to transfer all our
responsibilities — and I underline again that this is
mandated by resolution 1701 (2006) — to the Lebanese
Armed Forces.
The President: We have covered a lot of ground in a
few hours. This has been a very useful dialogue. I know I
speak for the Council in thanking all the Force
Commanders for making it possible by making themselves
available. I think this should become a tradition and that we
should have such an exchange at least once a year.
I thank the Force Commanders for being with us
today.
The meeting rose at 2.05 p.m.

29
