General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

196

35/174.

Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United ~ations system for improving
the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly,
Convinced that the obligation of all States to observe
the purposes and principles of the Chart~r of the United
Nations is fundamental for the promotion and respect
of human rights and fundamental freedoms and for the
realization of the full dignity and worth of the human
person,
Bearing in mind Article 13, paragraph I b, of the Charter by which the General Assembly shall initiate studies
and make recommendations for the purpose of promoting international co-operation in _the economic_, s_oci~l.
cultural, educational and health fields, and assisting m
the realization of human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex.
language or religion,
Recalling the importance of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights 91 and of the International Covenants
on Human Rights 92 in further promoting international
co-operation in respecting and observing human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling also its resolution 32/ 130 of 16 December
1977, in which it decided that the approach_ to the future
work within the United Nations system with respect to
human rights questions should take into account the
concepts set forth in that resolution,
Recognizing that the efforts ?f St~tes ~~d of .t~e
United Nations for the promotion ol pohttcal. CIVIi,
economic, social and cultural rights require the establishment of the new international economic order to ensure the full enjoyment of those rights,
Recognizing also that the efforts of the United
Nations and its Member States to promote and protect
civil and political as well as economic. social and cultural rights should continue,
Reiterating its profound conviction that all human
rights and fundamental freedoms are indivisible and interdependent, and that equal attention and urgent consideration should be given to the implementation.
promotion and protection of both civil and political,
and economic, social and cultural rights.
Stressing that, in order fully to guarantee human
rights and complete personal dignity, it is necessary to
guarantee the right to work, the participation of workers
in management, and the right to education, health and
proper nourishment, through the adoption of measures
at the national and international levels, including the establishment of the new international economic order,
Emphasizing that the right to development is a human
right and that equality of opportunity is as much a prerogative of nations as of individuals within nations,
Recalling its resolution 34/46 of 23 November 1979,
Appreciating that it is necessary that the Commission
on Human Rights should continue its current work on
the over-all analysis with a view to further promoting
and improving human rights and fundamental
freedoms, including the question of the Commission's
programme and working methods, and on the over-all
analysis of the alternative approaches and ways and
means for improving the effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, in accordance with
the provisions and concepts of resolution 32/ 130,
" Resolution 217 A ( 111 ).

Noting with appreciation the report of the Seminar on
the Effects of the Existing Unjust International
Economic Order on the Economies of the Developing
Countries and the Obstacle that this Represents for the
Implementation of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms, organized by the United Nations and held at
Geneva from 30 June to I 1 .I uly I 980, 4 •
Taking into account the request made to the SecretaryGeneral in paragraph 12 of resolution 34/46,
I. Reiterates its request to the Commission on
Human Rights to continue its current work on the overall analysis with a view to further promoting and improving human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the question of the Commission's programme
and working methods, and on the over-all analysis of
the alternative approaches and ways and means for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, in accordance with the provisions and concepts of General Assembly resolution
32/130;
2. Reaffirms that it is of paramount importance for
the promotion of human rights and fundamental
freedoms that Member States undertake specific obligations through accession to or ratification of international instruments in this field, and that, consequently,
the standard-setting work within the United Nations
system in the field of human rights and the universal acceptance and implementation of the relevant international instruments should be encouraged;

3. Emphasizes the necessity of establishing the new
international economic order to ensure the promotion
and the full enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all;
4. Affirms that the efforts of the United Nations and
its Member States to promote and to protect civil and
political rights, as well as economic, social and cultural
rights, should continue;
5. Requests the Cmr.mission on Human Rights to
take the necessary measures to promote the right to development as a human right, which is as much a prerogative of nations as of individuals within nations, and
to take action for its realization;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to give priority,
through the programme of advisory services in the field
of human rights, to the holding in 1981 of a seminar on
the relations that exist between human rights, peace and
development and, to this end, to pres;:nt a report to the
Commission on Human Rights at its thirty-seventh session, as was recommended by the Seminar on the Effects
of the Existing Unjust International Economic Order on
the Economies of the Developing Countries and the Obstacle that this Represents for the Implementation of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, when preparing
the study requested in paragraph 12 of resolution 34 /46,
to include possible solutions which will help eliminate
the massive and flagrant violations of human rights and
of the rights of peoples and individuals affected by situations such as those resulting from the evils mentioned
in paragraph I (e) of resolution 32/ I 30, and to indicate
the obstacles to the establishment of the new international economic order, which is an essential element for
the effective promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms:
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Alternative ap" ST!HR/SER.A X

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

proaches and ways and means within the United
Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of
human rights and fundamental freedoms".

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/175.

Alternative approaches and ways and means in
the United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 34148 of 23 November 1979.
in which it decided to consider at its thirtv-fifth session
the question of the creation of a post of u"nited Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights under the itt:m
entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms",
Recalling also its resolution 33/105 of 16 December
I 978, in which it requested the Commission on Human
Rights to consider the proposal for the establishment of
a post of United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights as part of its work on the over-all
analysis of the alternative approaches and ways and
means for improving the effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms.
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights
resolution 28 (XXXVI) of 11 March 1980,'" in which the
Commission decided to continue at its thirty-seventh
session its work on the over-all analysis of the further
promotion and encouragement of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including alternative approaches
and ways and means within the United Nations system
for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
Taking note of the proposal for the establishment of a
post of United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights,
Bearing in mind that the proposal for the establishment of a post of High Commissioner for Human
Rights requires more careful examination.
1. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
consider this proposal at its thirty-seventh session under
the item entitled "Further promotion and encouragement of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the question of the programme and methods of
work of the Commission: alternative approaches and
ways and means within the United Nations system for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms";
2. Further requests the Commission on Human
Rights to submit, through the Economic and Social
Council, to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth sessiou ct report on its work with regard to the item mentioned in paragraph I above. including the views expressed in the Commission with regard to the proposal
for the establishment of a post of United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights:
3. Decides to consider the question of the creation of
a post of United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights at its thirty-sixth session under the item
"'See Official Record, of the l:'conomic and So"al Council. /1.)1/0,
Supplement No. 3 (E/1980/IJ and (orr I). chap. XXVI. sect. A

197

entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nat ions system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms".

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/176.

Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system to improve
the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly.
Recalling the responsibility entrusted by the Charter
to the United Nations for ensuring universal respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Noting the growing awareness of the international
CL)mmunity of the need to ensure effective promotion
and protection of human rights,
Also recalling the experience acquired by the United,
Nations in pursuing the goal of the promotion and protection of human rights. inter alia, through the use of
fact-finding missions. in cases in which mass and
llagrant violations llf human rights have been recogni,rcd,
I. Considers that the question of the establishment
of bodies entrusted with fact-finding missions and the
extent to which they may enhance the promotion and
protection of human rights requires serious consideratinn;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
discuss this question at its thirty-seventh session under
the item entitled "Further promotion and encouragement of human rights and fundamental freedoms. including the question of the programme and methods of
work of the Commission: alternative approaches and
ways and means within the United Nations system for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms".

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/177.

Draft Body of Principles for the Protection of
All Persons under Any Form of Detention or
Imprisonment
·

The General Assemblv,
Recalling the adoption, in its resolution 3452 (XXX)
of 9 December 1975. of the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Recalling also its resolution 34/ 169 of 17 December
1979, by which it adopted the Code of Conduct for Law
Enforcement Officials and decided to transmit it to
Governments with the recommendation that favourable consideration should be given to its use within the
framework of national legislation or practice as a body
of principles for observance by law enforcement officials.
Recalling jimher that the Economic and Social Council, in its resolution 1979/34 of 10 May 1979, requested
the Secretarv-General to transmit to all Governments,
for their cornments. the draft Bodv of Principles for the
