UNITED

TWENTY-SIXTH

i’VATIONS

YEAR

MEETING: ‘20 OCTOBER 197 1
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1598) . , , . . 0 , . . . , . . . , , . , . . , . . . , . . , . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . .
The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the President of the Security
Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi. Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of),
Dahomey, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea,
Kenya, Liberia, the Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and
Zambia (S/ 10326);
(b) Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia (S/l 0330 and Con. 1) , . .

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND NINETY-EIGHTH

Held in New York on Wednesday-, 20 October
President: Mr. Cuillermo SEVILLA

SACASA (Nicaragua),

MEETING
1971, at 3.30 p,m.

Council, and if there is no objection, I shall invite the
representatives who are participating in the Council discussions on this item to take the seats reserved for them in the
Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America,

2. I invite the representatives of Sudan, Ethiopia. South
Africa, Liberia, Guyana, Chad, Nigeria, Mauritius, Saudi
Arabia, Uganda and India to take the seats reserved for
them in the Council chamber, it being understood that the)
will be invited to take a place at the Council table when
they wish to make a statement. I also invite the President of
the United Nations Council for Namibia to take a place at
the Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1598)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
(a)
Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, the
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Egypt,
Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, Kenya, Liberia, the Libyan Arab Republic,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and
Zambia (S/1032(j);
(b) Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia
(S/10330 and Corr.1).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. 0. Ogbu,
Presidentof the United Nations Council for Namibia. took
a place at the SeCUritv Counci/ table, and Mr. M. Fakhreddine (Sudan), M. Y. Tseghe(Ethiopia), Mr. C, F. G. van
Hirschberg (South Africa), Mr. J. R. Grimes (Liberia),
Mr. P. Moussa (Chad), Mr. R. K. Ram&l
(Mauritius),
Mr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. G, S. K Ibingira
(Uganda) and Mr. S. Sen (India) took the places reserseii
for them in the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We
shall now continue our consideration of the revised draft
resolution, sponsoredby the delegationsof Burundi, Sierra
Leone, Somalia and the Syrian Arab Republic, which has
beendistributed in document S/10372/Rev.l.
4. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I just wish to inform you that.
following consultations with various delegations,the sponsors of the revised draft resolution agreethat in operative
paragraph6 the word “Endorses” should be replaced by
“Agrees with “, That is the only amendment which the
sponsorswish to make to their draft resolution, in the hope
that, with the amendment, the Council will not be in a
position to proceed to a vote.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, the
Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya,
Liberia, the Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the
People’s Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, the
Upper Volta and Zambia (S/10326);
(b) Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia
(S/10330 and Corr.1)

5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
representative of Somalia has told us sf the amendment
which the sponsors of the draft resolution are ready to
accept, I understand that this is another proof of cooperation shown to the Council by the sponsorsand that it
would be generally acceplabIe to the other members.
6. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET (France) (interpretation
from French): We have considered with care the draft
resolution submitted by Burundi, Sierra Leone, Somalia
and the Syrian Arab Republic. We did so particularly
becauseof the extremely friendly relations that we maintain with the countries in question and also becauseof the

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): According to previous decisions adopted by the Security
1

qualifications of the authors of this text. I should like to
pay tribute to the work performed by the sponsors and I
should like to say that, although we have given sympathetic
consideration to the call for a unanimous vote emitted by
Ambassador Farah, nevertheless we are not able to vote in
favour of a text which, to our mind, does not take into
account either the possibilities or the necessities of the
moment.
7. I shall briefly explain our position. Without going into
the details of the preamble or the operative provisions of
the text and also without expounding on a matter to which
we had occasion to refer at length in the general debate
/158&h meeting/, I must first recall that we cannot accept
an approval, even implicit, of The Hague Court’s conclusions, much less the arguments on which they are based. We
note that the initial text on this particular point was
amended on several occasions, but even in the latest version
the text is such that we CaMOt accept it.
8. I do not wish to repeat the arguments already sub.
mitted by us to the Council. I would just say that even if
only the conclusions are concerned, that is to say paragraph
133 of the opinion of the Court,l these conclusions cannot
be endorsed by us. Quite clearly the draft resolution before
us does not have the validity of a decision by the Council. I
must state quite clearfy that if it had been a decision of the
Council our position would have been a negative one. It is
only because of the appeal made by the sponsors and a
desire not to hamper work which has met with the approval
of several members of the Council that we shall merely
abstain. Our position is categorical and we request that it be
placed on record: we do not consider ourseIves bound in
any way either by the Court’s conclusions or by its
arguments.
9. Having said that, we have other critical comments to
make on the draft resolution. There are references in it to
resolutions which were never supported by us because we
have always felt that they went beyond the scope authorized by the Charter.

future. Is anything added to the right to freedom and
independence by giving it a number, when in point of fact
that right is prescribed by the Charter? I think the United
Nations would gain if we were to speak more simply and
much more directly, particularly when there is no doubt
about the aim being pursued. And we know that in this
matter, our objective, on which there is complete agreement is that the people of Namibia be granted the
possibility of exercising their right to self-determination.
11. That is, in essence, why we shall not vote for the draft
resolution; it does not appear to us to be one that
represents a single forward step in solving the problem. 1
should have liked it to be otherwise but I fear that this text
will join the all too large stockpile of sterile resolutions that
has been built up in the archives of our Organization. We
believe that in this matter-and
this is what we have
proposed-we should stray from the beaten track, get out
of the rut and consider questions more realistically, not
only in the interest of the United Nations but also in that
of the people of Namibia because, after all, that is what we
are concerned with.
12. In any case, we wish this draft resolution well, but we
still beg to be allowed to remain sceptical as to its future.
We think that other ways should be tried. We have said that
and we repeat it. We shall, for the time being, abstain on
the proposals before us today, only because of the appeal
made by the sponsors, whose good work and goodwill we
fully appreciate.
13. Mr. BENNETT (United States of America): My
delegation has listened with great interest to the statements
that have been made in the Council on the question of
Namibia. We have paid particular attention to the statements made by Moktar Ould Daddah, President of Mauritania, and his colleagues, the Foreign Ministers of Liberia,
Nigeria, Ethiopia, Chad and the Sudan, who have spoken
here on behaif of the Organization of African Unity,
14. The United States supported General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) and I should like to reaffirm our support.
We supported Security Council resolution 284 (1970), by
which the Namibian problem was referred to the International Court of Justice, and when that body deliberated on
the legal consequences for States of the continued presence
of South Africa in Namibia the United States made two
contributions to its proceedings. In a written statement to
the Court in November 19702 and in an oral statement
made before the Court in March 1971 the United States
stressed the validity of General Assembly resolution
2145 (XXI) and the fact that South Africa’s continued
presence in Namibia is without legal basis.

10. I should like to make an additional comment that goes
beyond the scope of the present draft resolution. I was a
member of the ConseiZd’&zt, the highest administrative
tribunal in France. One of its functions is to deal with
administrative
disputes. References to precedents are
normal in judgements concerning such disputes. I must say
that the decisions of the Conseil d’Etat in France are
shorter, and much simpler, that they are less encumbered
with references than the resolutions of the United Nations,
although this is not as far as I know, an organization which
is an administrative tribunal. Why then is it necessary at
every turn to recall resolutions X, Y, Z? Why is it not
possible to state matters more simply and clearly for the
benefit of public opinion? The language of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies has in fact become a
jargon, understood only by the initiated and completely
incomprehensible to the mass of world public opinion. We
would hope very much that formalism wilI be dropped in

15. In the aftermath of the Court’s advisory opinion the
Council’s Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia began its
task of recommending to the Security Council courses of
further action to enable the people of Namibia to exercise
their right to self-determination. We are pleased with the
spirit of co-operation that prevailed in the Ad Hoc

1 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of
South Africa in Namibia (South West AfricaJ notwithstanding
Security Council resolution 276 (I 970), Advisory Opinion. I.C.J.
Reports 1971, p. 16.

2 Legal, Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of
South Afn’ca in Namibia (South West AfricaJ notwithstandirlg
Security Council resolution 276 (1970), Pleadings, Oral Arguments,
Documents, vol. I.

Sub-Committee. That spirit has carried over into the
proceedings of the Security Council and has made possible
the draft resolution now before us.
16. The United States will vote for and support the draft
resolution. The text before us, however, contains references
to certain resolutions on which my Government abstained.
Cur vote for the present resolution should not therefore be
construed as constituting any change in position with
regard to the earlier resolutions.
17. The draft resolution takes note of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice, particularly
its conclusions. For its part, the United States accepts those
conclusions, which declare-in paragraph 133-that South
Africa is under obligation to withdraw its administration
from Namibia immediately and thus put an end to its
occupation of the Territory, and which further declare that
Member States are

the seventh preambular paragraph, we note that the term
“movement” could be subject to several interpretations. I
wish to make it clear that we understand this term in a
peaceful sense, consistent with our support of practical and
peaceful means to achieve selfdetermination for the people
of Namibia. We would further note that the use of the term
does not COIlnOte SUPPOI? for any particular Namibian
group to represent the Territory,
22. With respect to operative paragraph 11 of the draft
resolution, I wish to point out that, as stated by the United
States in July 1970 /lS.SOth meeting], in relation to
Security Councli resolution 283 (1970), and in the light of
the advisory opinion of 1971 -especially paragraphs 133,
118, 122, 123 and 125-from which the resolution now
before us was drawn, the United States considers States free
to take appropriate action to protect their own citizens and
to assist the people of Namibia.
23. We wish to see no doors closed in dealing with the
future of Namibia. We hope that South Africa’s participation in the discussion of this question indicates a willingness
to enter into further talks.

I‘ . . under obligation to recognize the illegality of
South Africa’s presence in Namibia and the invalidity of
its actson behalf of or concerning Namibia, and to refrain
from any , . . dealings with the Government of South
Africa implying recognition of the legality of, or lending
support or assistance to, such presence and administration.”

24. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): In the past two
days we have been engaged in discussion of two draft
resolutions. I understand we are about to vote on only one
of those, and so my explanation of vote now will be
confined to that.

18. In his speech two weeks ago in the General Assembly

25, The main proposals in draft resolution S/10372/Rev.l
are very similar to those in part A of the report of the Ad
Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia, on which I gave my
delegation’s views during the general debate (1589th
meeting]. I will not repeat what I said on 6 October in
detail. I think the Council will recall that the basic reason
for which my delegation has not been able to associate
itself with and will, therefore, have to abstam on the draft
resolution is that we cannot accept-still less “endorse” or
“agree with”-the premises on which most of its proposals
are founded.

/1950th plenary meeting] Secretary of State Rogers stated

our acceptance of those conclusions and observed that that
position was consistent with our support of practical and
peaceful means to achieve self-determination and end racial
discrimination.
19. Our acceptance also reflects the importance that my
Government attaches to the Court. We consider that this
advisory opinion adds a significant and authoritative legal
element to the effort of the international community to
make it possible for the people of the Territory to enjoy
their right to self-determination. Our acceptance, of course,
does not necessarily imply approval of all the Court’s
reasoning. We note in this connexion concern about the
Charter interpretation which has been expressed by several
members of this Council.

26. In the course of the debate there has been discussion
of several of the important points of law involved, both
with regard to the particular question of the Mandate for
South West Africa (Namibia) and to the wider question
about the force of Security Council resolutions. We have
studied carefully the points which have been made by
others, particularly those relating to our own position. At
this stage of the proceedings I do not think I need say more
than that we have found in those points nothing which
seems to us to require any qualification of that position.
~h.ia applies particularly to the question of the force of
Security Council resolutions, on which the United Kingdom
fully maintains the position I stated earlier.

20. The draft resolution reaffirms resolution 283 (1970),
which urges Member States to take a number of actions
vis-&is Namibia. Let me recall, in this connexion, that even
before the adoption of that resolution the United States
had announced that it would officially discourage investment by United States nationals in Namibia, would not
make available United States Export-Import Bank credit
guaranteesand other facilities and would not assist United
States citizens who invest in Namibia on the basis of rights
acquired after the adoption of General Assembly resolution
2145 (XXI) in protection of such investments against
claims of a future lawful government of Namibia. Following
that announcement, my Government made sure that
~vesbm were informed of that new policy; and investment
hasin fact been inhibited in Namibia.

27. I hope we shall soon be able to vote on the other draft
resolution we have been looking at, which could move us
towards our common objective of permitting the people of
Namibia to exercise their right of self-determination. At
that stage, I hope, I shall have something more cheerful to
say.

21. There are a few aspects of the draft resolution on
which my delegation wishes to make specific comments. In

28. Mr. NAKAGAWA (Japan): I note that there has been
a change in the wording of the draft resolution contained in
3

individuals after the adoption of resolution 2145 (XXI),in
other words for somefive years.

document Sf10372/Rev.l.
Since my delegation did not
participate in the informal consultations on this change, I
should be grateful if the representative of Somalia could
explain to us the reason for the change and what difference
he envisages as a result of the change of wording.

34. My delegation feels that it would have been more in
keeping with the secondof the conclusionsof the COUIT in
its advisory opinion, to have acted in such a way that
paragraph 12 would only cover the future and not havea
retroactive effect. Abiding by the principle of non-retroactivity of laws, which is the rule in internal legislation,we
wish to stressthat Belgium cannot implement that provision except in so far as the future is concerned; that is to
say, any operation that may take place subsequentto the
._2
‘Qption of this resolution and not for those concluded
since the adoption of resolution 2145 (XXI). We believe
that this innovation, where the Council has for the first
time adopted a retroactive provision wil1 not be taken asa
precedent, since this is something that my delegationcould
not recognize.

29. Mr, FARAH (Somalia): As I said yesterday /1597th
meeting],
the Afro-Asian group of sponsorswould have
liked to seethe term “endorses” employed, as usedin the
draft. However, it was drawn to our attention by some
delegations, following the intervention of the representative
of France yesterday, that the word “endorses” could have a
different connotation. The International Court of Justice
and the Security Council aretwo of the four main organsof
the United Nations, and it might connote that one of those
two was subordinate to the other. If recognition of the
equal status of those two organsis to be maintained, the
word “endorses” would not be the correct term; “agrees”
would be more suitable. It was also brought to our
attention that perhapsendorsementwould imply a higher
degree of involvement and that to make the draft resolution
more acceptablethe term “agreeswith” shouldbe Used.

35. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish); The
statements which representatives make are, of course,
reproduced in the records of the Council. Thus it follows
that opinions expressedon behalf of their Governmentsand
their personalviews are officially recorded.

30. Mr. NAKAGAWA (Japan): I thank the representative
of Somalia for his clarification.

36. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
from Spanish): Mr. President, I should like to take the floor
if alI statementsreferring to the resolution we have adopted
have now been concluded.

31. The PRESIDENT [interpretation from Spanish): As
no other representativewishesto take the floor, we shall
proceed to vote on the reviseddraft resolution, asamended
orally, containedin documentS/10372/Rev.l, sponsoredby
the delegations of Burundi, Sierra Leone, Somaliaand the
Syrian Arab Republic.

37. I have asked to speak in order to submit for the
consideration of the members of the Council the draft
resolution contained in document S/10376, which hasbeen
distributed in all the working languagesof the Council.

A vote wastaker?by showof hands.
Irl favour: Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, Italy,
Japan, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian
Arab Republic. Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,United
States of America.

38. On behalf of the Argentine deIegation, I am submitting the draft resolution, and the name of my country
appearsat the head of it. However, I shouldlike to indicate,
from the very outset, that the text contained in this
document is not exclusively an Argentine initiative. In the
course of the debate on the question of Namibia, the
representative of France /1593rd meeting/ threw out an
idea which I felt was extremely constructive and fruitful,
and which in turn was taken up by other delegationsand
then taken into account by the delegation that I have the
honour to head. This idea began to take shapeand, after
lengthy consultations, not only with members of the
Council but with other delegations not representedon the
Council, it was embodied in the text that the Council now
hasbefore it,

Against: None.
Abstaining: France. United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
7;rze draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions.3
32. Mr. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium) (interpretation from
French): The resolution that has just been adopted, while
agreeing with the conclusionsof the Court’s opinion of 21
June 1971, also implements the principles enshrined in
General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI). My delegation
concurs with the former and remainsattached to the latter,
aswe stated in the generaldebate[1594th meeting/.

39. First let me expressmy appreciation for the assistance
and co-operation that I have received, in my consultations,
from all delegations concerned. But if I might specify, I
would say that my main thanks must be addressedto the
African delegations,both membersand non-membersof the
Council. The same applies to the President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, my good friend the Ambassador of Nigeria, whosecounseland co-operation havebeen
extremely valuable in allowing us to arrive at the point
where the draft resolution is ready for submission.

33. My delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution
despite certain legal difficulties raisedby paragraph 12. In
that paragraph we seea provision that may be upheld asfar
asits principle is concerned,but the application of which is
open to challengebecauseit covers franchises, rights, titles
or contracts granted by South Africa to corporations and

40. The fact that many delegations participated in the
drafting of the document may explain why the original is in

3 See resolution 301 (1971).
4

English and not in Spanish, which is my usual working
language. In the course of those consultations, some texts
were shown to us in French, others in English, others in
Spanish, and, finally, the merger took place around the
original text which the Council has before it in English. For
cur part, we have endeavoured to be as flexible as possible
in the preparation of the draft resolution, since what we
.;:.s ‘,? in mind is not to present an exclusively Argentine
text, but rather to submit a draft that would above all
reflect the concern felt by many members of the Council
and particularly by the members of the African Group.

resolutions of the United Nations at all and we do so
because the idea embodied in this draft resolution is the
idea of making easier a possible solution and not in any way
to place obstacles in its path. Therefore, this does not by
any manner or means imply that the Security Council or
the United Nations is abdicating or retreating from any
position previously adopted. Our position is unchanged and
what steps we have taken are still valid. But we should not
like to leave open the possibility of being told that because
we mention one document or another the search for a
solution on the basis of this resolution might be jeopardized .

41. Perhaps in my presentation of the draft resolution I
shall not proceed in completely orthodox fashion because I
intend to speak with complete frankness. This draft
resolution has no ulterior motives. The Argentine delegation is led by one single concern. It is the same concern as
that felt by African States as a whole. It is obvious that the
Namibian question affects the entire international community. but it is no less obvious that the African States are
quite properlv more interested than any one else in a final
solution being found to the problem afflicting the people
and the Territory of Namibia. Therefore, while we have
borne in mind all the suggestions made to us, we have paid
particular attention to those that were made to us by the
countries of Africa.

46. Yet all the basic principles which have any bearing on
the future of Namibia and which constitute the goals set for
themselves by the countries of Africa and the majority of if
not all the Members of the United Nations are embodied in
and represented by this draft resolution.
47. The second preambular paragraph of our draft resolution reads :
Recognizing the special responsibility and obligation of the United Nations towards the people and
territory of Namibia”.
“

.

.

.

In this very simple sentence we have embodied all that the
United Nations has done in the past regarding the Territory
of Namibia, which has been reaffirmed by the resolution we
have just adopted. In other words, far from compIacently
setting aside concern over the people and Territory of
Namibia, we are reaffirming the special responsibility and
obligation of the United Nations towards the people and
Territory of Namibia.

42. Namibia is in Africa, but, across the ocean, it is
opposite Argentina. Thus, like the African nations, we
hope, as soon as possible, to see a free, independent and
sovereign Namibia taking its rightful place in the United
Nations, for when the inhabitants of this Territory look
across the ocean, symbolically they will have the Argentine
Republic on the other side, on the east coast of the Atlantic
Ocean, while by land they will be linked to their African
brothers,

48. The next preambular paragraph says:

43. In my previous statements I had said that there were
not too many possibilities of solving this problem and that
as time passed those possibilities would shrink. One uf
those possibilities has been chosen by the Security Council
with the adoption of the resolution submitted by the four
Powers: Burundi, Sierra Leone, Somalia and the Syrian
Arab Republic. My delegation voted in favour of that
resolution and is the first to be gratified that it has been
endorsed and approved by the Security Council.

‘Heaffirrning
cmce again the inalienable and imprescriptible rights of the people of Namibia to selfdetermination and independence”.
J think that this language speaks for itself. I know that the
in English gives rise to certain
word “imprescriptible”
difficulties, but in the Latin languages the word is important and I have tried very hard to keep it in the draft
resolution because the meaning attached to the word here is
that the rights of the people of Namibia .to selfdetermination and independence will never become obsolete. They will not fail with the passage of time and that
is the legal meaning of the word “imprescriptible”.
As
regards the word “inalienable” we know it means that*no
one can deprive the people of those rights.

44. But, apart from that resolution, I should like to
reiterate our conviction that there are still other courses of
action and that these courses of action must not I;, :osed
off. The other courses of action-and
I must stress
this-must
in no way be considered as in opposition to or
incompatible with the course of action that the Council has
now adopted. I am just trying to ensure that another
possibility is considered by the Council, and I do so because
I am bearing in mind the fact that the basic concept that we
must keep before us must be the future of Namibia and
every possible alternative must be explored; none can be
discarded if we are to benefit the Narnibian people.

49. The draft resolution then goes on to say ‘Also
reaffirming the national unity and the territorial integrity
of Namibia”. This wording is very clear, but if any doubts
should exist in anyone’s mind, I would state categorically
that what my delegation understands by this is that
Namibia cannot and must not be parcelled off for the
benefit of anyone. States have the right to exist independently, without any reduction of their national unity or
territorial integrity. The responsibility of those countries
which, whatever the circumstances, exercise rights over
territories that have not as yet achieved independence lies

45. The draft resolution which I have the honour to
submit to the Security Council is a very straightforward
document. As I said, speaking very frankly, you will see
that in this draft resolution we do not refer to any previous
5

of South Africa whose co-operation in the implementation
of this draft resolution we trust will be positive. Were it not
to be so, then the Council can draw very clear conclusions
from such a result,

in the preservation of the territorinl integrity of those
territories and in promoting and encouraging a spirit of
national unity. It is only when peoples accede to independence endowed with a territory which has been preserved
wholly and integrally that they can fully exercise their
sovereign rights among other sovereign nations of the
world. This is what we have tried to spell out in this
preambular paragraph.

55. Finally, the draft resolution “Requeststhe SecretaryGeneral to report to the Security Council on the implementation of this resolution. This is so as to ensure that the
implementation of the resolution not be lost with the
passage of time and that we may all be kept informed on
how the contacts that the Secretary-General may carry out
are progressing.

50. Operative paragraph 1 states:
‘lnvit,zs the Secretary-General, acting on behalf of the
United Nations, to take all necessary steps as soon as
possible, including making contact with all parties concerned, with a view to establishing the necessary condi.
tions so as to enable the people of that territory, freely
and with strict regard to the principles of human equality,
to exercise their right to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.”

56. I have endeavoured to make as direct, succinct and
frank a presentation of this draft resolution as possible,
However, if it were felt necessary for me to stressthis, I will
do SOagain: that the only intentions of my delegation are
those that I have described in the course of this statement.
We would be the last to lend ourselves to any type of
manoeuvre, for delay on any other purpose. That is why we
felt that we were making a contribution to the solution of
the problem which, unfortunately, afflicts Namibia.

51. I do not doubt that as far as operative paragraph 1 is
concerned a more precise language might have been chosen.
This wording, however, is the result of many lengthy
consultations. But what is, I think, very clear to me and
should be clear to all concerned is that it carries a message
addressed to those who have a responsibility towards the
people and the territory of Namibia, and that responsibility
dictates their taking full advantage of this opportunity to
prove the purity of their intentions and their objectives to
lead the people of Namibia to self-determination and
independence. Since I started out by saying that I would be
frank, I would say that the message is, first and specificaily,
addressed to the Government of South Africa. It is that
Government, in those contacts which it will certainly have
with the Secretary-General, which has the sole responsibility for carrying out the purposes of which we were told
by the Foreign Minister of that country in the course of our
debate; as Mr. Muller stated (1584th meetilfg], the purposes are those of promoting the welfare of the people of
Namibia and leading them to self-determination and independence, if the people so decide. This is what we were
told.

57. In conclusion I understand that some delegations
would wish for more time to consider this draft resolution.
My delegation does not in any way object to such a step. It
can be put to the vote whenever you, Mr. President,
consider it appropriate to do so.
58. Once again, I wish in conclusion to thank the
delegations of Africa and Asia on the Council, other
members of the Council and also the other African
delegations that have given us such valuable co-operation in
the preparation of this draft resolution.
59. The PRESIDENT (iM?rpretation f?om Spanish):We
thank the representative of Argentina and I think that he
has put before us very clearly the purport of his draft
resolution, We understand that that draft does embody
noble concerns expressed within the Council. We also
understand that the representative of Argentina’s draft is
accompanied by the best of intentions. He has told us that
what we might term the very seeds of his concept lay in the
idea that first emerged from the representative of Francethat idea that very rapidly gained ground in the minds of
other members of the Council. We understand that he has
submitted to us a very worthy instrument meriting our
most careful consideration and therefore deservesa careful
exchange of views regarding the meaning of the draft. But
this exchange of views must be carried out with open minds
as we always proceed in this forum of international peace
and security.

52, Argentina believes that the people do so desire. We
believe that what must be done with the people of Namibia
is to prepare them within a certain time-limit, but gradually
and specifically, so that they can accede to that independence. We believe that this draft resolution does make that
step possible.
53. As far as the Argentine delegation is concerned, we do
not wish to inflict what might be termed a political defeat
on South Africa-far from it. What we are interested
in-and we are not alone in this-since, when submitting the
draft resolution, as I said, we have taken into account the
desires and concern of the African States-is that the people
of Namibia accede to self-determination and independence
and that they very soon join the United Nations as such.

40. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi)
(interpretation ji’O??z
French): Actually, my problem is half solved because the
representative of Argentina does not request any immediate
vote on his proposal. My delegation would like to request
formally that a vote on the draft resolution tak:e place at a
subsequent date in order to provide us with the necessary
possibility for consultations on other draft resa’lutions. On
the other hand, as the Council has considered the subject
before us for some three weeks or a month, I hope that the
same patience that was recorded over the period now
behind us will still be available to us all for a few days in

54. Thus, in a form of words, which may at first sight
appear vague, nevertheless we ensure that the door is left

open. The next Step is up to the others, When I say “the
others”, I am again referring specifically to the Government
6

rder that wt may consider carefully the text that we have
1st received.
1. Consequently, I should like to propose formally that
he draft resolution be put to the vote at a later meeting,
sy, Friday morning. I submit this proposal following
onsultations with the sponsor of the draft resolution and
lso in agreement with the African delegations, which are
he most directly concerned, and certain other represenatives as well. I have not been able to contact all the
Iembers of the Security Council on this matter, but 1 tlink
re would all agree that there is no necessity for undue
aste. Despite the sound basis of the d, ;ft resolution. it
rould be desirable for US to have another 24 hours to take
responsible position. Consequently, a meeting on Friday
lorning might be the last on this particular subject, and a
ote could be taken then.
,2. Mr, KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretatiuu
urn French): 1 am very happy to support the request of
he representative of Burundi; I think it to be a perfectly
.ormal suggestion. After al-l, yesterday I asked for an
djournment, which was supported by the Soviet delegaion. I do not intend to take a position now on the draft
ssolution just submitted by our colleague, the representaive of Argentina. He has been good enough to refer to the
+riginal inspiration of the draft, I shall go back to that in
.ue course and I, in the course of consultations, may have
ertain comments to make.
i3. However, I would right away mention, in order to gain
ime, a few matters of form.
i4. I must say that “Recognizing the special responsibility
-nd obligation of the United Nations” does not sound very
;ood in French: we should say rather “special obligations of
he United Nations Organization”.
55. Similarly, in the next paragraph we read: “Reaffirming
>nce again the inalienable and imprescriptible rights of the
>eople of Namibia to self-determination . . .“; and in this
:ase there are no rights, but there is one right, the right to
telfdetermination.
Therefore, it should read: “. . . the
nalienable and imprescriptible right . . .“. The text is
weakened, not strengthened by the use of the plural.
56. I should like to make one further observation, one not
zonceming form. I would merely point out to the sponsor
Df the draft resolution that it seems somewhat illogical to
say “to selfdetermination
and independence”, because
independence, after all, is only one of the choices under
selfdetermination.
A people expresses itself freely, and that
is self-determination; it chooses independence, which is but
a consequence of self-determination. It would seem more
Logical to me to say “‘to self-determination,
including
tidependence”.
67. This last observation of mine is a question not only of
form, but I will go back to the matter of form; for after all,
as I emphasized earlier, if the United Nations wishes to be
understood, it must speak in language that is used by
everyone, remaining faithful to the genius of the respective
languages it uses for the purpose. But when we read in
French “et dans Ibbservation tigoureuse des principes de

1‘egalitk liumaine I’, we really get the impression we are
reading a translation of an English text, as we used to say in
the Lyce’e. The wording should be: “dans le respect
rigoureux du priizcipe de I’tTgalite’ entre les Izommes “. That,
I believe, sounds a great deal better, and I think everyone
would agree.

68. Mr. PRATT (Sierra Leone): I should like very briefly
to congratulate Ortiz de Rozas of Argentina for his draft
resolution, which would be a positive step in the right
direction and which my delegation hopes will be accepted
by all members of the Security Council. Later on, when we
come to discuss it, I shall give my delegation’s vi?;-. s, but at
this stage I should like to propose a slight amendment. so
that at the time of the discussion, everyone wiIl have the
amendment in mind.
69. I refer to the first preambular paragraph, which now
reads: ‘Having examined further the question of Namibia”.
I would suggest the addition of the following words: “and
without prejudice to action to be undertaken on other
resolutions of the Security Council”.
70. I should like to stress that we have just adopted a
resolution by 13 votes, with 2 abstentions and the members
abstaining have explained the reasons for their abstentions.
And there are other resolutions. It is wonderful that our
proposal does not mention any resolution specifically. But
that must not blind our eyes to the fact that there are
resolutions which have been accepted by practically ail of
us, under which some action must be taken. And if there
are those resolutions that we have accepted, we need not
specify them. And since we do not specify them, since, as
the representative of France would say, we do not make a
catalogue of resolutions, but merely say “without prejudice
to action to be undertaken on other resolutions”, it shows
that this will meet the wishes of, for example, the
representatives of France and United Kingdom; and since
we do not further specify any resolutions referring to the
International
Court of Justice, this should meet any
objection that may have been posed from those quarters.
Also, the proposal is to refer merely to other resolutions in
general.
71, The reason for this is that if we were to adopt a draft
resolution, however, wellmeaning it might be, we might be
entangled in a legal problem, namely, that if a second piece
of legislation were adopted and if it, or some of its
provisions, were considered to be incompatible with previous pieces of legislation, then the subsequent legislation
could be interpreted, bv implication, to have repealed the
inconsistent earlier provisions.
72. Now, this, I am qui:L certsin, is not the intention of
the representative of Argcr,iina. It is therefore necessary to
avoid further technicalities In .!le future, to save resolutions
which perhaps might even :.< inconsistent with this one.
For example, the resolution :?,+ehave just adopted “Calls
once again on South Africa to withdraw from the Territory
of Namibia”. The draft resolution before us does not
mention South Africa: it calls upon the Secretary-General,
acting on behalf of the United Nations, to take all necessary
steps with South Africa to implement what is envisaged
here-leading the Namibians towards the exercise of their

a

more necessary to ask this question in that we have just
adopted a very important, although in the Soviet delegs.
tion’s opinion, insufficiently forceful, draft resolutice
containing many important provisions I Furthermore. one
special factor in our current consideration of the problem
of Namibia.is the existence of a new element. nameIy, the
opinion of the International Court of Justice, with which
the majority of members of the Security Council agreed
today. It hardly seems desirable, therefore, to strike out
this new page too in the history of the Security Council’s
consideration of ali that has been done in this matter so far.

right to self-determination. Thus the two are inconsistent;
and if we do not protect the earfier resolution by saying
that what we are asking the Secretary-General to do is
without prejudice to what we have previously decided, then
we might find ourselves wrapped up in all sorts of legal
technicalities in the future.
73. It is merely for these reasons that the Sierra Leone
deIegation is proposing this slight amendment mentioning
the word “resolutions”. We want to be specific.
74. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We
have listened to his observations with great care. We are all
taking full advantage of the dialogue that has taken place
around the Argentine draft resolution. I am sure the
sponsor has taken full advantage of the ideas expressed by
the representative of France and the Foreign Minister of
Sierra Leone.

80. Actually, I am merely thinking aloud. without defin.
ing, and without prejudice to, any positions that may be
taken with regard to these problems and so we shall, 01
course, study most carefully the interesting draft submitted
by the representative of Argentina. However, the comments
already made by other speakers lead me to think that this
question requires more thorough consideration and consul
tation.

75, Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My delegation wishes to
sssociate itself with the views and suggestions just expressed
1.v the representative of Sierra Leone +
.

81. With all due respect for the opinions expressed by the
distinguished representative of Burundi and supported bq
the distinguished representative of France, I would suggesl
that it might be more appropriate to have further time tc
think about the matter and hold consultations, and tc
inform our Governments and receive instructions. Bearing
in mind also that we are all occupied with the consideration
of very important questions in the General Assembly and in
the First Committee-the
Assembly is now in full swing-it
might be better to hold the next meeting of the Council not
on Friday morning but, for example, on Monday morning
This would give more time for consideration and consulta’
tion, and for receiving instructions.

76. For 25 years now the United Nations has been waiting
for South Africa to respond in accordance with the spirit of
the Charter. For 25 years we have met with a wall of
defiance and a wall of silence.
77. Operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution tabled
by the representative of Argentina calls upon the SecretaryGeneral to report to the Security Council on the implementation of this resolution. I think it is most important, in
view of the time factor, that we ask the Secretary-General
to report not later than a certain date. Otherwise we may
have to wait for another 25 years before the SecretaryGeneral is able to respond. When the time comes, and
possibly at the next meeting, my delegation will not only
make further observations on the text of this draft
resolution but will also perhaps elaborate further upon the
time-limit which should be set for the Secretary.General to
report to the Security Council on the progress of any talks
that might be initiated as a result of this draft resoiution.

82. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Note
has been taken of the suggestion made by the representative
of the Soviet Union,
83. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (inrerpretatiorl
porn Spanish): I should like to refer to the statements that
were made after I submitted
Council today.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I am not fully convinced that all
members of the Security Council participated in the
preparation of the Argentine draft resolution. However,
novelty is always attractive. The sponsor, the distinguished
representative of Argentina, stressed that he was trying to
find an entirely new approach to the problem. It is difficult
to object to novelty-it is a good idea. He also stressed that
his draft makes no reference to previous resolutions, Here
some doubt might arise. Would our approach be correct if
we were to forget all that has been done so far by the
Security Council and the United Nations on the question of
Namibia’? Should we erase the past? We should give some
thought to this.

the draft resolution to the

78. Mr. MALIK

(translated

84. With regard to the comments of the representative of
France, my delegation feels that those corrections of style
that he has suggested do improve the text. With regard to
retaining the words “and independence” after “to self.
determination”, might I make the following clarification?
It is obvious that, in the right to self-determination, any
possibility is involved and that right may not necessarily be
exercised to achieve independence. But my delegation
believes that the right to independence is implicit in any
right of peoples subject to foreign domination, and so we
feel it is extremely important that independence be
included as one of the rights recognized to the people of
Namibia. At the time when self-determination is exercised
by the Namibian people it will be up to them to decide
upon their future; but what must be understood and what
must be stated very clearly from the outset is that
independence is involved. That is why, with all due respect
to the views of the representative of France, although I
fully understand the line of his argument, I would prefer to
retain the word “independence” in the text.

from Russian):

79. Yet another question arises. The draft resolution
includes a request to the Secretary-General. By what would
he be guided-by his own judgement or by those basic
provisions that already exist in previous decisions of the
United Nations, in the form of both General Assembly
resolutions and Security Council decisions? It is all the
8

85. With regard to the comments of the Foreign Minister
of Sierra Leone, I would say that I find no objection to
including the addition that he has suggested. I say that
because, as I said at the outset, we do not consider that this
draft resolution is in any way incompatible with any other
resolutions already adopted or which the Security Council
may see fit to adopt on the subject. It is obvious, therefore,
that if that is our idea we couId not have any objection to
the specific mention being made in the text of the
resolution itself.

logical to refer to “the right to self-determination, including
independence”. It never entered my mind, on the contrary,
to delete this word, which I deem essential.
89. Mr. JOUEJATI (Syrian Arab Republic): On a point of
clarification, does the representative of Argentina think it
might be proper to have another operative paragraph calling
upon the Government of South Africa to cooperate fully
with the Secretary-General in the contacts he is going to
initiate? If the Government of South Africa. under one
pretext or another, should state that it will have nothing to
do with the resolution, we would be in a total impasse
again. The Council might reopen the discussion just to
make it clear that the Government of South Africa is under
an obligation to respond favourably to the steps the
Secretary-General might take. The insertion of such a
paragraph would not only fill a gap but might also save
time, and perhaps render unnecessary another series of
Security Council meetings dealing with procedure rather
than substance. This is merely a question of clarification.

86. I should like to refer to what the representative of the
Soviet Union has just said. With this draft resolution we are
in no way forgetting any of the previous resolutions of the
Security Council. We are not setting aside any resolution
adopted by the Security Council. A little less than half an
hour ago this Council, which is one and indivisible, adopted
a resolution-in which all previous resolutions on thl
subject are recalled. And it was this same Council. How,
therefore, can we now forget the previous resolutions if
we have just adopted one which we recall resolution
1514 (XV) of the General Assembly on the Bquidating of
colonialism. We recall resolution 2145 (XXI) of the General
Assembly. We recall and reaffirm resolutions 264 (1969),
276 (1970), 283 (1970) and 284 (1970), all of the Security
Council. We have recalled all that needed to be recalled. We
have overlooked nothing.

90. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
porn Spanish): I am grateful to Mr. Jouejati for his request
for clarification. May I tell him that as far as I am
concerned I would have no objection to the insertion of
this paragraph. But, as I said in my presentation, this draft
resolution is in fact the result of many and lengthy
consultations, particularly among the African States. The
text, as it stands now, is the result of these consultations
and therefore in order to respect the points of view
expressed by the African States and conveyed to me it
would be important to keep the text in the form in which it
stands. Nevertheless I feel that, even without the paragraph
that my colleague from Syria has suggested, the message
should already have been received, in all clarity, by the
Government of South Africa, since what is sought is
precisely that the Government of South Africa should
co-operate in those contacts that the Secretary-General will
establish with that Government and any other interested
party in order to protect the rights of the Namibian people.

87. The point is that we are submitting another draft
resolution which does not overlook or forget anything, but
opens up a new possibility. It may well be-and I do not
discard this as a solution-that this draft resolution I have
submitted will lead nowhere. It is possible and it would not
be the first time in the history of the United Nations. But
by the same token I am convinced that the representative
of the Soviet Union would not object to our following a
course of action which might lead the people of Namibia to
self-determination and independence. If that were the case,
simply because we do not mention previous resolutions
why should we discard that possibility? I am sure that the
representative of the Soviet Union wants the same thing as
my delegation, namely, that the people of Namibia should
accede to independence. If that be the case, why object to a
draft resolution which does not contradict previous resolu
tions but does not mention them specifically and which
would be adopted by the same Council that half an hour
ago adopted another resolution which does mention each
and every one of the other resolutions? This is an open
door. My friend Mr. Malik of the Soviet Union, who is a
skilful diplomat, knows full well that in the process of
deliberations of a collegiate body such as the United
Nations no possibility should be discarded, particularly
when that possibility might-I do not say that it will, but
might-lead the people of Namibia to self-determination
and independence.

91, I feel that with the clarification given in the course of
the presentation and the one I am now giving in response to
the quite justifiable concern of the representative of Syria.
the South African delegation will have been able to take
due note and will inform its Government that we expect
such cooperation on its part, without there being any
necessity for it to be spehed out in an additional paragraph
of the draft resolution.
92. Mr. KUILAGA (Poland) (interpretation from French]:
The Polish delegation was not involved in the consultations
which led to the draft resolution now before the Council.
Consequently it has certain difficulties in connexion with
the eventual expression of its attitude on the text.
Nevertheless, at this juncture, it would like to refer to a
feeling of uncertainty already shown in this Council about
what has been called the new approach towards the
problem. We consider that resolutions adopted in the
United Nations are not, after all, merely numbers; they are
more than that. Resolutions adopted in the United Nations
are the reflection of positions, of opinions, of stands
adopted in and by the Security Council in connexion with
the problem under discussion, that of Namibia. Conse-

88. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretation
from French): I think perhaps a certain error of interpretation has arisen in connexion with this question of right of
self-determination and independence, Either my Argentine
colleague did not understand me, or I expressed myself
incorrectly. I never suggested dropping the word “independence”. Actually, speaking here originally, I did propose
the word myself. What I said was that it seemed to me more
9

quently, we would agree with the comments on the need,
the desirability of all questions pertaining to Namibia being
dealt with within the political and legal framework which
has been provided for Namibia by the United Nations for a
long time.
93. That is the first comment we wished to make on
procedure. The second is the following: it would seem
difficult to prejudge now the exact date on which we might
be able to take a final stand and vote. I believe that the
debate has shown the need for a serious consideration of
this matter to see exactly what could be done. Consequently it would appear that it is premature today to
decide on a date when we could vote.
94. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): 1
have taken careful note of the statements made on the draft
resolution submitted by the representative of Argentina. We
understand very well that all comments are important, and
I am sure that the sponsor has duly taken note of all the
views expressed. We understand very well that it might be
better to continue exchanging views before we set’s specific
date and time for another meetingof the Security Council.
If I hear no other comments or objections from members of
the Council, I would submit the suggestion that the
President be allowed to convene the meeting at some future
time to continue consideration of the Argentine draft
resolution submitted today. This means that whatever time
we have between now and the time of the next meetingtomorrow and Friday also-would be utilized to continue
our consultations. The sponsor of the draft will consult all
members of the Council, particularly the sponsors of the
resolution just adopted. The President will of course take
note of the consultations and will be at the disposal of alI
concerned, and, when we feel the time is ripe to do so, we
shall convene a meeting of the Council. It could be Monday
afternoon, as was suggested. I would hope in the near
future. But I believe that we should adopt this procedure,
. leaving it to the President to decide upon the date and time
of the meeting after the consultations are held, instead of
deciding here and now on a specific time and date.

you referred to, but I would remind members of the
Council that the General Assembly and other United
Nations bodies are considering problems of considerable
importance. Their importance is great because these problems are of interest to the world at large, to all countries; in
the case of Africa, there are also urgent problems, such as
that of Namibia, which in our opinion cannot be reIegated
to a second-string category. There are other problems with
which the Council has been seized, the request of Senegal
and the problem of Guinea. They also have to be dealt
with. Consequently, wMe agreeing to an adjournment of
the consideration of this problem, we hope that the Council
will not lose sight of these problems on the agenda that are
also of such great importance. For the Africans the
problems of Namibia, of Guinea and of Senegal, problems
due to colonialism and racism, must enjoy first priority
among the items and concerns of the United Nations.
97. Therefore, we do not object to the adjournment, you
proposed, but we hope that during the consultations the
President will take into account the necessity of acting
speedily. The resolutions we adopt are only partial solutions, because the final and complete solution of such
problems as those of Namibia and of the remaining colonies
in Africa wiII only be full accession to independence.
98. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish).
Repeating what I said, I pledge myself to convene another
meeting of the Council to continue dealing with the
Argentine draft resolution. It is possible that after consultations with members of the Council, on how we may use the
next few days I may call a meeting to deal with other
questions before the Council. If this is acceptable, I will
adjourn the next meeting now, but will take care to
convene another meeting after consultations, defining the
subject we shall discuss.
99. We have a number of items on our agenda. The
representative of Burundi has mentioned them, and I am
fully aware of their existence. I place myself at the disposal
of the Council so that we may take full advantage of the
next few days in order to continue our work for the benefit
of international peace and security.

95 . I am very respectfu1of the views of all members of the
Council, and therefore I would ask whether they agree with
this procedure, which I would sum up as follows, I shatl in
due course call another meeting of the Council, which will
not be before Friday, and, I trust, will not be after next
Monday, to continue dealing with the draft resolution
submitted by Argentina, on the understanding that we shall
in the meantime take full advantage of the hours and days
available to continue with open minds to hold consultations
among ourselves and particularly to allow consultations
between the sponsor of this draft and the sponsors of the
resolution adopted this afternoon.

100. If the Council therefore agrees with my suggestion I
shall adjourn this meeting, and I shall consult all members
of the Council as to when the next meeting is to be held
and what subject is to be discussed at it. I ask whether this
is the proper decision. We will not set a specific time and
date at this time but the chair, after consultations, will set a
time tomorrow morning-possibly Friday and we can then
decide on whether the subject is to be Guinea, Senegal or
Namibia-all
subjects which I am fully aware are on our
agenda,

96. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi) (interpret&m
from
F~~~tClz/’ I did not wish to contradict the consensus that

The meeting aroseat 6.10 p.m.

10
Litho

in Vnitea Nattons,

New York

Price:

SUS.

0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

8216S-August

1973-2,050
