296

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

6. Decides that the Special Committee shall accept the
participation of observers of Member States, including in
the meetings of its working group;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue, on a
priority basis, the preparation of the draft handbook on
the peaceful settlement of disputes between States, on the
basis of the outline elaborated by the Special Committee
and in the light of the views expressed in the course of the
discussions in the Sixth Committee49 and in the Special
Committee,48 and to report to the Special Committee at its
session in 1989 on the progress of work, before submitting
to it the draft handbook in its final form, with a view to its
approval at a later stage;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to render all as­
sistance to the Special Committee;
9. Requests the Special Committee to submit a report
on its work to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth
session;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "Report of the Spe­
cial Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and
on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization".

76th plenary meeting
9 December 1988
43/171. Development and strengthening of good­
neighbourliness between States
A

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the determination of the peoples of the

United Nations, as expressed in the Charter of the United
Nations, to practise tolerance and live together in peace
with one another as good neighbours,

Recalling the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, approved by its resolution 2625 (XXV) of
24 October 1970,
Considering that the great changes of a political, eco­
nomic and social nature, as well as the scientific and tech­
nological advances that have taken place in the world and
led to unprecedented interdependence of nations, have
given new dimensions to good-neighbourliness in the con­
duct of States and increased the need to develop and
strengthen it,
1. Takes note of the report of the Sub-Committee on
Good-Neighbourliness,50 established by the Sixth Com­
mittee during the forty-third session of the General As­
sembly;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fifth session the item entitled "Development and
strengthening of good-neighbourliness between States".
76th plenary meeting
9 December 1988

49

Ibid., Forty-third Session. Sixth Committee, 14th to 20th and

46th meetings, and corrigendum.
so A/C.6/43/L.I I.

B
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the determination of the peoples of the

United Nations, as expressed in the Charter of the United
Nations, to practise tolerance and live together in peace
with one another as good neighbours,
Recalling the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, approved by its resolution 2625 (XXV) of
24 October 1970,
Recalling also its resolutions 1236 (XII) of 14December
1957, 1301 (XIII) of 10 December 1958, 2129 (XX) of
21December 1965, 34/99 of 14December 1979, 36/101 of
9 December 1981, 37/117 of 16December 1982, 38/126 of
19 December 1983, 39/78 of 13 December 1984, 41/84 of
3December 1986 and 42/158 of 7 December 1987, as well
as its decision 40/419 of 11 December 1985,
Bearing in mind that, for various reasons, there are par­
ticularly favourable opportunities for co-operation and
mutual advantage between neighbouring countries in
many fields and various forms, and that the development
of such co-operation may have a positive influence on in­
ternational relations as a whole,
Considering that the great changes of a political, eco­
nomic and social nature, as well as the scientific and tech­
nological advances that have taken place in the world and
led to unprecedented interdependence of nations, have
given new dimensions to good-neighbourliness in the con­
duct of States and increased the need to develop and
strengthen it,
Taking into account the working papers concerning the
development and strengthening of good-neighbourliness
between States, as well as the written replies sent by States
and international organizations on the content of good­
neighbourliness and on ways and means to enhance it, 51
the views expressed by States on this subject and the re­
ports of the Sub-Committee on Good-Neighbourliness es­
tablished by the Sixth Committee, 52
Recalling its opinion that it is necessary to continue to
examine the question of good-neighbourliness in order to
strengthen and develop its content, as well as ways and
modalities to enhance its effectiveness, and that the results
of this examination could be included, at an appropriate
time, in a suitable international document,
1. Reaffirms that good-neighbourliness fully conforms
with the purposes of the United Nations and shall be
founded upon the strict observance of the principles of the
United Nations as embodied in the Charter and in the
Declaration on Principles of International Law concern­
ing Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, and so
presupposes the rejection of any acts seeking to establish
zones of influence or domination;
2. Calls once again upon States, in the interest of the
maintenance of international peace and security, to de­
velop good-neighbourly relations, acting on the basis of
these principles;
3. Reaffirms that the generalization of the long prac­
tice of good-neighbourliness and of principles and rules
pertaining to it is likely to strengthen friendly relations
51 See A/36/376 and Add.I. A/37/476, A/38/336 and Add.I and
A/40/450 and Add.I and 2.
52 See A/C.6/40/L.28 and Corr.I, A/C.6/41/L. 1 4 , A/C.6/42/L.6
and A/C.6/43/L I I.

IX. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee
--------------

and co-operation among States in accordance with the
Charter;
4. Takes note of the report of the Sub-Committee on
Good-Neighbourliness, 53 which functioned within the
Sixth Committee during the forty-third session of the
General Assembly;
5. Decides to continue and to complete at its forty-fifth
session, on the basis of the present resolution and the re­
port of the Sub-Committee, the task of identifying and
clarifying the elements of good-neighbourliness and to be­
gin the elaboration of a suitable international document on
the development and strengthening of good-neighbour­
liness between States within the framework of a sub­
committee on good-neighbourliness;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fifth session the item entitled "Development and
strengthening of good-neighbourliness between States".
76th plenary meeting
9 December 1988
43/172. Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Rela­
tions with the Host Country, 54
Recalling Article l05 of the Charter of the United Na­
tions, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of
the United Nations55 and the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regard­
ing the Headquarters of the United Nations,2
Recalling also that the problems related to the privileges
and immunities of all missions accredited to the United
Nations, the security of the missions and the safety of their
personnel are of great importance and concern to Member
States, as well as the primary responsibility of the host
country,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to
be taken by the competent authorities of the host country,
in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of
missions and the safety of their personnel,
Conscious of the increased interest shown by Member
States in participating in the work of the Committee,
l. Endorses the recommendations and conclusions of
the Committee on Relations with the Host Country con­
tained in paragraph 81 of its report;
2. Reaffirms its condemnation of any criminal acts vi­
olating the security of missions accredited to the United
Nations and the safety of their personnel;
3. Urges the host country to take all necessary mea­
sures to continue to prevent criminal acts, including
harassment and violations of the security of missions and
the safety of their personnel or infringements of the inviol­
ability of their property, in order to ensure the existence
and functioning of all missions, including practicable mea­
sures to prohibit illegal activities of persons, groups and
organizations that encourage, instigate, organize or en­
gage in the perpetration of acts and activities against the
security and safety of such missions and representatives;

53 A/C.6/43/L.1 I; see also A/C.6/43/SC/CRP.3.
54 Official Records of the General Assembly. Forty-third Session,
Su 'ement No. 26 and addendum (A/4V26 and Add. 1).
ff
Resolution 22 A (I).

297

4. Reiterates its request to the parties concerned to fol­
low consultations with a view to reaching solutions to the
issues raised by certain Member States concerning the size
of their missions, in accordance with the Agreement be­
tween the United Nations and the United States of
America regarding the Headquarters of the United Na­
tions and in the spirit of co-operation;
S. Urges the host country, in the light of the considera­
tion by the Committee of travel regulations issued by the
host country, to continue to honour its obligations to
facilitate the functioning of the United Nations and the
missions accredited to it;
6. Stresses the importance of a positive perception of
the work of the United Nations, expresses concern about a
negative public image and, therefore, urges that efforts be
continued to build up public awareness by explaining,
through all available means, the importance of the role
played by the United Nations and the missions accredited
to it in the strengthening of international peace and
security;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively
engaged in all aspects of the relations of the United Na­
tions with the host country and to continue to stress the
importance of effective measures to avoid acts of terror­
ism, violence and harassment against the missions and
their personnel, as well as the need for any pertinent legis­
lation adopted by the host country to be in accord with the
Agreement and its other relevant obligations;
8. Requests the Committee to continue its work, in
conformity with General Assembly resolution 2819
(XXVI) of 1S December 1971;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "Report of the Com­
mittee on Relations with the Host Country".
76th plenary meeting
9 December 1988
43/173. Body of Principles for the Protection of All
Persons under Any Form of Detention or Im­
prisonment
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3S/177 of 1S December 1980, in
which it referred the task of elaborating the draft Body of
Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any
Form of Detention or Imprisonment to the Sixth Commit­
tee and decided to establish an open-ended working group
for that purpose,
Taking note of the report of the Working Group on the
Draft Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons
under Any Form of Detention or lmprisonment,56 which
met during the forty-third session of the General Assem­
bly and completed the elaboration of the draft Body of
Principles,
Considering that the Working Group decided to submit
the text of the draft Body of Principles to the Sixth Com­
mittee for its consideration and adoption, 57
Convinced that the adoption of the draft Body of Princi­
ples would make an important contribution to the protec­
tion of human rights.
Considering the need to ensure the wide dissemination of
the text of the Body of Principles,
'6

A/C.6/43/L.9.

SJ J bid., para

4.
